* 2113889
* IUCRC Planning Grant University at Albany: Center for Weather Innovation and Smart Energy and Resilience (WISER)
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Eric Stern, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 19,999.00

Every year, with increasing frequency due to a warming world and the concomitant
generation of extreme weather events, billions of dollars are lost due to
electrical grid outages and powerlines triggering forest wildfires. To address
this serious and economically devastating issue, this funding provides resources
for the State University of New York in Albany and the University of Connecticut
to explore the formation of a two-Site industry-university cooperative research
center for Weather Innovation and Smart Energy and Resilience (WISER). The
Center is focused on combining the strengths, intellectual capacity, and
resources of universities, industry, and the public sector to tackle some of the
largest problems in electrical grid reliability and reduction of grid outages
caused by extreme weather events, via predictive models. The Center will also
address issues of grid integration for climate/weather-related renewable energy
sources, such as wind and solar, as well as tree biomechanics. The latter issue
is critical to include because falling trees are one of the biggest causes of
powerline and transformer loss, causing local power outages. Through a Center
planning meeting, the University at Albany and the University of Connecticut and
their administrators will engage a broad spectrum of utilities and other public
and private entities to identify and discuss collective needs with the goal of
creating a viable research roadmap and associated research thrusts in which
partners are willing to participate and fund. Topics and potential Center
research thrusts will be discussed, and those of highest importance to industry
will be identified upon which a viable Center can be created. Broader impacts of
the work include workforce training where students participate in industry-
relevant, basic, pre-competitive research projects proposed by university
faculty; the engagement of underrepresented groups via various partnerships with
institutional entities focused in recruiting and retraining students from
underserved populations; and improvements in the reliability of the nation’
electrical grid in areas of the country experiencing extreme weather events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Industry-university cooperative research centers, like the
one proposed to be focused on extreme weather and the reliability of the
nation’s electrical grid by The University of Albany and University of
Connecticut, are powerful partnerships between universities; the private sector;
government; non-profits; and local communities. These Centers operate as
consortium focused on university faculty and students carrying out fundamental
research that addresses collective industry and community needs and where
projects are funded by membership fees and other financial contributions from
Center members. In this construct, the intellectual power; infrastructure; and
student talent of universities is focused on real world problems of critical
interest of a segment of the economy in need of innovation to overcome
conceptual and technological hurdles individual entities are unable to overcome
themselves. The planning meeting proposed will bring together interested parties
to hear proto-Center leadership describe the Center’s value proposition and
potential return-on-investment of those entities wishing to become members of
the Center. Those at the planning meeting will also help the Center create a
research road map and research thrusts that best address the most pressing needs
of the collective membership in the Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.