* 2113254
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Development Of Complex Fishing Technologies
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Sarah McClure, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 23,097.00

Among maritime hunter-gatherer-fishers around the world, the adaptation from
subsistence strategies that emphasized shellfish collecting towards one which
people were increasingly fishing marked a critical transition because it
provided more food for society, supported semi-permanent habitation, and
restructured sociopolitical organization. Previous scholarship has documented
changes in human diet and settlement associated with the introduction of new
fishing technologies. Less emphasis has been placed on understanding the
circumstances that led people to shift strategies and develop the tools to
access a greater number of marine resources. This doctoral dissertation project
will investigate how indigenous people on the California Channel Islands adapted
specialized fishing strategies that were supported by local marine ecosystems
and how people innovated new technologies to target these resources. In doing
so, they will address fundamental questions in anthropological archaeology such
as why intensive subsistence economies emerge and how cultural innovations
materialize in variable environments.This research is in collaboration with
local indigenous stakeholders. An Advisory Board of Native community members was
created to ensure that communication is transparent, research is ethical and to
create opportunities for community input and participation at varying stages of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will utilize existing,
unanalyzed museum collections from three archaeological sites to address how
environmental conditions influenced the emergence of intensive fishing practices
and the evolution of fishing technologies, such as the single-piece shell
fishhook and sewn-plank canoes. The research focuses on indigenous populations
from the California Channel Islands. Drawing from evolutionary theory,
researchers will model human behavior and decision making based on habitat
suitability. They use intertidal shellfish population density data and
calculated area of wetlands as measures of habitat suitability. Researchers will
analyze all faunal remains from the study sites. Additionally, they will submit
select samples of artifacts and raw materials associated with the construction
and maintenance of sewn-plank canoes for geochemical analysis. These data will
determine the source of raw materials necessary for canoe construction and
provide valuable insight to debates regarding the role of long-distance exchange
and intensified resource acquisition in the development of sociopolitical
complexity. Lastly, this study will demonstrate the tremendously valuable data
available in unexplored museum collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.