* 2113414
* Mean-Field Models in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sumit Mukherjee, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 170,000.00

Frequently in high dimensional Bayesian models, the posterior distribution is
complicated and exhibits non-trivial dependence. Understanding the behavior of
such models, both theoretically and empirically, is a challenge. In these
situations, variational inference provides an efficient and scalable method of
inference, when more traditional methods based on Markov Chain Monte Carlo are
computationally prohibitive. One of the most common techniques for variational
inference is the naive mean field approximation. However, despite its wide
usage, not much is known about rigorous guarantees for the naive mean field
method. This project aims to address this question, by studying the validity of
naive mean field methods for several examples of
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project defines a formal notion of
correctness of the naive mean field approximation, which requires that the
leading order of the log normalizing constant of the high dimensional
distribution is predicted correctly by the mean field prediction formula. This
definition does not require the high dimensional distribution of interest to
arise as a posterior distribution. If the naive mean field approximation is
indeed asymptotically correct, the high dimensional distribution of interest
should be well approximated by a mixture of product distributions. If further,
the optimization in the mean field prediction formula has a unique maximizer,
then essentially the high dimensional distribution should be close to a product
measure, and it is natural enquire about Law of Large Numbers, Concentration,
Fluctuations, and Asymptotic Properties of Estimators. The PI plans to study
these questions for three concrete examples: (a) (Bayesian) Linear Regression,
(b) (Bayesian) Mixture of Gaussians, and (c) Exponential Random Graph
Models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.