* 2113754
* Collaborative Research: Development of Classification Theory and Methods for Objective Asymmetry, Sample Size Limitation, Labeling Ambiguity, and Feature Importance
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jingyi Jessica Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 120,000.00

Classification is a popular data analytical technique in disciplines ranging
from biomedical sciences to information technologies. This project will develop
theory-backed statistical methods and algorithms to address pressing challenges
in the application of classification. These challenges are related to imperfect
aspects of training data, which are widespread in high-stake applications such
as disease diagnosis and cybersecurity. In particular, this project will focus
on the so-called asymmetric classification problems where a particular class is
of greater importance than other classes, and the methods and algorithms will
aim to control the classification error of missing the most important class in
the population, not just in a particular dataset. This property will make the
methods and algorithms powerful for medical diagnosis, for which the primary
goal is diagnosis accuracy in the population. Moreover, this project will
provide a suite of projects, ranging from theory to applications, that are
suitable for training graduate and undergraduate students. The interdisciplinary
nature of this project is expected to attract students from diverse background
to join the PIs’ efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop a suite of
application-driven, theory-backed methods and algorithms to address pressing
data challenges including sample size limitations, sampling biases, and
ambiguous class labels. The development will be primarily under the Neyman-
Pearson (NP) classification paradigm, which was designed to control the
population-level false-negative rate (p-FNR) under a desired level while
minimizing the population-level false-positive rate (p-FPR). This project will
integrate the NP classification into cutting-edge statistical learning tasks and
enable it to address the aforementioned real-world data challenges.
Specifically, this project will include the following four overarching goals.
First, the PIs will use random matrix theory to address a long-standing problem
in the NP classification methodology: whether NP classifiers can be constructed
without a sample-splitting step to improve data efficiency. Second, because the
NP paradigm has an invariance property to sampling bias, the PIs will develop NP
classifiers to address the sampling bias issue in biomedical applications. These
classifiers can be trained on biased samples but still achieve the p-FNR
control. Third, the PIs will develop a model-free feature ranking framework to
incorporate multiple classification paradigms including the NP paradigm and to
reflect prediction objectives. Fourth, the PIs will develop the first NP
umbrella algorithm under the label noise setting and the first information-
theoretic criteria that combine ambiguous classes in multi-class classification.
To disseminate the project outcomes, the PIs will give research talks, organize
conference sessions, share open-source software packages with tutorials, and
reach out to practitioners of classification methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.