* 2113851
* IUCRC Phase III: Marquette University: Center for Water Equipment and Policy (WEP)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Daniel Zitomer, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 132,366.00

Clean drinking water and sanitation are economic and policy issues that need to
be addressed for sustainable growth of the US economy. A collaboration between
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and Marquette University, the IUCRC for Water
Equipment and Policy (WEP) provides innovative water technologies and processes
to promote advancement of the water industry and conducts research to inform
water policy makers. During Phase I and II, WEP has completed nearly 100 pre-
competitive research projects in four thrust areas: water sensors, novel
materials, innovative treatment systems, and water policy research. Through
research, the WEP Center has provided innovative products and solutions to
address industrial partners’ unmet/underserved needs in point-of-use
technologies, emerging contaminants, sustainability, and energy conservation. In
Phase III, the WEP Center aims to capitalize on past success, grow center
research through new customer discovery, expand the research team through site
additions, continuously refine the technology roadmap, explore new frontiers of
water science for break-through technologies, and train a talented workforce to
meet the nation’s needs in drinking water quality and wastewater management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Marquette University site of WEP is comprised of
researchers and facilities to develop the next generation of technologies to
treat and protect drinking water and natural waters. On the shores of Lake
Michigan in Milwaukee, WI, Marquette University water researchers work with
regulators and industry representatives in equipment manufacturing, municipal
utility, and chemical production to advance water technology and protect Great
Lakes water. Researchers in civil and environmental engineering, electrical
engineering, biological sciences, and law/policy collaborate to address
contemporary challenges identified by Center members. WEP also seeks to train
the next generation of water technology professionals. Member-driven research to
address policy information needs is conducted by the Marquette University Law
School's Water Law and Policy Initiative in collaboration with engineers and
scientists. Unique resources and capabilities for collaborative research include
the Marquette University Water Quality Center, the V. Clayton Lafferty
Laboratory for Advanced Microsystems Research, and the Nanoscale Devices
Laboratory where work is performed to develop novel processes and sensors for
the water industry as well as to train students and postdoctoral
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.