* 2113535
* The Polymath Jr. Program
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Adam Sheffer, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2022
* USD 30,000.00

During the summer of 2021, the Polymath Jr. program will provide research
opportunities to hundreds of undergraduates from different backgrounds. It will
also train a group of graduate students in mentoring undergraduate research.
This highly inclusive program will support students who do not have research
opportunities, due to the pandemic or for other reasons. It is an online program
that employs modern virtual tools: meetings with Zoom, a dedicated Wiki site,
Overleaf, and a Discord server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program consists of at
least 12 research projects in a variety of mathematical subfields: number
theory, combinatorics, representation theory, commutative algebra, complex
analysis, and more. Each project includes a professor who is an expert in the
relevant field, additional graduate student mentors, and 20-30 undergraduate
students. Some projects focus on proof writing, others involve programming,
applied problems, exploring large spaces of examples, and so on. The goal of
this variety is to provide opportunities for students with very different
interests and backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;https://geometrynyc.wixsite.com/
polymathreu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.