* 2113811
* IUCRC Phase I Georgetown University: Center for Science, Management, Application/s, Regulation, and Training [SMART]
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Clare Sullivan, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Cyber SMART is one of the first IUCRCs to strategically combine computer science
(CS) and the related NSF social and economic sciences (SES) and behavioral and
cognitive sciences (BCS) programs to cyber research. This multidisciplinary
approach enables better understanding by industry, educators, students, and
government of the impact of cyber. This comprehensive approach opens significant
new and under-utilized avenues of enquiry, particularly at the intersection of
CS, SES and BCS. The Center’s unique skill-set significantly increases the depth
and breadth of research available to organizations, the research and education
opportunities available to academics and students in a range of disciplines, and
informs policy, standards, and regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber SMART’s
CS expertise covers distributed ledger technology and standards, secure
information systems, artificial intelligence (AI) including neuroscience and
neurotech, cybersecurity and secure communications, quantum computing,
finance/economics, business management, digital identity, cyber law/regulation,
policy, psychology and ethics. Across the Center, each Site has specific,
complementary expertise. All Sites have strong CS, SES, and BCS capability but
each site has leading expertise in specific areas. For example, Georgetown
University has leading expertise in cyber ethics, cyber law, regulation,
standards, and policy that complements and supplements the CS, SES and BCS
expertise of other Sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber SMART is uniquely
positioned to produce research that comprehensively addresses the consequences
of increased digitization. In broader impact, the Center’s work will benefit
industry, individuals who use products and services, educators and scholars,
regulators, and society in general. Applying CS, with relevant SES and BCS
expertise enables comprehensive understanding of all the issues, better framing
of research, and development of targeted and feasible solutions. Most
importantly, new cross-discipline collaboration will bring innovation in
education and training and greater inclusion. The Center’s industry engagement
and outreach is specifically designed to engage women, girls, and
underrepresented minorities for career motivation, training and employment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber SMART will maintain a Center-wide project repository
including research data, code, results, emulators, simulators, scientific papers
etc. for at least three years after the end of the IUCRC. Georgetown University
has an institutional repository that will outlast the life of the
IUCRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.