* 2113783
* Collaborative Research: Testing for nutrient limitation in alpine snow algae ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* James Elser, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 12/31/2024
* USD 793,118.00

Climate change is driving massive changes in the amount of frozen water present
on Earth (the cryosphere). An increasingly well-recognized factor that interacts
with climate change to amplify the melting of ice and snow is the proliferation
of algae that bloom on the snow surface (snow algae). Current understanding of
the factors that control the abundance of snow algae, and thus their impact on
snow and ice melt, is incomplete, especially in alpine environments where
glaciers and snowfields are critical components of the water supply and are
particularly susceptible to climate change. This project will examine an
important but understudied driver of snow algae abundance – the variable input
of key nutrient elements (nitrogen and phosphorus) via atmospheric deposition
(in snow, rain, and dust). This project leverages and develops the capacities of
an interdisciplinary team involving faculty, a postdoctorate, a graduate
student, and undergraduates in a project of broad societal relevance given the
crucial role of mountain snow in water supplies globally. Collectively, these
studies will be among the first to explicitly test for nutrient limitation of
alpine snow algae, significantly enhancing current understanding of how nutrient
supplies drive large-scale ecosystem dynamics in the cryosphere. In particular,
this information is critical for understanding and forecasting the role of snow
algae in driving cryosphere loss, a process that ultimately has major impacts on
sea level rise and freshwater supply. Project personnel will develop and deliver
a unique “Cryosphere Ecology” undergraduate field class that will integrate key
topics and concepts in ecosystem ecology, microbiology, and snow science. Public
outreach will include contacts with water resource stakeholders and managers as
well as communication to broader audiences via existing public outreach
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the impacts of
nitrogen and phosphorus inputs on snow algae in six study regions in the western
USA across a gradient of atmospheric nutrient deposition. The project has three
focal questions: 1) How are snow algae biomass, productivity, and
carbon:nitrogen:phosphorus ratios related to patterns of nutrient (nitrogen,
phosphorus) deposition and availability in mountains of the western USA? 2) How
do these snow algae ecosystems respond to experimental nutrient enrichment? 3)
How does proliferation of nutrient-driven snow algae affect albedo properties of
snow and thus accelerate snow melt? To answer these questions, this project will
assess how snow algae proliferate in snow formed from meltwater from the six
study regions (using the unique capacity of the Subzero Research Laboratory at
Montana State University) and test how nitrogen and phosphorus enrichment affect
snow algae growth and its impact on albedo and melting under both field and
laboratory conditions. Answering these questions will produce novel fundamental
knowledge of the role of nutrient limitation in snow algae ecosystems and the
connection between nutrient inputs and biological albedo reduction, facilitating
better forecasting of snowmelt-driven water supplies in mountain regions and
providing a basis for mitigating processes that drive inputs and transport of
atmospheric pollutants. The project will also support development of an
interdisciplinary course in cryosphere ecology, encompassing snow science,
biogeochemistry, microbiology, and phycology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.