* 2113734
* International Congress of Mathematicians 2022: Administration of Travel Grants for US Participants
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Thomas Barr, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2023
* USD 0.00

The quadrennial International Congress of Mathematicians (ICM) is the preeminent
international gathering of mathematicians in the world. Organized by the
International Mathematical Union, an organization with some 87 adhering member
nations including the United States, the ICM serves as a global forum for
mathematicians to present and learn about new mathematical developments,
directions of future research, applications, ideas for pedagogy, and
methodologies for disseminating and archiving mathematical knowledge. Since
their inception in 1897 in Zurich, Switzerland, ICMs have been held in many
different countries—most recently in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2018), Seoul, South
Korea (2014), and Hyderabad, India (2010)—and a number have had historical
significance well beyond the mathematical community. In 2022, the ICM will be
held on the days July 6 – 14 in St. Petersburg, Russia, and an anticipated 5,000
individuals from around the world are expected to attend. To support
participation in the Congress by individuals from the United States, the
American Mathematical Society will utilize this grant to fund travel for
approximately 140 US-based mathematicians, with an anticipated two-thirds of the
awards going to early-career mathematicians. In cooperation with the Simons
Foundation and the ICM Local Organizing Committee, this grant will provide
support for up to 100 additional early-career people. The participation of a
robust and diverse contingent of US-based mathematicians in such an event helps
to sustain the US’s world leadership position in mathematical research and more
broadly in STEM fields. Mathematical research contributes directly to the US’s
knowledge infrastructure, national security, industry, and commerce. Especially
in mathematics, research activity is reliant on in-person interactions,
increasingly collaborative, and international in scope. Travel support for such
gatherings as ICM is a cost-effective way to foster these basic interactions,
promote the creation of new knowledge, and strengthen international cooperation.
In the large, these activities contribute significantly to the vitality of the
US’s knowledge-based economy and to the country’s overall prosperity and
health.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The 2022 ICM Structure Committee has set topical
sections for the Congress, which include the following: Logic, Algebra, Number
Theory, Algebraic and Complex Geometry, Geometry, Topology, Lie Theory and
Generalizations, Analysis, Dynamics, Partial Differential Equations,
Mathematical Physics, Probability, Combinatorics, Mathematics of Computer
Science, Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing, Control Theory and
Optimization, Statistics and Data Analysis, Stochastic and Differential
Modeling, Mathematical Education and Popularization of Mathematics, and History
of Mathematics. Up to 170 invited lectures will be presented across these
sections. An additional twenty-one plenary invited lectures are scheduled,
including fourteen by mathematicians from US universities or companies. Through
the invited lectures, panels, and other activities, the opportunities for
participants to exchange ideas will abound. The 2022 ICM will incorporate the
Emmy Noether Lecture, which honors women who have made fundamental and sustained
contributions to the mathematical sciences. The Congress is also the occasion
for conferring the most prestigious awards in the mathematical sciences. The
Fields Medal, the “Nobel Prize” of mathematics goes to a mathematician under the
age of 40 for either past achievement or future promise; the Abacus Medal honors
an individual with distinguished achievements in mathematical aspects of
information science; the Carl Friedrich Gauss Prize recognizes those whose
mathematical research has had an impact outside of mathematics; the Chern Medal
Award is given to an individual—regardless of age or vocation—whose
contributions to mathematics warrants the highest level of recognition; the
Leelavati Prize recognizes outstanding public outreach work for mathematics.
Those traveling from the US with support from this grants program will have rich
opportunities to learn from and interact with lecturers, deepen their
connections with their research, and share their discoveries and
insights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.