* 2113355
* The AGEP University of California Alliance: A Model to Advance Equitable Hiring of Teaching-Focused Faculty in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2026
* Stanley Lo, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 883,229.00

This collaborative research project brings together four University of
California (UC) campuses: Irvine, San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz – all
of which are Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) or emerging HSIs - with the
goal of developing, implementing, self-studying, evaluating, and disseminating
an AGEP Alliance Model about increasing the number of Latinx teaching-focused
STEM faculty. The AGEP Alliance partners will employ a collective impact
framework to ensure there is a common AGEP Alliance agenda, to share measures
across the partner institutions, to implement mutually reinforcing activities
and interventions, to facilitate continuous communication, and to engage with
the backbone organization (UC San Diego) that supports AGEP Alliance activities,
interventions and communication. The Latinx teaching-focused faculty who are
proposed to be hired in Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences, as well as
Engineering departments, will vary depending on each campus’s social and
academic context, and fiscal status. In addition to supporting STEM faculty
fellows as agents to improve hiring practices and department climate, the AGEP
Alliance will create and implement objective rubrics for both the teaching
faculty search processes and for evaluation of candidates’ teaching
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM achievement gap
between racial and ethnic minority and non-minority undergraduate and graduate
students, our universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote
a diverse cohort of STEM faculty to serve as role models and academic leaders
for students to learn from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate
that racial and ethnic minority STEM associate and full professors occupy only
about 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and
universities, and only about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. This AGEP Alliance Model has the potential to
improve the success of Latinx STEM scholars transitioning into early-career
faculty positions, and early-career faculty advancing to promotion and/or
tenure, in Mathematical, Physical and Life Sciences, as well as Engineering.
Advancing the careers of Latinx faculty ultimately leads to improved academic
mentorship for undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars,
in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AGEP Alliance’s integrated
research study will examine how early career Latinx STEM faculty in teaching-
focused roles experience the transition into the faculty positions. A national
sample will be investigated using narrative inquiry methods. One evaluator will
conduct the formative evaluation of the AGEP Alliance and a different
independent evaluator will manage the summative project assessment. There were
also be independent evaluation team to conduct formative and summative project
evaluation. Additionally, the AGEP Alliance will consult regularly with an
advisory board and an institutional leadership council, to garner input for
self-study and continuous project improvement. Finally, the dissemination plan
includes a structure to share the Alliance work locally and to present the
project at national professional and disciplinary meetings; and peer-reviewed
publications are also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.