* 2113874
* IUCRC Phase 1: The City College of New York: Center for Building Energy Smart  Technologies (BEST)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Nicholas Madamopoulos, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 07/31/2026
* USD 299,998.00

The Building Energy Smart Technologies (BEST) IUCRC brings together universities
and industries to transform the building industry through the development and
adoption of sustainable and intelligent technologies. BEST will apply
innovative, energy-smart technologies through a wide spectrum of US buildings.
BEST will be located in two sites: the lead site at University of Colorado
Boulder (CUB) and the partner site at City College of New York (CCNY), taking
advantage of the diverse academic, natural and industrial environments these
locations provide. The BEST center will foster smart, sustainable, and efficient
development and utilization of energy in the built environment through an
integrated systems approach to design, retrofit, construct, and operate
sustainable buildings and cities. Ultimately, the BEST Center will support the
U.S. building industry’s efforts to meet increasingly stringent building energy-
efficiency regulations, and society’s expectations for improved sustainability,
resiliency, and security in communities and cities. The BEST Center will support
the goal of achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Moreover, the
center will educate and train a skilled and diverse workforce to address current
and future employment needs for the U.S. building
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEST Center will enable the development of
new and sustainable building energy technologies through a holistic
understanding of the interactions between built and-natural systems. In
particular, the center will address design and operation solutions for the built
environment associated with extreme weather events, which are becoming more
frequent and intense due to a rapidly changing climate. Additionally, the center
will focus on the emerging challenges in the building sector due to pandemics
and health crises such as those caused by COVID-19, and increase cybersecurity
of the buildings systems and of occupants’ privacy. The center’s research scope
spans various disciplines specific to building energy systems, including indoor-
outdoor energy flows, advanced building envelope systems, demand-response
informatics, application of advanced in-situ and remote sensing for monitoring
the environment and occupants, and distributed energy efficient and renewable
technologies. To cover the rich and wide diversity of the building industry
needs, five Thrust Areas are proposed for the center’s research activities: (i)
smart buildings materials, (ii) intelligent building mechanical and electrical
energy systems, (iii) distributed and renewable energy systems, (iv) city-scale
building energy systems and informatics, and (v) smart grid systems integrated
with distributed energy and data systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.