* 2113736
* SenSE:Wearable hybrid biochemical and biophysical sensing systems integrated with robust artificial intelligence for monitoring COVID-19 patients
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2024
* Yi Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2024
* USD 754,496.00

The outbreak of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) has infected more than 17
million individuals worldwide, resulting in the death of more than 669, 000
people as of July 2020. Based on the available data and published reports, most
people diagnosed with COVID-19 exhibit no or mild symptoms and could be
discharged home for self-isolation. About 20% of them will progress to severe
disease requiring hospitalization and medical management. Currently, there is a
lack of effective methods and technologies for healthcare providers to remotely
monitor patients’ clinical conditions at home, evaluate their disease
progression, and predict clinical deterioration for timely medical
interventions. This multidisciplinary project aims to create a new route to
improve the COVID-19 recovery outcome by providing an at-home smart monitoring
system. This project will provide exciting interdisciplinary education and
research opportunities, as well as hands-on experience, to train our graduate
students and to involve undergraduate students, especially minority students,
into research. A set of integrated research and education activities will be
implemented for out-reaching to K-12 students and the public, to increase their
awareness of advanced scientific and engineering solutions for addressing the
critical healthcare challenges of COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies
have established that cytokine level is associated with COVID-19 disease
severity and mortality. The level of cytokines can be used as an effective
predictor for disease severity and progression. Currently, testing for cytokines
involves an organized setup such as blood collection by a phlebotomist and
analysis of samples using laboratory equipment such as plate readers. A major
drawback is that continuous monitoring of cytokine levels cannot be accomplished
since it will require dozens of visits to the hospital over time. The objective
of this proposal is to develop a wearable multimodal sensing system integrated
with explainable and robust artificial intelligence for continuous monitoring of
biophysical and biochemical conditions of COVID-19 patients at home, close
tracking of their illness progression, and timely risk level prediction and
medical intervention. This project includes three research objectives: (1)
develop a wearable biochemical/biophysical sensing system for non-invasive and
continuous monitoring of COVID-19 patients, (2) integrate wearable sensing
system with explainable and robust artificial intelligence for multimodal sensor
data analysis, personalized illness progression modeling, and sensor performance
optimization, and (3) characterize and evaluate the multimodal sensor systems
with COVID-19 patients. The research will provide fundamental understanding and
essential principles for developing a novel sensor for long-term and continuous
monitoring of cytokines. Advanced machine learning methods and tools will be
developed for multimodal sensor data analysis, risk level determination, and
sensor performance optimization. The biosensing technology, device design, and
machine learning models developed in this project are applicable to other
fields, including sensors to monitor patients with influenza or other diseases,
where the continuous monitoring and timely interventions are
required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.