* 2113271
* CRCNS Research Proposal: Modeling neural dynamics of naturalistic movements across contexts
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bijan Pesaran, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 950,000.00

Everyday tasks, such as tying shoelaces, throwing a ball, reaching for a cup
involve performing complex, require precise and coordinated hand and arm
movements in various behavioral contexts. How our brain controls these rich
movements; that is, the neural basis of motor control, remains elusive.
Investigating this neural basis not only will advance our understanding of brain
function, but also will have broad translational implications for developing
brain-machine interfaces to restore function in disabled patients and for
understanding neurological disorders such as Parkinsonâ€™s disease and devising
deep brain stimulation therapies. This proposal investigates how a population of
neurons in the motor cortex of the brain controls movements by utilizing motor
experiments that record simultaneously from large motor cortical areas including
thousands of neurons, and by leveraging computational tools that can uncover
behaviorally relevant structure in the complex neural population data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves a very close collaboration between
computational and experimental methods. The experimental component incorporates
a variety of different behavioral conditions that produce a rich repertoire of
movements, while recording from large populations of motor cortical neurons in
an animal model. The primary focus of this project is on the relationship
between movement kinematics (the trajectory of motion) and the temporal dynamics
of these large neuronal populations in motor and premotor cortex. To study this
relationship, we analyze the computational component that characterizes neural
population dynamics using a low-dimensional state variable that is directly
related to behaviorally relevant movement kinematics. This is achieved by
leveraging linear dynamical modeling methods that can identify low-dimensional
behaviorally relevant state dynamics in motor cortical populations, examining
how these states change, and modeling local and input dynamics during behavior.
Integrating these computational and experimental components, will advance our
understanding of the dynamical principles underlying how motor cortical
population activity gives rise to rich movements and has the potential to lead
to breakthroughs in restoring motor function in patients with impaired
movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.