* 2113302
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Direct force measurements and analysis of intrinsically disordered proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Omar Saleh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2025
* USD 587,468.00

This project aims to measure the behavior of a certain class of proteins, termed
‘disordered proteins’. Unlike other proteins, these intrinsically disordered
proteins are floppy and dynamic. A major goal of this project is to find the key
molecular-scale features that control this dynamic behavior. Disordered proteins
are commonly found in all living organisms, and their function strongly depends
on the structures they form; thus, this research has the potential to broadly
impact our basic understanding of the molecular processes of life. The research
will be carried out, in part, by graduate students, who will be trained broadly
in physical and chemical approaches to the study of proteins, and thus gain
skills needed to enter the technical workforce. The work will be done along with
scientists at an Israeli university, which will advance international
collaboration. Another side benefit of the project will be the dissemination of
a specialized experimental technique, which is expected to have wide utility in
the quantitative study of biological molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior work
has shown that a certain intrinsically disordered protein displays anomalous
dynamics and elasticity, apparently due to what is termed ‘heterogeneous
mesostructure’: the interplay of fluctuating, polymeric behavior with
distributed local structure formation. Here, researchers aim to investigate the
overall incidence of these anomalous effects across biologically-occurring
disordered proteins, and to study the molecular determinants that cause the
behavior. The project is driven by specific hypotheses regarding the metrics of
residue sequence associated with heterogeneous mesostructure. These sequence-
based hypotheses have led to the identification of several disordered proteins
expected to display a range of structural behavior. The primary work will
involve experimental investigation of the structure and dynamics of those model
systems, using both novel single-molecule probes and ensemble assays. If
successful, the project will improve understanding of complex structural
behavior in disordered proteins and its relation to coarse-grained descriptions
of disordered-protein sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the
Israeli Binational Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.