* 2113954
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Artificial Intelligence-Enhanced Cybersecurity: Workforce Needs and Barriers to Learning
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Brent Lagesse, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 131,329.00

The intersection of artificial intelligence (AI) and cybersecurity is emerging
as an important field to ensure the integrity of the economy and critical
infrastructure. Industry and government organizations require a workforce that
is well-trained in both AI and cybersecurity. Courses and workshops are emerging
to meet this need, but there is no published work addressing the content that
needs to be taught and how to teach that content to develop a workforce at the
intersection of AI and cybersecurity. This project addresses the gap in our
understanding of how to prepare the workforce to apply AI to problems in
cybersecurity by identifying workforce needs and developing solutions to
learning barriers that could prevent broad participation in AI-enhanced
cybersecurity. The project will create and disseminate an AI-enhanced
cybersecurity course for advanced undergraduate and master's students and
contribute new knowledge at the intersection of AI, cybersecurity, and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify workforce training
needs for AI-enhanced cybersecurity through interviews with industry experts.
This will inform the development of a course for master's and advanced
undergraduate students that addresses gaps in existing cybersecurity curricular
frameworks. The hands-on course will serve as a testbed to identify key
conceptual challenges, prerequisites, and compelling examples of AI-enhanced
cybersecurity. The course will train students at the University of Washington
Bothell in crucial AI-enhanced cybersecurity skills. Additionally, the project
seeks to identify opportunities to broaden participation at the intersection of
AI and cybersecurity. A better understanding of how computing majors perceive
courses and careers in AI, cybersecurity, and the intersection of the two can
inform efforts to broaden participation in AI-enhanced cybersecurity. This
interdisciplinary collaboration will also prepare the project team to engage in
education research at the intersection of AI and cybersecurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.