* 2113724
* Learning Algorithms for Inverse Problems from Data: Statistical and Computational Foundations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Venkat Chandrasekaran, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Methods for the solution of inverse problems arising in domains such as image
analysis, the geosciences, computational genomics, and many others are designed
based on a detailed understanding by a human analyst of the structure underlying
the problem. This project aims to develop new data-driven approaches to learning
solution methods for inverse problems and to develop the associated statistical
foundations. Specifically, the project will provide a new approach to data-
driven design of learning regularizers, which can be computed or optimized
within a specified computational budget, and come with statistical guarantees.
The research will engage both graduate and undergraduate students and will be
disseminated to a broader audience through the development of new
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regularization techniques are widely employed in
the solution of model selection and statistical inverse problems because of
their effectiveness in addressing difficulties due to ill-posedness, access to
only a small number of observations, or the high dimensionality of the signal or
model to be inferred. In their most common manifestation, these methods take the
form of penalty functions added to the objective in optimization-based
formulations. The design of the penalty function is based on prior domain-
specific expertise about the particular model selection or inverse problem at
hand, with a view to promoting a desired structure in the solution. This project
will develop a framework for the construction of algorithms for inferential
problems so as to address the following questions â€“ What if we do not know in
advance the structure we seek in our solution due to a lack of detailed domain
knowledge? Can we identify a suitable regularizer directly from data rather than
human-provided expertise? What are the fundamental limitations in terms of
sample complexity and the amount of computational resources required in such a
framework? Statistically, how do we provide confidence bounds for point
estimates that lie in a collection of regularizers?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.