* 2113426
* Inference for Functionals in High-Dimensional Regression
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Pragya Sur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 170,000.00

Modern science and engineering applications involve large datasets with a
multitude of variables or features. A key challenge in this context is to
distinguish the scientifically relevant variables from the irrelevant ones - in
other words, the signal from the noise. The challenge is compounded by subtle
nonlinear relationships among these variables. Generalized linear models are the
most often used tools in classical statistics for discovering such nonlinear
relationships and they are routinely employed, even in contemporary big data
settings. Unfortunately, classical statistical theory, traditionally used to
justify the validity of these methods, fails in this regime. This project will
develop novel approaches for inferring scientifically relevant parameters in the
framework of generalized linear models, adapted to the setting of high-
dimensional or big data. The theory developed will facilitate principled
inference regarding the relations among observed variables in applications such
as genomics, computational neuroscience, signal and image processing. The
principal investigator will also engage graduate students in the project by
mentoring them and develop courses that will incorporate results from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop statistical
theory and methods for inferring scientifically relevant low-dimensional
functionals in high-dimensional generalized linear models, organized around two
broad themes: (1) frequentist inference for signal-to-noise ratio type
functionals; (2) Bayesian inference for functionals under continuous shrinkage
priors. The first theme will develop novel estimators for the signal-to-noise
ratio and the genetic relatedness, a generalization of the signal-to-noise ratio
that measures the shared genetic basis between multiple traits in statistical
genetics. The second thrust will construct data-driven credible intervals for
components of the underlying signal under computationally tractable continuous
shrinkage priors. Both thrusts will develop inference procedures agnostic to
sparsity level of the underlying signal. To achieve this, the research will
focus on the proportional asymptotics high-dimensional regime and utilize novel
insights from approximate message passing theory, developed originally in
probability, information theory, and statistical
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.