* 2113984
* Collaborative Research: Sustainable Water Infrastructure for Adapting to Coastal Climate Change
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mark Merrifield, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This collaborative project seeks to advance the sustainability and resilience of
coastal communities against foreseeable impacts of climate change, such as
intensified precipitation, sea-level rise (SLR), and SLR-driven groundwater
rise. The central hypothesis is that sustainable and resilient infrastructure to
manage water supply and flooding in coastal areas requires informed decisions
aimed at (i) enhancing sustainability by balancing the local water budget
through decentralization and (ii) enhancing resilience against compound flooding
in which precipitation may coincide with other inundation sources. Projections
of SLR impacts increasingly will need to consider the flooding associated with
the interconnections between SLR and shallow coastal aquifers, as well as
expected compound flooding under typical precipitation events. Therefore, this
project will establish a mechanistic framework to analyze important stressors to
water infrastructure, with a focus on disadvantaged communities, and it will
develop a decentralized model to enhance their sustainability and
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to systematically understand
the impacts of frequent and longer timescale flooding events on water
infrastructure systems, and explore the sustainability benefits of decentralized
infrastructure to mitigate the compound inundation impacts in which
precipitation coincides with other inundation sources. The project team will
employ a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) technique and couple it with distributed
hydrologic modeling informed by groundwater table observations. A comprehensive
LCA framework will be informed by merging approaches from hydrology and data
sciences to forecast the response of water infrastructure systems to future
climate change stressors. Because the success of decentralized systems heavily
relies on understanding barriers that communities face in system implementation
and operation, this project seeks to advance sustainability assessment of
infrastructure by incorporating the needs of communities. Additionally, the
project team aims to actively engage students from underrepresented groups
through recruiting programs with Maximizing Access to Research Careers (MARC)
and the Initiative for Maximizing Student Development (IMSD) at San Diego State
University (SDSU), an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI). This project will
train 1 PhD and 2 undergraduate students, each of which will be engaged in
performing the project and presenting the outcomes to disseminate the knowledge.
The PhD student will be recruited to the Joint Doctoral Program (JDP) between
SDSU and UCSD (University of California, San Diego) to be able to systematically
benefit from the research, education and advising resources of the two
institutions. Furthermore, the project will include K-12 student engagement,
where the project team will deliver workshop modules on decentralized
infrastructure for the SDSU Pre-College Instituteâ€™s STEM Exploration Day, an
annual event for over350 underrepresented middle/high school students to engage
with STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.