* 2113469
* Research Initiation Award: Probing inter-compartmental cross-talk between redox and amylin signaling networks
* EDU,EES
* 12/15/2020,03/31/2023
* Tameka Clemons, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 196,384.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Spelman
College has potential broader impact in a number of areas and will assist in
building its research capacity and enhance the educational and research
experiences of underrepresented students. This study seeks to understand beta-
cell death, a process that has been suggested to occur partially as a result of
an increase in amylin, a protein that is co-secreted from beta-cells. A broader
understanding of the role of amylin and UCP2 will contribute to understanding
how cells communicate so that they can maintain a healthy cell
status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to clarify the
role of Uncoupling Protein 2 (UCP2) in beta-cells, which are cells known for
secreting insulin. Although the secretion of amylin is not often discussed when
describing beta-cells, amylin has been shown to be co-secreted with insulin. The
role of amylin in negatively impacting beta-cell function has recently been
described. UCP2 is known for decreasing the number of oxygen radicals resulting
from a metabolic process, which suggests that UCP2 may work to keep beta-cells
healthy since a high number of oxygen radicals can lead to poor cell function.
This project will investigate the influence of UCP2 on amylin's function,
thereby affecting the role that amylin plays in beta-cells. In addition, the
project examines the influence of UCP2 on amylin in neuronal cells, which are
cells that have also been shown to have increased levels of
amylin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.