* 2113839
* SaTC: EDU: A Curriculum for Quantum Security and Trust
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Swaroop Ghosh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2024
* USD 215,000.00

Quantum computing is significantly faster than its classical counterparts at
solving certain types of problems, including those with applications in
cryptography. Encryption is used to protect hard disk data, communication
channels, and sensitive user data in large scale data centers from
eavesdropping, misuse, and tampering. The use of quantum computers to carry out
cyberattacks on these systems has the potential to expose a wide variety of user
data placing data worth trillions of dollars at risk. Quantum computing courses
presented in the computer science domain are typically introduced at a
theoretical level with little emphasis on hands-on activities using real quantum
hardware. Courses addressing quantum computing in the physics domain focus on
quantum mechanical properties of materials. Meanwhile, industry is producing
Noisy-Intermediate-Scale-Quantum computers paving the way for research on
practical applications of quantum computing, including using off-the-shelf
algorithms to solve problems related to cryptography, which are areas not
currently covered in quantum computing courses . As a result, there is a
widening gap between coursework and industry advancement that needs to be
addressed to ensure there is an adequately skilled workforce prepared to address
the opportunities and threats that will arise as quantum computing becomes more
widely accessible. This project hopes to address this gap and to advance
cybersecurity education through the development of a flexible and portable
course that can be easily adopted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to
create a hands-on curriculum for undergraduate students, using the Quantum
Security and Trust (QUEST) framework, to allow students to apply their newly
acquired knowledge immediately as part of the learning process. The proposed
curriculum rests on activities and games on the QUEST framework to reinforce
relevant concepts. The students will create various circuits on QUEST and
validate them in simulations and on real quantum hardware. This approach should
enable personalized learning at low cost due to cloud-based access to quantum
hardware and a simulator. It also hopes to facilitate self-learning of complex
quantum computing concepts through hands-on activities. The proposed course can
be taken by undergraduate students with minimal prerequisite knowledge.
Therefore, a large population of undergraduate students can be exposed to
quantum computing and cybersecurity early in their career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and
privacy, and in this case specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program
aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan
and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing
social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.