* 2113937
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying nitrous oxide sources across an oxygen gradient in the northern Benguela upwelling system
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Karen Casciotti, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 776,194.00

Nitrous oxide is a potent greenhouse gas that also contributes to ozone
destruction in the upper atmosphere. Sources of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere
involve the activity of microbes (bacteria and archaea) in the ocean,
particularly where oxygen is scarce. Although marine environments low in
dissolved oxygen occur in both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, much of what is
known about microbial nitrous oxide production in the ocean is based on data
from the Eastern Tropical Pacific. Substantially less research has focused on
the Eastern Tropical Atlantic, such as the northern Benguela Upwelling System
(nBUS), where high nitrous oxide fluxes have been observed. The lack of
measurements, combined with a limited understanding of the microbial pathways
that lead to nitrous oxide production, creates uncertainty in predictions about
future ocean emissions of nitrous oxide. Therefore, the overall project goal is
to quantify nitrous oxide cycling rates and determine microbial pathways across
an oxygen gradient in the world’s most productive upwelling system – the nBUS.
The project will support training of two graduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher. The PIs and graduate students will participate in the African
Regional Graduate Network in Oceanography (RGNO) Discovery Camp in Namibia,
Africa, thus the proposed research is fully nested in broader impacts
activities. Further, the PI will host a graduate student from the University of
Namibia, Africa at Florida State University to transfer knowledge regarding
methods used in microbial ecology, bioinformatics and statistical analyses in
years two and three. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two specific
objectives, with the first being to determine the spatial distribution of
nitrous oxide production rates and mechanisms using 15N tracers and natural
abundance isotope and isotopomer analyses. The second objective is to determine
the relationship between dissolved oxygen concentrations and microbial community
structure, microbial function and metabolic activities that lead to nitrous
oxide production, resolving the active microbial pathways that lead to the
observed isotopic data from the first objective. The relative contributions of
different pathways to nitrous oxide accumulation will be tested through a
combination of 15N tracer experiments, natural abundance isotope and isotopomer
analyses, and 16S rRNA gene, metagenome and metatranscriptome sequencing. The
proposed work will model the distributions of nitrous oxide bulk and site-
specific isotope ratios using nitrate and nitrite isotope measurements as inputs
and will test the rates and environmental controls determined in incubation
experiments to assess consistency with the longer-term isotopic measurements.
The molecular data will also inform the interpretation of the isotopic data,
further resolving nitrous oxide source mechanisms and
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.