* 2113155
* Collaborative Research: Moving mountains: timing and emplacement of the Marysvale gravity slide complex
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* W. Ashley Griffith, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 229,669.00

Volcanic fields are dynamic environments, characterized by rapidly evolving
landscapes and extreme hazard potential. This research project is focused on
learning and understanding the processes involved in collapse of volcanic fields
and production of mega-scale landslides. The project objectives will be achieved
by geologic mapping of the ancient Marysvale gravity slide complex in
southwestern Utah, one of the largest such structures in the world that is made
up of three individual mega-scale slides, determining the age of rocks contained
in the slides, and modeling slide initiation and lateral transport to distances
over 35 km to the south of their initiation sites. This research project
assembles a new multi-institution, multi-disciplinary collaboration and will
provide support for graduate and undergraduate students. High-resolution 3D
geologic data collected during this study will be used to develop virtual field
trips and field camp mapping modules. These modules will be interactive and
contain outcrop models, geologic maps, and samples that will enable students and
the public to learn more about volcanic hazards and mega-scale landslides. The
modules will also serve a broader mission to make the Earth Sciences accessible
to a broad, diverse population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;During the late Oligocene
to Miocene, the Marysvale volcanic field of southwestern Utah, USA, experienced
three consecutive mega-scale catastrophic collapse events, collectively called
the Marysvale gravity slide complex (MGSC). The stratigraphic succession,
kinematic indicators, basal structures, pervasive fragmentation, and
pseudotachylyte collectively suggest that emplacement of each of these slides
occurred at high velocity during individual events. Outstanding questions for
these landslides include (1) the conditions of the volcanic field that made it
susceptible to mega-scale collapse, and (2) the factors which allowed the
resulting gigantic slides to travel tens of kilometers at high velocity, driven
by gravity. The MGSC provides an excellent opportunity to address these
questions due to the exceptional exposure of the internal structure and basal
slide planes of the slide blocks. Through a multidisciplinary approach combining
geologic mapping, geochronology, rock mechanics analyses, and numerical
modeling, we will evaluate the timing of slide initiation with respect to
evolution of the volcanic field and major eruptive events, the role of a
frictionally weak substrate on slide initiation, and the combined roles of
thermal pressurization, damage, and shear localization on slide mobility and
deceleration. Geological mapping and field work, combined with 40Ar/39Ar and
zircon U-Pb geochronology, will provide constraints on timing, the dimensions
and continuity of each slide, and the structure of the basal sliding surface.
Laboratory measurements of rock properties, combined with field-based geologic
parameters, will be used to constrain numerical models of both the coupled
processes facilitating slide mobility and the conditions of pre-slide stability,
representing an unprecedented level of geologic constraint on models of massive-
scale, long runout landslides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Tectonics program and the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry program in
the division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.