* 2113404
* Data Integration Via Analysis of Subspaces (DIVAS)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Marron, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A challenge In analyzing big data is that of multiple measurement types that are
often generated simultaneously. This research addresses this challenge from the
perspective of multi-block (also known as multi-view) data. In particular, the
focus is on multiple types of measurements made on the same objects. One common
example is that of multiple 'omics' measurements (e.g. gene and protein
expression) in biology and medicine. The data analytic challenge is to
understand how the different measurements work together, in terms of modes of
joint variation, and how they work independently in terms of individual modes of
variation. The proposed new methodology is named DIVAS, an acronym for Data
Integration Via Analysis of Subspaces. An important underlying theme is that the
most useful new data analytic methods are invented in the context of
interdisciplinary collaboration. The project also provides research training
opportunities for graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIVAS will be a
breakthrough in analysis methods for multi-block data in several ways. First,
the algorithm is completely different from existing methods, using a new
structure deliberately designed to facilitate partially shared blocks. Second,
statistical inference is deliberately incorporated into all aspects of DIVAS,
instead of being mostly an after-thought as in most competing methods. In
particular, our applications motivate inference on both scores and loadings,
which will be performed using novel principal angle based concepts. Third, the
algorithm is based on an innovative combination of perturbation bounds and
random direction bounds which draws on ideas from all of probability theory,
linear algebra, approximation theory and optimization. Theoretical validation
will be performed using an unusually broad range of asymptotics, that is
motivated by the breadth of the driving applications. To ensure focusing on the
most important aspect of the methodology, development of DIVAS will be done in
direct collaboration with experts (including unfunded collaborators) in other
scientific areas. One will be breast cancer research, which typically involves
very high dimensional data. We will mathematically investigate that domain with
High Dimension Low Sample Size asymptotics, where the dimensions go to infinity
for fixed sample size. The other will be Drosophila behavioral genetics with
typically low dimension, which creates additional methodological challenges.
Here the completely different classical asymptotics, where the sample size grows
for fixed dimension, provide the best insights into performance of the
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.