* 2113742
* I-Corps:  Microbially-derived, Precipitated Calcium Carbonates for Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Hazel Barton, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of precipitated calcium carbonates (PCCs) using microbial
precipitation under ambient conditions. Particulate (micron scale) calcium
carbonate has a number of industrial uses in the manufacture of paper,
thermoplastics, sealants and adhesives, and paints. Currently, the production of
PCCs requires sintering (heating to &gt;1,000Â°C), which releases an estimated
162 kilotons of carbon dioxide (CO2), a greenhouse gas, into the atmosphere
annually. The anthropogenic emission of greenhouse gases represents a
significant threat to our planet, with climate impacts that will disrupt
societies and damage important ecosystem services. The proposed microbial
processes by-passes sintering and sequesters CO2 in the production of PCCs. This
technology represents a novel target to reduce CO2 emissions, while carbon
capture credits may increase profit margins in a market that is worth $5.6
billion annually. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a microbial metabolic pathway that uses cellular calcium cations
(Ca2+) homeostasis to initiate the precipitation of micron-scale carbonates
sourced from atmospheric CO2. By understanding the metabolic pathways and
genetic controls that regulate this process, it has been possible to tune the
microbial cultures to produce a variety of PCCs, including PCCs that cannot be
made using existing technologies. As the carbonates produced in this system are
sourced from atmospheric CO2, not only does this represent a green solution to
PCC production, but it also has the potential to be a previously unidentified
mechanism of carbon-capture. In addition, the proposed technology is unique
within current microbially-precipitated calcium carbonate technologies in that
mined limestone is not required; nor is bacterial ureolysis utilized. Instead,
the source of the carbonates in the PCCs produced using the proposed method is
atmospheric CO2 with net carbon capture. By varying the chemical conditions for
growth, it may be possible to generate PCCs with a variety of characteristics
(particle size, particle shape, surface chemistry, and surface area) that are
important in many industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.