* 2113618
* NeTS:  Small:  Collaborative Research:  Cooperative Interference-Embracing Communication in Multi-Hop Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Huacheng Zeng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Sprintson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 123,304.00

While the proliferation of wireless devices and their Internet-centered
applications has brought forth numerous wireless services, current wireless
technologies are unable to meet the increasing communication demand caused by
the huge number of wireless devices and the scarcity of available radio
spectrum. The proposed research will make a concrete step toward bridging this
gap by developing new communication algorithms and protocols for wireless
networks, specifically multi-hop wireless networks. Multi-hop communication
brings many benefits such as enlarged network coverage, reduced radio transmit
power, and relaxed requirements for network infrastructure, yet interference
severely degrades network performance. This project investigates this
fundamental issue by developing practical approaches to managing interference in
multi-hop wireless networks, with the objective of maximizing their throughput
performance. The success of this project will advance the field's knowledge of
wireless system design and implementation, significantly improve network
throughput performance, and enlarge the network communication coverage, yielding
ubiquitous high data rate wireless services. The project will also provide
opportunities for research training for underrepresented students at
undergraduate and graduate levels, and project results will be widely
disseminated through high-profile tutorials, talks, publications, software
toolkits, and open-source sites. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to develop novel, practical, and foundational interference-embracing
solutions to improve the throughput of multi-hop wireless networks by leveraging
recent advances in physical layer techniques, and to evaluate such solutions
using real-world implementations. Focusing on theory, protocol design, and
system prototyping for interference management technologies, this project
presents a comprehensive solution for advanced interference management in multi-
hop wireless networks, including interference cancellation, interference
alignment, and interference neutralization. In addition to significantly
advancing interference management techniques for multi-hop wireless
communications, this project will provide training opportunities for students
spanning signal processing, optimization, algorithmic development, and
networking infrastructure research; support talented female and underrepresented
Ph.D. students in the completion of their doctoral studies; result in the
dissemination of research results through high-profile tutorials, talks,
publications, software toolkits, and open-source sites; and integrate research
results into the development of new courses at both the University of Louisville
and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln.