* 2113365
* Genomic and Evolutionary Responses of Bat Populations to White Nose Syndrome
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mandy Guinn, United Tribes Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,796.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions increases the opportunities for their students to pursue
challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in
areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and
generational appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project,
titled “Genomic and Evolutionary Responses of Bat Populations to White Nose
Syndrome” directly aligns with that goal. Conducted by faculty at United Tribes
Technical College (UTTC), the project investigates the effects of exposure to
White Nose Syndrome (WNS) on the genetic variation of bats in North Dakota and
the Great Plains. Bats play key roles in ecosystems and their populations have
been adversely affected by WNS globally. This study aims to generate important
information for preserving this important and unique species. In addition to
conducting socially significant research, the project enhances the college’s
research capacity and engages minority undergraduate students in research and
training opportunities that increase their familiarity with field and laboratory
research methods. Further, findings from the study will be integrated into
undergraduate STEM courses at UTTC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
significantly impact the understanding of the host’s response to WNS through
three key and interconnected objectives to 1) complete a phylogenetic analysis
to distinguish subspecies relationships and delineation across the Northern
Great Plains; 2) compare transcriptome-wide changes in infected vs. non-infected
tissue in Myotis lucifugus; and 3) conduct a genome-wide scan to identify allele
frequency differences between survivors and non-survivors and reveal potential
selection pressure in populations exposed to WNS. Data generated will be used to
test whether there is overlap between genes whose expression is altered by WNS
and genes subject to natural selection. It is expected a subset of genes
involved in physiological and immunological responses to WNS will also exhibit
evidence of selection, with protective alleles found at a higher frequency in
survivors versus non-survivors. This project will lay the foundation to
implement a long-term, sustainable genomic and evolutionary biology research
program at UTTC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.