* 2113905
* IUCRC: Planning Grant: RIT:  Center for Smart Spaces Research (CSSR)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Xumin Liu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 19,338.00

Smart spaces are characterized by the presence of smart services built on
emerging sensing, computing, and communication technologies. This planning grant
will create a multi-university Center for Smart Space Research (CSSR) involving
Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) and the University of California, Irvine
(UCI). CSSR takes an integrated approach to make them versatile and adaptable to
situations by ensuring the availability and accessibility of data, knowledge,
and services. This planning grant will identify research challenges to build
application-focused smart spaces. Applications encompass health and disease
monitoring systems, smart buildings, public spaces and cities, mission critical
systems, transportation, and others. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The center’s focus
will be on four main areas of relevance to industry, university, and society:
creation of adaptive computing and communications infrastructure; trustworthy
acquisition, processing, interpretation and sustainability of data and
knowledge; and applications that span all aspects of life and the environment.
RIT researchers will engage in collaborations with industrial organizations,
technology developers, and users, with an objective to create proactive,
scalable, secure, and efficient smart spaces. The planning grant will identify
challenges and research tasks to make smart spaces adaptable to multiple
applications. Collaborations with industry will lead to the emergence of new
applications of smart spaces. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The planning phase of CSSR
will significantly impact research directions and pedagogical activities at RIT.
The research activities will be fine-tuned to enable effective transfer of
research artifacts to the collaborating industries with an emphasis on
applications to improve quality of life, enhance public health, conserve energy,
and sustainability. Workshops and interactions with industry collaborators will
be leveraged to recruit and mentor diverse groups of students. At RIT, students
from diverse backgrounds, including those from the National Institute for the
Deaf (NTID) will be exposed to challenges and solutions in the research and
development of smart spaces.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the near future, access to
smart spaces and smart infrastructure will impact every individual and will
greatly improve quality of life. CSSR activities in fostering innovation in
accessible smart spaces will play a major role in the future world. Planning
phase will serve as a platform for meetings, discussions, and workshops, to
identify critical research to guide the development of smart spaces. CSSR will
maintain a publicly-accessible repository comprising meeting materials, workshop
information, research topics and details, and publications. This repository will
be maintained at a publicly accessible URL at RIT for the lifetime of the
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.