* 2113464
* Collaborative Research: Predator facilitation across a variable marine environment.
* BIO,IOS
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Scott Shaffer, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 09/30/2024
* USD 45,000.00

In the open ocean, unique and poorly understood interactions between apex
predators can take place, where one predator influences prey to make them more
susceptible to other types of predators. During such “facilitation” interactions
between large, predatory pelagic species (dolphins, tunas, swordfish, sharks)
attack forage fish from below, driving dense aggregations to the surface where
they become available to aerial predators (seabirds). These interactions are
hard to observe, which is problematic because they may be particularly important
for numerous seabird species believed to be dependent on facilitated foraging.
During this project, we will develop methods to remotely observe these
interactions using a novel combination of biologging devices (GPS, cameras,
accelerometers, heart rate loggers, and stomach temperature loggers) in concert
with new statistical approaches for analyzing animal tracking data. This will
allow the investigators to detect and characterize these interactions more
accurately and measure the degree to which facilitation improves foraging
efficiency in tropical pelagic seabirds. The project will occur at Palmyra Atoll
in partnership with NOAA, the US Fish and Wildlife Service, and The Nature
Conservancy in an effort to provide management guidance regarding the importance
of predator facilitation and its potential loss on seabird populations world-
wide. Graduate and undergraduate students at the four participating universities
will be involved in research and receive valuable hands-on educational and
training experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
nature of and importance of open-ocean predator facilitation, a key but
overlooked trait-mediated interaction between two predators that target a common
prey. To achieve these objectives, the project will develop methods to remotely
detect facilitation interactions and evaluate their energetic consequences to
foraging seabirds by combining data from a unique suite of biologging devices in
analyses using novel statistical modeling techniques. Specifically, animal-borne
cameras will be combined with GPS telemetry deployed on red-footed boobies (Sula
sula) to characterize facilitated foraging interactions around Palmyra Atoll in
the central Pacific. Cameras will directly observe the presence of facilitation
and potentially the taxonomic composition of other predators, while bird-borne
GPS data will record movement patterns, location, and frequency of these
interactions. With these data, the investigators will develop Bayesian dynamic
parameter movement models that detect facilitation from GPS-observed movement
patterns alone, when camera data are not collected. Finally, on a pilot basis to
demonstrate feasibility, the models will then be fit to individuals tracked by
GPS while carrying biologging equipment that measures energetic expenditure
(triaxial accelerometry, heart rate loggers) and gain (stomach temperature
loggers) to evaluate the associated energetic impact of facilitation on overall
energy balance of foraging seabirds. These observations will be supplemented
with more traditional approaches to demonstrate the technical feasibility of
this approach for measuring the impacts of facilitated foraging in free living
individuals that forage in the open ocean. Once developed, it will be possible
to relate the importance of this ecological interaction to breeding success at
the population-level for seabirds that can be similarly observed, making precise
observation of foraging behaviors possible from available biologging
technologies and statistical modeling approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.