* 2113467
* High-Dimensional Point Process Modeling with Applications to Large-scale Neuronal Activity Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiwei Tang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 06/30/2024
* USD 83,148.00

Large-scale point process data is ubiquitous in a wide variety of scientific and
business applications, for example in neuroscience. This project aims to develop
a sequence of novel statistical methods and machine learning algorithms for
modeling high-dimensional point process data. These methods can be used to
analyze the complex ensemble neuronal activity data, which is now of key
interest in neuroscience to understand mechanisms of sensory coding, motor
output, and cognitive function for groups of neurons. The methods will also be
useful to address other important scientific questions, such as predicting the
occurrence of earthquakes, capturing the spatial pattern of galaxies,
characterizing social networks, and modeling marketing forecasts and supply
chains. This project will stimulate interdisciplinary collaboration between data
and domain scientists from disparate areas including neuroscience, environmental
science, business, epidemiology, astronomy, ecology, and political science. The
project will integrate research with the teaching and training of students at
various levels. Software packages implemented in programming languages R and
Python will be developed and distributed for broad
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analyzing multivariate neuronal spike trains data
imposes significant challenges and requires new sophisticated tools for modeling
high-dimensional point processes. This project aims to develop a general
multivariate point process regression model, which allows both high-dimensional
point-process-type responses and predictors, through utilizing the advanced
tensor decomposition techniques. The method will enable researchers to model a
large number of neurons jointly while having the model dimension substantially
reducedâ€”this turns the adversity of the high dimensionality of data into
benefits. The project will also incorporate additional structures, such as
sparsity, clustering, and spatial-correlation, into learning, and model
interaction effects through higher-order convolutions. The research can greatly
facilitate neuroscience studies regarding coordinating mechanisms among neurons
in information transmission and encoding. More importantly, the models to be
developed with effective and scalable computing procedures can adapt to both
temporal and spatial processes and apply to other types of scientific
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.