* 2113436
* NSF-BSF: Precision Muon and Electron Scattering to Probe Low-Energy Proton Structure
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Kohl, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

This award provides funding for the NSF-supported research activities of the PI
and his group at Hampton University, a Historically Black College and University
(HBCU) in Virginia, USA. The group will work on the Muon Scattering Experiment
(MUSE) at the Paul-Scherrer Institute in Switzerland. The MUSE experiment is an
investigation into the so-called “proton radius puzzle”. The size of the proton
is a fundamental quantity with considerable uncertainty due to conflicting
measurements and methods. The MUSE experiment will measure the proton charge
radius with high precision via the elastic scattering of electrons and muons off
protons. The experiment will provide data to constrain the possible explanations
of the puzzle and has the potential to reveal new physics beyond the Standard
Model. The project offers opportunities for students and postdocs at a minority
serving institution to participate in forefront international
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MUSE experiment aims to address one of the
most pressing questions in nuclear and particle science to date; to measure the
radius of the proton. MUSE will use mixed muon and electron beams of either
charge (μ+/e+, μ−/e−) to make precise measurements of the lepton-proton elastic
scattering cross sections, over a broad kinematic range, with the goal to
extract the proton charge radius for each probe. The experiment will determine,
with high precision, if there is any difference seen for the proton charge
radius observed by electron versus muon scattering. At the same time, it will
provide tight constraints on nuclear theory. The PI is one of the original
initiators of the MUSE project. The coPI is a junior faculty member whose PhD
work focused on similar measurements. The group will play a major role in
running the experiment and analyzing the data. Notably, the group is responsible
for high-resolution beam particle tracking at MUSE using GEM
detectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: the PI’s research program
provides new research and educational opportunities for students from minority
populations, predominantly African-Americans, and postdoctoral researchers.
Hampton University is the only HBCU in the US offering a PhD program in Nuclear
Physics. This project combines state-of-the-art detector development at Hampton
University with forefront research at facilities around the globe, such as PSI
and Jefferson Lab. The PI has successfully worked with Hampton University
undergraduate and graduate students for many years, and he has been a dedicated
mentor for postdoctoral researchers and a strong supporter of women in science.
Further, the PI has maintained strong partnerships with other institutions, with
the clear goal of attracting graduate students to the physics PhD and Master
programs at Hampton University and providing a pipeline of talented
undergraduate students toward graduate education in top schools, to ultimately
increase the number of African-American PhDs. The development and operation of
GEM detectors for MUSE constitutes a strong basis to advance this novel
technology with potential future applications in other experiments, as well as
in the medical sector and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
co-funded by the Physics Division, and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program. This award also provides Binational Science
Foundation (BSF) funding for the group at The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.