* 2114702
* HSI Pilot Project: College of Alameda Mathematics Engineering Science Achievement (MESA) Connect
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alex Madonik, College of Alameda
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,047.00

With support from Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase the enrollment
of Latinx students in College of Alameda (CoA) STEM programs and impact rates of
success and retention in gateway STEM courses. The Mathematics Engineering
Science Achievement (MESA) Connect program will excite students about applied
STEM learning and teach them the fundamentals of STEM inquiry and research
through Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) that will be
woven into their fall semester courses. The project has four objectives: (1)
broaden participation in STEM degree programs by piloting and evaluating a
summer STEM Discovery Institute and internships; (2) improve STEM teaching and
learning by designing a first-year learning community that incorporates CUREs in
introductory Biology, Chemistry, CIS and Math courses; (3) deliver comprehensive
student support services, including academic tutoring, professional and near
peer mentoring, faculty advising, transfer support services, campus health
resources and financial aid; and (4) in collaboration with CSUEB, build
institutional capacity to both deliver and analyze culturally informed STEM
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation of MESA Connect will contribute
to a growing body of knowledge about CUREs and their importance to Latinx
community college students, particularly when CURE design is culturally relevant
and significant. The formative evaluation will consider whether the project is
being conducted as planned and with the stated intentions of cultural competency
and fidelity to evidence-based practices. The summative evaluation will look at
whether project participants achieved the intended pilot outcomes, including
qualitative academic (course completion) and qualitative STEM-related (career
interest, understanding of core concepts) outcomes, and whether the project
contributed toward its intended long- term impact on degree attainment and
transfer. Quantitative analysis will compare participating Latinx student
outcomes with overall college outcomes, and qualitative analysis will be
grounded in students’ cultural backgrounds, measuring the effectiveness of the
pilot interventions within the context of the project and the student
experience. Contributions to the literature on this topic will answer the
research question: What is the impact of participation in a STEM learning
community enriched by culturally informed CUREs on Latinx community college
students’ awareness of and decision to pursue STEM education and careers?
Deepening understanding of culturally appropriate CUREs in the context of a
transfer pathway will benefit students from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM
who begin their post-secondary education in the community college. The
dissemination plan will include presentations at national networks, such as the
Community College Undergraduate Research Initiative. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.