* 2114657
* AGS-PRF: The Impacts of Hemispheric Moisture Transport and Atmospheric Dynamics on Millennial-Scale Arctic Hydroclimate through the Holocene
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Allison Cluett, Cluett, Allison A
* Fellowship Award
* Soumaya Belmecheri
* 10/31/2022
* USD 110,001.00

The Arctic is warming at twice the global average rate and is projected to
experience among the highest rates of precipitation increase. Locally, the
Arctic hydrological cycle is an underlying control on ice sheet mass balance,
ecosystems, and freshwater and radiative balances, and thereby influences
feedbacks in global oceanic and atmospheric circulation. This project aims to
develop a synthesis of past hydroclimate variability in the Arctic region during
the Holocene with the goal to fill critical gaps in understanding of the
mechanisms controlling Arctic moisture availability. Specifically, the
researcher will 1) Contribute to curation of Arctic Holocene moisture-sensitive
record database, 2) Apply mechanistic-based models to constrain the magnitude of
precipitation changes inferred from past climate records, and 3) Synthesize
moisture-sensitive records for comparison with a global Holocene climate
reconstruction and climate model simulations. The data synthesis and data-model
comparison will be used to test the following hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1. Arctic
moisture-sensitive data demonstrate meridionally-coherent millennial-scale
Holocene variability. Support for this hypothesis would suggest Arctic moisture
availability was sensitive to large-scale meridional atmospheric transport
patterns, whereas low spatial coherence among proxy records along lines of
meridian could indicate local processes drove spatial variability. &lt;br/&gt;2.
In the early- to mid-Holocene, a weakened and more meandering westerly jet
reduced moisture transport to the North Atlantic region, while promoting strong
moisture transport to eastern Beringia and other Arctic sectors. Reduced mid-
latitude cyclone activity linked to a weakened westerly jet may have contributed
to North American aridity in the early to mid-Holocene. In the Arctic, this
mechanism would likely reduce cyclone activity in the eastern North Atlantic
region, while enhancing moisture advection to Eurasia and the western Arctic.
Alternatively, similar changes across all sectors may imply dynamic impacts were
trivial in comparison to the thermodynamic impact of increased atmospheric
moisture capacity in a warmer atmosphere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential
Broader Impacts include a greater understanding of long-term spatiotemporal
variability of hydroclimate and moisture variability in the arctic region and
their link to mid- to high-latitude atmospheric teleconnections. The project
will produce a curated database of moisture sensitive records in the arctic
region covering the Holocene which will be made publicly available. Other
Broader Impacts include the development of educational materials in partnership
with the Institute for Tribal Environmental Professionals (Northern Arizona
University), creating a module for a workshop for k-12 and tribal college
teachers in Northern Arizona on climate change and variability with social and
human implications. The research and outreach activities will provide scientific
and professional development for an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.