* 2114784
* I-Corps:  A skin phenotype analysis technology using mass spectrometry (MS)-based  molecular omics analysis with artificial intelligence (AI)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Stacy Sherrod, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will provide
scientifically-founded insights to empower consumers and professionals to make
informed decisions regarding the skincare products they use and guide clients on
proper use. Consumers lack an understanding of their skin properties and needs,
as well as knowledge around the biochemical basis for the use of a particular
product or ingredient. As a result, they spend money and time trying new
products and seek professional assistance in managing their skin. This project
has the potential to bring robust scientific information to the skincare
industry, a sector that is largely unregulated, which may result in an increase
of consumer confidence in the beneficial use of their skincare products. Both
direct-to-consumer and professional markets can be transformed by this
technology, owing to its ability to enable commercial opportunities that will
increase the overall health and wellness of individuals through self-testing.
This self-testing will drive skincare product manufacturers to formulate high-
quality products with ingredient transparency (including product analysis and
ingredient quality control) and will create competition in the home testing
market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on a skin phenotype
assessment technology to empower consumers to make informed choices about
skincare products. Specifically, mass spectrometry (MS)-based molecular omics
analysis and artificial intelligence (AI) are used to determine ideal facial
skincare products and/or ingredients for an individual's unique skin. The state-
of-the-art MS analysis illuminates the composition of skin cells at the
molecular level (e.g., amino acids, ceramides). The molecular composition can be
used to characterize skin health (e.g., structure, function, environmental
exposures, and hydration). The product-skin fit AI matches the needs of the
individual's skin to existing products based on the biological functions of
active and common ingredients in skincare products. Through prior work in animal
models, 5,240 skin analytes were detected and &gt; 50 different lipid and
metabolite classes identified. These molecularly-diverse metabolites and lipids
highlight the depth of biological information contained in skin cells. Taken
together, the skin phenotype technology will allow for the use of scientifically
proven data to address the challenges in the skincare industry (i.e. subpar skin
results, discarded products, loss of valuable time, and wasted money for
consumers) and allow individuals to achieve their skincare
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.