* 2114911
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Just-in-Time Artificial Intelligence-Driven Cyber Abuse Education in Social Networks
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Peter Clarke, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 192,921.00

Social networks encourage casual interactions and expose users to a variety of
forms of cyber abuse, which are known to have negative socio-psychological
effects. Previous work has shown that only a fraction of cyber abuse victims
adopt self-protective behaviors. This may occur because some victims lack the
background knowledge required to identify cyber abuse and to assert appropriate
protective behaviors. While education can be effective in this regard, classroom
delivery may fail to reproduce the diverse and dynamic context of cyber abuse,
making it difficult for students to effectively translate knowledge into
practice. This project seeks to increase the adoption of self-protective
behaviors by integrating educational content into social networking
interactions. Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques will be used to optimize
the placement and timing of educational content. The project has the potential
to improve the security and privacy of vulnerable social network
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will leverage their expertise in
cybersecurity, AI, and education to investigate, develop and evaluate a new
educational framework that provides just-in-time awareness training to identify
and respond appropriately to cyber abuse when using social networks. First, the
team will develop AI-based solutions to detect and classify cyber abuse based on
abuse traces in the accounts of the users involved. The team will also leverage
data and feedback collected from study participants to build a ground-truth
dataset of instances and timelines of cyber abuse. Second, the team will design
and implement targeted learning content and user interface nudges to deliver the
knowledge required to make safer decisions in social network interactions.
Third, the team will develop AI-based techniques to determine the ideal
placement of learning content that improves user adoption of self-protective
behaviors. Finally, the unique features of Facebook will be exploited to design
evaluation experiments and educational outcomes-based techniques that capture
user behaviors in the context of their regular Facebook
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.