* 2114288
* RAPID: Effects of increased human presence on the brain and behavior of a wild songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kendra Sewall, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Humans alter the environment by building infrastructure, such as roads and
buildings, and also through our presence in wildlands for recreation. Though
some species are excluded by human impacts on the environment, many species of
wildlife readily modify their behavior to cope with changes such as
urbanization. Studying the neural and physiological mechanisms that permit some
species to adjust to environmental change addresses the fundamental scientific
question of how behavioral flexibility is achieved. Additionally, understanding
how species adjust to different aspects of environmental change can inform
conservation and management efforts. The proposed work will take advantage of an
increase in human recreation in parks in Montgomery County, VA that has been
driven by the COVID-19 quarantine to both compare the effects of human presence
relative to those of the built environment, and identify brain mechanisms that
regulate behavioral adjustments to environmental change in a common song bird,
the song sparrow. By working with a local land trust to educate the community
about our research this work will benefit the birders and walkers using the
park, as well as provide insight into the conservation of wild
songbirds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-induced rapid environmental change is a
threat to biodiversity and especially songbirds. While some species are in
decline because of impacts such as urbanization, others have traits that allow
them to cope with changing conditions. Behavioral plasticity is critical for the
persistence of species and individuals in the face of rapid environmental
change, yet we do not fully understand the mechanisms underlying such
flexibility. Moreover, though distinguishing the effects of different types of
anthropogenic change is critical for conservation, we do not understand their
consequences for wildlife. The proposed work capitalizes on a temporary increase
in outdoor recreation in rural environments during the COVID-19 pandemic to
determine how increased human presence impacts the behavior and underlying brain
mechanisms in free-living song sparrows (Melospiza melodia). Much of what we
know about the effects of anthropogenic change on wildlife comes from studies of
urbanization. Wild animals living in urban habitats are more aggressive than
rural counterparts but the mechanisms regulating these differences remain
unclear. Our research group demonstrated that increased territorial aggression
in male song sparrows living at our long-term urban study sites is associated
with differences in the function of the arginine vasotocin (AVT) system.
Therefore, to characterize the contribution of the AVT system to behavioral
plasticity in response to anthropogenic change we will compare brain and
behavioral measures from adult birds (Aim 1) and hatch-year birds (Aim 2) living
in replicate urban habitats, rural habitats with low human presence, and rural
habitats with temporary increases in human presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.