* 2114204
* Collaborative Research: Illuminating the characteristics, causes, and paleoclimatic importance of the Mid-Cenozoic Loess in the Western USA
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Ran Feng, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,818.00

Loess deposits consist of fine-grained, windblown sediments and contain critical
information about continental aridification processes that are key to
understanding biotic evolution and climate change. This project integrates field
data collected from loess deposited ~37-30 million years ago in Wyoming,
Nebraska and Montana, laboratory analyses, and paleoclimate simulations to
understand the nature, causes, and paleoclimatic importance of these loess
deposits. The research will advance STEM diversity by supporting a two-day
GEOCAMP for historically underrepresented high-school students from east Texas.
In addition, this project will promote further development of the high-
resolution Community Earth System Model to be used to better understand ancient
climate changes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will include field
sedimentological observation and lab analyses of bulk sediment and quartz grain-
size, quartz surface morphology, detrital and high-precision zircon U-Pb
geochronology to study the ancient loess deposits in Wyoming, Nebraska and
Montana, USA. These proxy data will constrain the extent, timing, pattern and
characteristics of the loess; and determine sediment provenance and sediment
recycling mechanisms. These proxy data will be integrated with a coupled
atmosphere-land model to simulate changes of regional climate and vegetation
induced by topography changes, global climate cooling, glaciation and shoreline
regression to understand the cause and climate significance of the loess. In
additional to gaining fundamental understanding of the loess deposits, the
project will shed light on 1) the influence of climate change on biotic
evolution at the Eocene-Oligocene transition (~34 million years ago); 2) the
validity of different models of surface uplift in the western USA; and 3) the
potential positive climate feedback of enhanced mineral dust emissions on global
cooling at the transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.