* 2114165
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: EDU: Hardware Security Education for All Through Seamless Extension of Existing Curricula
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 105,999.00

The field of cybersecurity has focused predominantly on the security of software
and the communication network due to the assumption that the underlying hardware
is trustworthy and reliable. However, emerging hardware attack methods have
originated from untrustworthy global supply chain sources and vulnerabilities
inherent to the hardware. To address these challenges, the government and
industry are in urgent need of cybersecurity professionals trained to counter
hardware-oriented attacks. However, most students are insufficiently prepared
because existing undergraduate curricula for electrical and computer
engineering, computer science, and related programs focus primarily on the
software and network aspects of cybersecurity. Few institutions have introduced
dedicated hardware security courses and even when these courses exist, they are
typically electives. This project aims to facilitate hardware security education
for engineering undergraduate students by incorporating the relevant concepts
into existing core courses. The project will broaden undergraduate students’
participation; advance their knowledge; and create a well-trained and
diversified cybersecurity workforce with essential knowledge of hardware
security. The security-integrated contents of various core courses will be made
available online for all universities and community colleges nationwide. The
participation of students who are members of underrepresented groups in
cybersecurity education and research should also be catalyzed by this effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to integrate theoretical and practical
training on six foundational hardware security concepts in core courses related
to digital design and embedded systems. Course modules will be distributed to
the broader community after evaluation by industry and academic experts.
Existing theory and lab modules within the target core courses will be augmented
with security-oriented concepts through a ‘contextual learning’ process, so that
they will strengthen the materials of the core course while educating on
security. The course materials, modules, and findings will be shared publicly
using the PIs’ webpages and well-established online platforms for hardware
security, such as Trust-Hub and CADforAssurance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program,
which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case
specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.