* 2114202
* CICI: UCSS: Enhancing Integrity and Confidentiality for Secure Distributed Data Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Subhashini Sivagnanam, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The promised benefit of research data sharing lies in the ability to reuse the
data. While many scientific disciplines are starting to share data, there are
others who are restricted in the data they can share and with whom they can
share. More and more interdisciplinary research and cross-institutional science
collaborations are conducted on datasets that result from multiple funding
sources with different constraints and policies and are stored in repositories
that require specific metadata standards and formats and are subject to access
restrictions. Providing a secure method to efficiently share and verify the data
and metadata while maintaining privacy restrictions becomes necessary for the
reuse of the scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Open Science Chain –
Integrity Services (OSC-IS) strengthens cybersecurity controls with the
application of blockchain technology primitives to preserve the integrity and
the provenance of public and private data assets on research platforms and hubs.
For private data assets, additional consideration of confidentiality exists,
which may extend to fields in metadata. OSC-IS leverages a combination of smart
contracts and off-chain storage to ensure the data confidentiality and privacy
in sharing private research data in collaborative research. The project creates
an API-based data integrity verification management service for data-driven
research platforms and hubs that will reduce data information loss and build
support for managing various metadata standards and access controls. The project
enhances the security and trustworthiness in scientific data sharing that leads
to increased usage in exploration and utilization of datasets within scientific
communities. OSC-IS informs a wide array of different areas, including best
practices in data management, demonstrating the use of blockchain in academic
research, and incorporating computer security in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.