* 2114569
* Defect States of Silicon Allotropes for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Reuben Collins, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,999.00

Nontechnical description: The project is focused on the design, synthesis, and
structure-properties control of novel forms of silicon, which differ in crystal
structure from the conventional silicon used in microelectronic technology. They
are being investigated as potentially disruptive materials for quantum
information science. The novel structures to be investigated are comprised of
3-dimensional networks of silicon cages and 2-dimensional networks of silicon
tunnels that have the unique ability to trap dopant atoms in precise site
locations that minimize interaction with the silicon crystalline lattice. The
trapped atoms can act as qubits, the basic element for storing quantum
information. These materials could overcome major hurdles being faced with
conventional silicon, like challenges with optical coupling and decay of signal
due to interactions of qubits with the silicon lattice. Hence, the project could
enable optically efficient silicon-based devices, a holy grail of the silicon
community. This research benefits society by providing a new class of materials
that would revolutionize several global technological fields including computer
chips, lasers, detectors, and telecommunications. The project includes strong
and novel education and outreach activities that provide exciting opportunities
for K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate students, and underrepresented
groups in STEM, including summer workshops and internships, research experiences
for undergraduates, and community outreach. With the project focus on materials
development for quantum computing and related applications this is an
exceptional opportunity to attract new students to STEM, with innovative design
of new hands-on, exportable, activities for a broad range of students and their
teachers (elementary, middle, high school), including underrepresented and low
income communities in Denver. These activities are designed as both hybrid and
in-person. Modules also specifically target the Rocky Mountain Dyslexic Camp for
students at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The project
is focused on advancing the knowledge on critical properties and controls of
spin-defect states that are needed for quantum information science materials.
The inherent structure and properties of novel crystalline silicon allotropes
provides precise interstitial sites for dopants/qubits to sit, along with the
potential for low sensitivity to thermal excitation and long spin lifetimes and
decoherence times, coupled with a direct bandgap within the telecommunications
wavelength. The project provides new understanding of spin defects and the
research activities could lead to a completely new class of quantum information
science materials. The project goals are to design, synthesize, and control the
structure-properties of crystalline silicon allotropes with interstitial dopants
(inside cages or channels), with controlled defect spin-states with lower
sensitivity than diamond Si to thermal excitation and spin relaxation, to
mitigate key issues in diamond silicon for revolutionary quantum information
science materials. The project scope includes thin film synthesis and design of
silicon allotropes with different crystal structures and dopant types and
concentrations/site occupation to enable systematic investigations to understand
and control the interstitial spin defect states of the dopants and the relations
of structure, optical, electrical, and quantum properties. The project approach
and methods include: (i) Synthesis and design of thin films to produce high
phase purity allotropes with desired dopants; (ii) Investigation of the
structural (X-ray diffraction; confocal Raman; scanning electron microscopy;
time of flight secondary ionization mass spectrometry), optical
(photoluminescence spectroscopy, absorption), and electrical (conductivity and
mobility) property-relations; (iii) Measurement of spin-defect states using
continuous-wave electron paramagnetic resonance and nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy; (iv) Pulsed electron paramagnetic resonance study of spin
coherence. Revolutionary discoveries from this project are possible because of
the research teamâ€™s unique expertise in silicon allotrope synthesis/properties,
in fundamental defect/dopant science and in solid-state dopant-based quantum
information science approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.