* 2114428
* I-Corps:  Electrostimulation-based process that uses weak alternative electric fields to stimulate and activate hair follicles in the scalp
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Xudong Wang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wearable electrostimulation hair growth cap. The proposed
development of flexible and wearable nanogenerator aims at powering wearable
electronic devices from relevant body motions. The goal is to enable the
possibility of bypassing the bulky and rigid battery systems that currently
hinder the evolution of many electronic therapeutic devices toward a wearable
system. It may lead to a platform technology providing self-powered and closed-
loop electronics as a new wearable or implantable solution for achieving a
variety of biomedical functions, such as health monitoring, information
gathering, and providing therapeutic treatments. Further, the self-powered,
closed-loop electrostimulation cap may become an effective solution to cure the
hair loss problem that plagues many human beings across a broad age range
worldwide with an anticipated global market of $12 billion in
2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
self-powered, electrostimulation technology that directly converts biomechanical
energy from random human body motions into continuous electric pulses without
involving any battery or regulative electronics. Due to its unique energy
resource and pulsed bi-phasic electricity form, directly applying the generated
electricity to achieve certain therapeutic treatments may becomes effective for
hair growth. This technology is distinguished from other battery-driven devices
by directly coupling the biomedical functions with biomechanical energy sources,
forming a closed loop of both energy flow and function feedback. In such a
closed-loop electrostimulation, the stimulations are automatically responsive
and synchronized to corresponding body motions, and thus impose efficient
therapeutic effects without external manipulations. Successful pre-clinical
results have been demonstrated self-powered electrostimulation hair regrowth on
rats and nude mice. In addition, the results showed that the technology improved
the secretion of a few key growth factors related to hair follicle growth,
alleviating hair keratin disorder, and increasing the number of active hair
follicles. The proposed technology may bring a wearable, convenient, safe, and
cost effective solution to enable electrostimulation treatments to reverse
baldness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.