* 2114267
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Hierarchical Federated Learning Over Wireless Edge Networks: Performance Analysis and Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 10/31/2024
* USD 165,200.00

Federated learning (FL) is revolutionizing machine learning by catalyzing a
paradigm shift from cloud-based centralized learning towards distributed, on-
device edge learning. FL enables devices to collaboratively train and execute a
global learning task by using local processing and simple learning parameters
exchange, thus avoiding the communication and privacy concerns associated with
sharing large data volumes with a remote cloud. Owing to its attractive privacy,
scalability, and communication features, FL will be an integral edge component
of Internet of Things (IoT) services such as autonomous systems. However, when
deployed over the wireless IoT edge, the performance of FL will be largely
constrained by the quality of the wireless links used to exchange the local and
global FL model parameters. Since the next-generation IoT will be powered by a
wireless cellular system (e.g., 5G), reaping the benefits of FL for the IoT
hinges on understanding how wireless factors, such as fading, interference, and
delay, impact the convergence and performance of FL (e.g., accuracy,
reliability, and convergence time). The goal of this research is to develop a
foundational framework that rigorously answers fundamental questions on the
achievable FL performance over realistic, large-scale wireless edge networks
thus facilitating FL integration unto a real-world IoT. The research is coupled
with a well-crafted educational plan that includes a new course at the
intersection of communications and machine learning as well as a significant
involvement of graduate and undergraduate students at all levels. Broad
dissemination and outreach will be ensured via several workshops, tutorials,
outreach events, and other tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a novel, holistic framework for performance analysis and optimization of
FL over large-scale wireless cellular edge networks. The proposed framework will
yield major innovations across both wireless and FL fields: 1) A scalable
hierarchical wireless architecture that allows a large-scale implementation of
FL over wireless cellular systems, 2) Rigorous performance analysis of
hierarchical FL over wireless edge networks that will yield novel FL performance
metrics that jointly couple learning performance indicators, such as training
accuracy and convergence time, 3) Novel notions of reliability for FL over
wireless networks to enable the operation of FL under extreme network conditions
and in presence of IoT device mobility and spatio-temporal correlations, and 4)
Suitable resource allocation algorithms that can optimize the performance of
hierarchical FL over wireless edge networks. The results will be validated using
various simulation and experimental means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.