* 2114581
* Compact Objects and Gravitational Radiation
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Deirdre Shoemaker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 01/31/2023
* USD 596,662.00

September 14, 2015 saw the dawn of gravitational wave astronomy with the
detection of gravitational waves from the merger of a binary black hole. Since
then, three other detections from merging black holes have been made. And, on
October 16, 2017 a very special event was announced, the first detection of
gravitational waves from the merger of two neutron stars! The event was special
because the gravitational waves did not arrive alone. They were accompanied by
electromagnetic radiation. Gravitational wave observations afford an
unprecedented opportunity to probe some of the most energetic engines of the
Universe, engines with objects where gravity has the strongest grip: black holes
and neutron stars. Mining this information requires state of the art
computational modeling, data science and theory. The work of this award will be
a vehicle for training and educating scientists at Georgia Tech in an exciting
and growing field of astrophysics. Graduate students and postdocs will gain
experience in high performance computing and data analysis connected to multi-
messenger astrophysics. The experience will further the careers of young
researchers participating in the effort, acquiring valuable skills that are in
demand in a broad range of professions. The detections of gravitational waves
have generated an excitement that is palpable. The number of undergraduate
students interested in engaging in gravitational wave astrophysics research is
becoming too large to handle with traditional setups. This grant paves the way
for undergraduate students at Georgia Tech to participate in projects in this
exciting field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science in this project involves
computational modeling to enhance the understanding of the late inspiral and
merger of compact object binaries as sources of gravitational and
electromagnetic radiation. The focus will be on the role that these binaries
play as sources of gravitational and, when neutron stars are involved,
electromagnetic radiation. The projects address astrophysics and gravitational
wave physics in the strong non-linear regime, where an accurate characterization
of dynamical gravity is required. The numerical relativity work is designed to
inform future more sensitive gravitational wave observations about the details
of the path followed by compact object binaries into their final state. The
research is organized into two areas. The first will focus on simulations
involving intermediate mass black holes. The effort will also involve
simulations of neutron star -- neutron star and neutron star -- black hole
mergers. Second, dynamical horizons and numerical relativity will be used to
investigate the issue of the final state, namely the approach to the final black
hole. The focus will be on the phase when the common dynamical horizon first
form in binary black hole mergers. The no-hair theorem will be tested using the
multipoles of the dynamical horizon. This award is co-funded by the
Gravitational Physics program from the Physics Division and the Astronomy and
Astrophysics Grants program from the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.