* 2114264
* Model Systems in Neuroethology
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Kenneth Catania, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Investigations of specialized species often lead to important advances in
neurobiology and serve as vehicles for communicating basic principles of nervous
system function in our classrooms and to the public. This project will continue
to investigate the evolutionary origins of the prey control behaviors using a
comparative approach focusing on specialized animals, including electric eels,
electric catfish, and parasitoid wasps, and the water opossum combining detailed
observations of behavior and peripheral sensory structures with exploration of
the related brain specializations that allow extreme animals to behave and
survive. There are two overarching goals of these studies. The first is to solve
general problems of brain function, animal behavior, and evolution that may
apply across species and therefore inform us broadly about the animal kingdom,
of which humans are a part. The second is to learn about the more specific and
often unique abilities of extreme species. The latter goal informs us about the
limits of evolution and inspires a sense of wonder and appreciation for the
animals that share our planet. The PI will engage in a number of activities to
bring the process of discovery to students, inspiring the next generation of
scientists. The PI will continue to participate in diverse public outreach,
ranging from K-12 presentations, the Vanderbilt Minority Access to Research
Careers Program, Vanderbilt’s Brain Blast event for children and parents, the
Neuroscience Extravaganza for graduate students, and invited interviews and
podcasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three main focuses of this research
project: 1) Investigation of the newly discovered stings in the emerald jewel
wasp (Ampulex compressa). 2) Further investigation of the extraordinary sensory
and predatory aspects of strongly electric fish, including the electric eel
(Electrophorus electricus) and new studies of the strongly electric catfish
(Malapterurus electricus). 3) Conducting exploratory studies of the water
opossum (Chironectes minimus) sensory biology with a focus on its specialized
hands. For the first set of studies in jewel wasps—a newly discovered suite of
stings into the 2nd thoracic ganglion will be investigated with the goal of
further characterizing how the wasp’s venom sequentially controls cockroach
behavior to facilitate oviposition and hence reproduction. Data will be
collected by recording extracellular action potentials from motor neurons that
control femur extension in a restrained roach preparation that is being stung by
the wasp. These data will set the stage for investigating venom composition that
may include excitatory neurotransmitters (e.g. acetylcholine). In the case of
electric eels, we will investigate defensive responses and pursue preliminary
data from the last grant period that suggests eels may have a form of
“terrestrial” electroreception, during which they assess the resistance of their
target during the recently discovered “leaping defense”. We will also
investigate and compare the behaviors and abilities of strongly electric catfish
with those of the electric eel. The African electric catfish evolved its
electrical output independently from the eel, but it may use similar strategies
to control the efferents of prey. If so, this would be a remarkable example of
convergent evolution. Finally, exploratory studies of the water opossum in fixed
museum specimens will explore the sensory specializations of the their unique
hands and lay the groundwork for potential future investigation of their brains
and behavior. These three aims balance exploratory components with ongoing and
less risky investigations, consistent with the spirit of the research line,
aimed at diverse model systems in neuroethology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.