* 2114381
* Neuroimmune Contributions to Maternal Care
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Kathryn Lenz, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2026
* USD 722,365.00

Pregnancy is a time of significant hormonal change. Pregnancy hormones affect
the expectant mother’s immune system to protect the developing fetus and also
act on the brain to foster the display of caregiving behaviors that are
necessary for the survival and well-being of the offspring. What is unknown is
whether hormones are acting on immune cells within the brain itself to regulate
maternal behavior. This project will address this gap in knowledge. Uncovering a
role for the immune system in maternal behavior could benefit society because
many environmental factors, such as infections, inflammation, dietary
perturbations, stress, pollutants, and social isolation or instability, shift
the activity of the immune system. If the onset of parental behavior relies on
immune system action in the brain, then these environmental factors could
negatively impact parent-offspring interactions. In humans, the quality of
parental caregiving, particularly maternal care, is associated with lifelong
health outcomes in both mother and children alike. It would benefit society to
better understand the mechanisms that underlie maternal behavior so that
policies that increase or optimize maternal behavior (e.g., parental leave,
stress-reduction efforts) can be promoted and efforts be made to avoid exposures
that can perturb the immune system to potentially compromise parental behavior.
Results from this work could fundamentally transform the way we think about the
role of the immune system in the body during motherhood. Synergistic broader
impacts activities will promote meaningful engagement with research experiences
amongst students from historically excluded groups in science at the high school
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across many species, the transition to parenthood is
associated with prominent hormonal changes. During mammalian pregnancy, hormones
act on the brain to promote caregiving behaviors that support survival and well-
being of offspring. Hormones during pregnancy also contribute to the shift in
maternal immune function that is well characterized peripherally, but poorly
understood in the brain. The PIs have found that the brain’s immune system shows
dramatic modifications during the peripartum period, including decreased
microglia number in brain regions relevant to maternal care, as well as a
shifted cytokine balance in the brain. Yet there remain fundamental gaps in
understanding of the mechanisms driving neuroimmune changes in the maternal
brain and how neuroimmune changes impact maternal brain function and behavior.
The investigators will use behavioral, neuroanatomical, biochemical, and
targeted pharmacological approaches and converging manipulations in both
peripartum and reproductively inexperienced female rats to test the central
hypothesis that peripartum neuroimmune alterations are linked to pregnancy-
related hormones and contribute to the display of maternal
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.