* 2114439
* EAGER: Modeling and Control of COVID-19 Transmission in Indoor Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Anette Hosoi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 11/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Although much remains unknown about COVID-19, observational studies have
demonstrated that tiny coronavirus particles can become airborne and hence,
remain aloft in air for a few hours and travel distances much longer than the
6-feet guidance of the social distancing. This consequently increases the risk
of exposure to the virus in confined indoor spaces, such as, restaurants,
offices, and dormitories. Although they are generally not designed for pandemic
situations, heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems, if
properly designed and controlled, can significantly mitigate the spread of
diseases in indoor spaces. This collaborative research project between MIT and
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL) synergies research activities
in control theory, fluid dynamics, and machine learning to enable optimal design
and control of HVAC systems for built environments so as to minimize the
exposure risk of occupants. The project will establish a new theoretical
framework for optimal control of HVAC systems employing realistic computational
models of the disease transmission as well as the indoors thermofluid dynamics.
This will provide business owners and building managers with general guidelines
for the HVAC operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will integrate the
proposed framework with data-driven, reduced-order models and employ
reinforcement learning techniques to develop computationally tractable
algorithms for adaptive, online control of the HVAC systems in order to contain
the spread of the coronavirus. First, the project will resolve the uncertainty
that exists about the minimum level of modeling complexity required for
developing reliable, COVID-19 safety guidelines by systematic study of different
levels of modeling complexities and analyzing their effects on the transport of
pathogen-laden droplets and aerosols. Second, the project will develop an
optimal control framework that studies the flow physics of the virus
transmission and the general airflow in the indoor space. Third, this research
will develop a data driven, adaptive control framework that can be used to
design plug and play controllers for HVAC systems. The proposed research will
have significant social and economic benefits by setting the foundation for an
improved methodology in designing case-specific infection control guidelines
that can be realized by affordable HVAC devices, such as, ventilators and
fans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.