* 2114778
* RAPID: Tracking and Deconstructing COVID-19 Vaccine Distribution as an Extreme Logistics Event
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Hani Mahmassani, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 125,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) grant will document and investigate the
deployment and distribution of the COVID-19 vaccines as a large-scale complex
extreme logistics event. Given the unique unprecedented scale, magnitude and
urgency of this operation, and its fast-moving nature, it is imperative to
document its development and deployment, and extract lessons for the planning,
design and operation of future extreme logistical operations. Controlling the
virus through vaccination will normalize economic and social life in the US and
around the world, reopening vital local, regional, and international economies.
Given the huge toll of lost lives, productivity and economic output, along with
poor educational and mental health outcomes, it is imperative to take stock of
the vaccine deployment process, extracting lessons for future extreme logistical
operations including future pandemics, health threats, and responses to major
natural and man-made disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will document
in real-time the state of the COVID-19 vaccine supply chain, including
vaccination rates over time, provide interim guidance for the latter portions of
the continuing deployment process, and extract lessons learned and principles
for the robust design and resilient operation of future extreme logistics
deployments, including other health-related crises and disaster response
situations. The study findings will help address questions about (1) the
capacity of the US logistics system and overall biopharma supply chain to
deliver vaccine at the desired scale and in the desired urgent time frame, (2)
the time frames required to reach target vaccination levels, (3) the main
vulnerabilities in the vaccine supply chain and distribution process, (4)
resilience of the overall supply chain viz. disruptions due to various sources,
(5) equity of the logistical processes in terms of reaching traditionally
underserved populations, and (6) the value of real-time information in enhancing
the robustness and resilience of extreme logistics processes and building public
trust in these processes. This work will be further informed by an advisory
board of experts and stakeholders engaged in the distribution process. The
scientific significance arises from the unprecedented scale, urgency and
complexity of the logistics processes, featuring (a) decisions made by multiple
interacting agents from considerably different domains, (b) many sources of
stochasticity and disruption potential, (c) strongly interacting network
elements with potential for cascading failure, and (d) hierarchical processes
featuring strong centralized control at upper levels with highly decentralized
loose coupling at lower levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.