* 2114385
* Synthesis, Defect Structure and Photo-physics of Ternary Pnictide Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ayaskanta Sahu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic and optoelectronic
applications consume nearly 30% of all energy produced. The two environmentally
friendly photonic technologies expected to have the largest impact are solid-
state light sources (light emitting diodes (LEDs)) for energy efficient
lighting, and photovoltaics (PVs) for generating solar electricity. Materials
currently dominating the photonics market are not sustainable and run into
issues with stability, use of toxic materials such as cadmium, tellurium or
lead, or rare and expensive elements such as indium or gallium. An economically
viable solution relies on discovery of scalable and low-cost earth-abundant
materials with low toxicity (RoHS compliant) and requiring minimal energy input
for both development and integration into applications. With this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, Prof. Ayaskanta Sahu and New York University and his
research group will investigate methods to produce ternary pnictides
nanocrystals comprising of earth-abundant, low-cost, non-toxic elements (e.g.
zinc tin phosphide) amenable to large-scale, sustainable production. This
integrated research and education program aims to drive fundamental advances in
the discovery and development of this new generation of unexplored photonic
nanostructures, accelerating technological innovations involving these materials
and expanding the frontiers of nanoscience. The primary goal is to provide
detailed insight into various solution-growth mechanisms and synthetic
procedures for complex material systems, thus advancing the field of nanocrystal
synthesis and providing a pathway for rational design and incorporation of
multicomponent nano-crystalline systems in functional photonic devices. This
project involving materials science, engineering, chemistry and physics, offers
a diverse platform to engage, train and educate the next generation of engineers
and scientists starting from K-12 students to undergraduates and graduate
students, and instill a culture of active collaboration. The project also
provides a complementary education and outreach NEXUS program that strives to
increase research participation and promote an interdisciplinary environment for
women, black and Latino students, and other underrepresented minorities (URMs),
and involves developing an instruction-oriented active hands-on learning kit by
URM students for demonstration in K-12 Summer Science Camps and workshops at New
York City schools and partner institutions in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, aims to synthesize sustainable ternary
II-IV-V2 (II = Zn, Mg, Sr; IV = Si, Sn, Ge; V = N, P) colloidal quantum dots
(CQDs), understand the complex phase behavior, defect structure and effect of
cation disorder on the photo-physics of individual CQDs and assemblies of these
CQDs, and control the optoelectronic properties of II-IV-V2 films to such an
extent that fabrication of light-emitting and light harvesting photonic devices
that will achieve high efficiencies is enabled. Compared to the III-Vs, which
are the workhorses of photonic applications, II-IV-V2 CQDs, with tunable band
gaps owing to quantum confinement, are estimated to exhibit reduced charge
separation effects which is expected to lead to improved optoelectronic
properties, and are compatible with existing technologies. In addition, these
materials allow for both ease of p-type doping (huge issue with III-Vs) as well
as band gap tunability via cation disorder and compositional control in contrast
to binary III-Vs which suffer from miscibility issues. This project aims to
establish a systematic process of ternary pnictide CQD synthesis and thin-film
deposition of assemblies of CQDs, accompanied by complementary physical,
spectroscopic and analytic characterization (both in-situ and ex-situ)
techniques to elucidate the structure (order/disorder phases and defects),
optical (quantum confinement) and electronic properties and provide feedback and
guidance on the effects of synthesis conditions and crystallite size on film
performance. Thus, this close-knit coupled synergistic feedback loop of
synthesis-structure-property-performance provides a detailed understanding of
the defect structure and optoelectronic properties of II-IV-V2 CQDs. The project
has three interrelated objectives and tasks: (1) Synthesis of ternary II-IV-V2
(ZnSnP2) CQDs, (2) Modulation of disorder and intrinsic defect concentration in
ternary pnictide CQDs, and (3) Structural, optical and electrical
characterization of pnictide CQDs. Efforts are directed to integrate all these
tasks simultaneously and synergistically to enable crucial breakthroughs in the
materials science and engineering of II-IV-V2 based semiconductor
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.