* 2114660
* BCSER: Investigating Factors that Influence African American Students’ Selection of Computational Internships and Careers
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Qingxia Li, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 304,761.00

The project is designed to enable the principal investigator to conduct an
exploratory research project while acquiring skills and competencies to conduct
robust STEM education research. The research component will examine factors and
experiences that impact African American students’ decision to pursue careers
that require quantitative and computational skills. The mentored professional
development component will provide the investigator with expertise in
qualitative research design and methods and with the design of an experimental
intervention. The project will be implemented in three phases: (1) building
capacity in qualitative research methods, design-based research, and analytic
techniques of qualitative data; (2) collecting interview and qualitative data
with the guidance of mentors; and (3) framing a pilot intervention to increase
African American students’ interest in majors and careers that emphasize
competencies in quantitative and computational sciences. In addition to
expanding the base of scholars from Historically Black Colleges and Universities
conducting STEM education research, the project will advance the understanding
of the experiences and career decision-making process of African American
students seeking computational careers and internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
hypothesis guiding the research is that a structured college curriculum, extra-
curricular programs and activities, African American role models and peer
influence, sense of belonging and self-efficacy, faculty advising, and effective
recruiting strategies are the variables that positively impact African American
students’ awareness of and interest in computationally related majors and
careers. The investigator will use a triangulation of perspectives to examine
the factors that influence African American students’ career trajectories from
the perspectives of students, STEM faculty at Fisk University, and industry
recruiters. The qualitative data analysis will examine what and how social,
cultural, and contextual factors impact African American students’ career
selection in computing and math-related careers. The investigator will analyze
data from interviews and focus groups and apply a design-based methodology to
frame the proposed intervention - a Computational Career Alliance that will
serve as an infrastructure to build internal capacity to conduct STEM education
research at a Historically Black College and University. The intervention also
can potentially broaden the participation of African American students in STEM
majors and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is supported by the ECR:
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR funds fundamental STEM education research projects
that address STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.