* 2114989
* CICI: UCSS: SciAuth: Deploying Interoperable and Usable Authorization Tokens to Enable Scientific Collaborations
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Basney, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,959.00

The SciAuth project facilitates a cybersecurity transformation for NSF
cyberinfrastructure, which is the scientific computing infrastructure across the
nation that enables scientific productivity. The transformation at the heart of
the project is a migration from cybersecurity technologies from 20 years ago to
the cybersecurity standards of the modern Web. SciAuth provides needed
leadership and coordination for this critical transformation through community
engagement, coordinated adoption of community standards, integration with
software cyberinfrastructure, security analysis and threat modeling, training,
and workforce development. The project helps the community realize the benefits
of an interoperable, modern cybersecurity ecosystem when transitioning between
technologies, while maintaining the reliable and secure cyberinfrastructure upon
which the scientific community depends. This transition to modern cybersecurity
mechanisms is critical for enabling productive scientific collaborations across
a diverse and distributed scientific cyberinfrastructure ecosystem. SciAuth
builds on prior work by the NSF SciTokens project, in partnership with domain
science projects and cyberinfrastructure providers, to realize this
cybersecurity breakthrough across NSF cyberinfrastructure. SciAuth also supports
the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through a
fellows program that pairs students across the country with mentors from the
project to collaborate on student-led projects on the topic of
cyberinfrastructure security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The migration from X.509 user
certificates to JSON Web Tokens is in progress across NSF cyberinfrastructure.
This migration has facilitated a re-thinking of authentication and authorization
among cyberinfrastructure providers: enabling federated authentication as a core
capability, improving support for attribute, role, and capability-based
authorization, and reducing reliance on prior identity-based authorization
methods that created security and usability problems. Achieving the benefits of
a fundamentally new security credential ecosystem in NSF cyberinfrastructure,
while avoiding the temptation to simply re-implement old X.509 methods, requires
leadership and coordination. SciAuth provides the needed leadership and
coordination to make these breakthrough technologies usable by scientists across
disciplines, project sizes, and software ecosystems by enabling coordinated
deployments across cyberinfrastructures in active use
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.