* 2114680
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: A Life-Cycle Approach for Artificial Intelligence-Based Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Elisa Bertino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 10/31/2023
* USD 298,214.00

In order to devise more effective defenses against a rising number of cyber
attacks, recent security solutions leverage artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques. While there are plenty of publicly available AI approaches to
cybersecurity, successful use depends on users’ technical and soft skills.
Moreover, AI-based approaches have been intensely scrutinized with respect to
their security and ethics, delaying deployment. AI itself can be attacked and
there can also be issues with discrimination in AI-based classification. Thus,
for AI to be effectively and quickly adopted for cybersecurity, AI security and
ethics need to be assured. Training cybersecurity professionals to understand
how to effectively use AI for cybersecurity and to be aware of AI security and
ethics issues is critical for effective design and deployment of AI-based
cybersecurity solutions. Future cybersecurity professionals must also be able
effectively to communicate relevant information related to AI-based security
mechanisms and policies to a variety of stakeholders. This project will design
competency-driven educational activities focusing on AI techniques for
cybersecurity that will increase the effective and ethical application of AI-
enhanced cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s educational approach
is based on four interrelated pillars. The first pillar focuses on educational
activities covering a systematic AI-powered approach to cybersecurity, based on
defender and attacker perspectives. The second pillar focuses on educational
activities covering a systematic analysis of categories of AI attack and
corresponding mitigation techniques. The third and fourth pillars focus on AI
ethics and approaches to cybersecurity communications, respectively. A
combination of social, philosophical, and technical perspectives will create a
unique approach to cybersecurity communication. Together, the pillars provide a
systematic perspective of AI-powered cybersecurity. They provide both
foundational and technical competencies related to AI ethics and cybersecurity
communication that benefit multiple stakeholders, from students and educators to
employers and regulators. An important goal of the project is to make sure that
students and educators understand that cybersecurity, including AI-based defense
techniques, requires deployment of different types of defense approaches. The
project includes design of educational projects, focusing on well-known data
breaches and other types of attack and how AI-based security techniques could
prevent or mitigate these attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the
fields of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC
program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic
Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the
growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security
and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.