* 2114568
* Understanding the interaction of 2D particles with phospholipid membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Samaniuk, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 323,986.00

The research being performed in this project will lead to a better understanding
of the way small particles interact with membranes, both biological and non-
biological, composed of lipid molecules. The specific particles that will be
studied are graphene, and the membranes will be comprised of a lipid molecule
naturally found in the lungs. The graphene is representative of a broader class
of particles called two-dimensional particles, which are increasingly being
utilized in consumer products such as batteries, concrete, various coatings, and
even safety masks. As the uses and availability of two-dimensional particles
increases, their interaction with biological membranes in various capacities,
including those within the lungs, will likely increase. In addition, two-
dimensional particles can be incorporated into products where lipids similar in
nature to those found in lungs are used to create emulsions such as paints, and
cosmetics. Although many two-dimensional particles such as graphene will not
undergo chemical reactions with lipids, there is evidence that their interaction
with lipid films can alter the structure of the film at a microscopic level in
ways that are not understood. This research seeks to characterize those
alterations in lipid film structure in the presence of two-dimensional particles
with both experiments and computer simulations. The results can lead to a better
understanding of the way two-dimensional particles influence biological
membranes, especially those found in the lungs, but they can also lead to a
better understanding of the ways two-dimensional particles can be used in lipid-
containing consumer products. The project also includes an outreach component
with a local primary school where the principal investigator will work with
students with specific learning disabilities using hands-on demonstrations that
illustrate important physics concepts relevant to the work, including surface
tension. The goal is to increase the long-term interest in STEM careers of those
students who may avoid technical fields because of a specific learning
disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to understand the interaction
of two-dimensional particles with phospholipid monolayers using experiments and
molecular dynamics simulations. Two-dimensional particles are a class of
nanoparticle that is rapidly expanding in terms of the available chemistries. As
the number of two-dimensional materials increases, and the applications expand,
the intersection of these materials with biology, either intentionally or
unintentionally, will become more prevalent. Phospholipid membranes, including
monolayers and bilayers, are ubiquitous in biology, and are influenced by the
presence of nanoparticles, although the nature of the interaction between these
membranes and two-dimensional particles is not understood. The central
hypothesis is that lateral diffusion of two-dimensional particles in contact
with phospholipid monolayers is dependent on a number of variables, including
particle chemistry, the number of stacked particle layers, and the membrane area
density, and that this is related to both the physical position of the particle
in the membrane (e.g. surfing on lipid tails vs embedded), and the influence the
particle has on the surrounding phospholipid structure. The approach will be
both experimental and computational, making use of particle synthesis
techniques, various forms of microscopy, and molecular dynamics simulations. The
materials utilized will be graphene, and the phospholipid
dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine. One significant contribution that this work will
make is the generation of a large amount of experimental data on a model system
with which to compare computational results, a limiting factor thus far in
understanding the interaction of two-dimensional particles with biological
membranes. Another product of this work will be an improved understanding of how
two-dimensional particles influence the structure of phospholipids that they
interact with laterally, a behavior that can change the interfacial rheological
properties of the membrane. A third contribution of this work will be to
understand how multiple, stacked layers of two-dimensional particles interacts
differently with membranes than single layers. Although two-dimensional
particles are often thought of as single monolayers, thermodynamics drive
monolayers to stack. As a consequence, it is relevant to understand the
interaction of multilayers with biological membranes, since this is likely to be
physiologically relevant whether the interaction derives from an unintended
exposure to two-dimensional particles, or from an intentional use of the
particles in a future biotherapeutic application. It is expected that what is
learned in this work utilizing graphene as a model two-dimensional particle will
likely be generalizable to two-dimensional particles of different chemistries
since research involving spheroidal particles at interfaces indicates that
particle shape is a major factor in predicting the dynamics of the particles at
fluid-fluid interfaces. The project includes an outreach component where the
investigator will visit a local primary school to perform hands-on
demonstrations that illustrate basic concepts in interfacial phenomena such as
surface tension for groups of students with specific learning disabilities. Such
students tend to avoid STEM fields because of a labeled learning disability. The
goal is to increase their long-term interest in STEM careers by showing them
that they are fully capable of understanding complex concepts in
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.