* 2114757
* Collaborative Research: Detection and Estimation of Multi-Scale Complex Spatiotemporal Processes in Tornadic Supercells from High Resolution Simulations and Multiparameter Radar
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Leigh Orf, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 391,400.00

The project is to understand thunderstorm conditions that trigger tornados. Each
year across broad regions of the United States, atmospheric conditions become
favorable for the formation of supercell thunderstorms, the most prolific source
of violent tornadoes. Tornadoes ranked EF4 and EF5, the top strength categories
of the Enhanced Fujita scale, are responsible for the bulk of fatalities, even
though they are the least common, comprising less than 1% of observed tornadoes.
The death and destruction wrought by supercell tornadoes has motivated much
observational, theoretical, and numerical modeling research designed to
understand and predict these powerful storms. However, despite the many advances
that have resulted from these studies, there is currently poor understanding of
what determines whether a supercell will produce a tornado or not, and whether
that tornado, should it form at all, will be weak or strong, short-lived or
long-lived. This complex question is not only one of the great mysteries of
nature but is of critical importance to assuring public safety. The project will
investigate these issues by combining observational, numerical, and analytical
methods. The project will develop educational exhibits on tornadoes at the Fleet
Science Center at Balboa Park, San Diego, CA and the National Weather Museum at
Norman, OK. The project will also provide unique research and education
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in understanding tornado
evolution through high-resolution numerical simulations as well as data analysis
and visualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central challenge for understanding
the generation and maintenance of violent, long-track tornadoes in supercells is
being able to quantify the storm-wide processes that determine whether strong,
long-lived tornadoes form. This proposal will use a novel method called the
Entropy Field Decomposition (EFD) as a unifying framework to integrate and
quantify the complex dynamics of tornadic supercells produced in high resolution
physics-based simulations, predicted radar signatures derived from these
simulations, and actual observational data of supercells collected in the field.
EFD is a data-agnostic approach to four-dimensional space-time entangled data
mining that leverages techniques from Bayesian analysis and the physics theory
of fields to identify statistically significant storm â€œmodes" within huge
volumes of complex, often noisy, data. In contrast with machine learning
approaches, no training datasets are required. Rather, prior information within
individual data derived from space-time correlations, codified in the theory of
Entropy Spectrum Pathways (ESP), provides sufficient prior information to
extract distinct space-time modes of complex systems. This method will be used
to study a first-of-its-kind data set comprised of ensembles of high-resolution
simulations that yield a rich variety of tornadic and non-tornadic storms to
understand fundamental controls of tornadogenesis, tornadogenesis failure, and
tornado maintenance. This ensemble will also enable some of the first detailed
intercomparisons between mobile radar observations and tornado-resolving,
idealized simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.