* 2114078
* Actuated Post Arrays for Integrated Studies of Pumping, Mixing and Free Swimmers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Richard Superfine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 483,856.00

An understanding of how flows are produced and controlled by microactuators is
of significant interest for fundamental fluids physics, for microfluidics
technologies and for microrobotics. Microscopic flows generated by cilia are
central to biology; examples include muco-ciliary clearance in the lung, ciliary
transport of the fertilized ovum along the fallopian tube to the uterus, and the
propulsion of bacteria and protozoa. Engineered mimics of these structures
developed as microfluidic technologies offer unique solutions for transport at
the microscale for mixers, pumps and as microfluidic rheological sensors in
blood clotting diagnostics. In this project, photolithographically molded
biomimetic ciliated surfaces will be used to investigate fundamental questions
pumping and mixing. The lessons learned will be used to design and control
ciliated swimmers, i.e. biomimetic paramecia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three goals focused on pumping, mixing, and swimming in low Reynolds number
fluid. Starting with pumping, the project will study the ways in which arrays of
actuators can generate flows. Using designed arrays and actuation strategies,
the project will use arrays of similar actuator geometry and compare the utility
of different strategies for breaking time symmetry of motion. Using the same
arrays, the project will generate coordinated time-asymmetric beats between
actuators (pairs, arrays, etc.), time asymmetric beats in single actuators, and
metachronal waves where the time-asymmetry extends over tens of actuators. The
nature of these flows will be studied to understand the length scale of long-
range fluid motions and for mixing, which in part may occur on short length
scales. Next, the project will use the arrays to focus on mixing. In the low
Reynolds number of microfluidics systems, fluids cannot support turbulence and
therefore mixing is diffusion limited. The project will identify the parameters
of beating actuators that provide high mixing. Finally, the project will
fabricate free swimmers that will be untethered. The design rules that govern
the generation of directed flow for surface attached structures directly
transfer to swimmer design. In this way, the project will completely close the
loop between fluid pumping and swimmer propulsion. In total, the research
program will design actuating surfaces for better biomedical diagnostics and
design micro-robotics for future implantable treatment
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.