* 2114514
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Towards Robust Deep Learning Computing on GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hyeran Jeon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 198,308.00

Graphics processing units (GPU) have become one of the most promising computing
engines in many application domains such as scientific simulations and deep
learning. With the massive parallel processing power provided by GPUs, most of
the state-of-the-art server and edge systems employ GPUs as the core computing
engines for deep-learning model training and inference. As the performance of
deep learning models becomes one of the most important delimiters that
determines market revenue of the model creators and the convenience of daily
lives of model consumers, it is critical to enforce reliable and robust deep-
learning computation. This project aims to explore the challenges and
opportunities to address the reliability and privacy implications of GPU
computing as a deep-learning accelerator and design lightweight protection
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project are divided
into three thrusts. The first thrust explores and evaluates possible
vulnerabilities and their impact on GPU-based deep-learning computing. The
second thrust tackles the vulnerabilities at the compute-unit level by
redesigning GPU building blocks, such as new scheduling algorithms and
activation acceleration logic. The third thrust explores selective integrity
protection mechanisms in communication channels and memory subsystems to
transfer data between the CPU and GPU without imposing significant performance
overhead. The proposed solutions will mitigate architectural and system
vulnerabilities in GPU-based deep learning computing, which will enable the deep
learning algorithm developers to focus more on performance improvement and
technological advancement, and the consumers to use deep learning-based
cognitive products without privacy concerns. The findings of this research will
be integrated into undergraduate and graduate courses as well as various
outreach activities on K-12 education, and publicly shared through open-source
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.