* 2114580
* SI2-SSI: Collaborative Research: Einstein Toolkit Community Integration and Data Exploration
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2021
* Pablo Laguna, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Walton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 56,473.00

A new astronomy has arrived with the recent detection of gravitational waves.
Modeling of sources of gravitational radiation is more than ever a critical
necessity in order to interpret the observations. The project Einstein Toolkit
has as overarching mission to provide the scientific community with a
sustainable software platform of core computational tools for research focused
on astrophysical systems endowed with complex multi-scale/multi-physics
properties which are governed by Einstein's equations of General Relativity. The
central premise of the project Einstein Toolkit is to create a broad and vibrant
community of users, a community where interdisciplinary collaborations are the
norm and not the exception, a community driving advances in the next generation
of high-performance computing cyberinfrastructure. The main objectives of the
project Einstein Toolkit are: developing software tools for a radical increase
in scientific productivity, achieving sustainability of the software ecosystem,
addressing software engineering challenges, and the curation of data from
general relativistic numerical simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will achieve its goals through two major activity areas. Regarding the software
ecosystem and its sustainability, the scheduler that handles the flow of tasks
in a problem will be redesigned to be more versatile and to improve its
performance. In addition new software modules will be developed to broaden the
choices of initial data and matter sources, as well as modules for problems
requiring a high degree of experimentation with equations and numerical
methodologies. A new general relativistic magneto-hydrodynamics code will also
be integrated in the Einstein Toolkit. The second activity area involves
building a simulation data repository. The repository will allows user to
compare results, contribute data, test innovative ideas and algorithms for
gravitational wave data analysis, and to explore or discover new phenomena in
sources of gravitational radiation. The broader impact effort in the project
Einstein Toolkit will be organized in two major activity areas. The first
involves community integration. The project will support a program of ease-of-
use on-line tutorials and a workshops/tutorial series. The program will help
small groups or individual investigators familiarizing with the codes and
modules in the toolkit as well as pathways to become a developer. Regarding
outreach and education, the project Einstein Toolkit will enable
interdisciplinary training of students and postdocs in numerical relativity,
computational astrophysics and computer science. The effort will includes
developing a teaching resources bank for educational activities involving
computational topics applied to gravitational physics and astrophysics. The
educational resources will be suitable for computational courses in general
relativity and astrophysics at both the graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Division of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Physics Division in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.