* 2114451
* III: Small: Trajectory Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 328,883.00

The need to deal with spatial data is a pre-requisite to a steadily increasing
number of applications. From smartphone apps to large databases stored in data
warehouses on the cloud, spatial data is often key. Spatial data has
traditionally meant location data such as GPS coordinate values (i.e., longitude
and latitude). However, location data need not be restricted to be single
coordinates. Instead, location data may be based on numerous factors such as
proximity, adjacency, connectivity, etc. This award deals with data points that
correspond to vertices in a road network, where the collection of data
represents the object's trajectory. Trajectories lie at the heart of many
applications. This award examines a number of applications where trajectories
play an important role. In particular, identifying landmarks that are in the
paths of a high percentage of drivers in the road network. This knowledge can
help the design of information for drivers or ease access for multiple people in
ride sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first application deals with motor
vehicle trajectories where we are given a set of landmarks and a large number of
individual trajectories. The objective here is (1) to determine the landmarks
through which each individual travels on the shortest path from an individual's
starting and destination locations, and (2) to determine for each landmark all
the individuals whose shortest paths pass through that landmark or within a
specified distance of that landmark. These queries are termed in-path queries
and find use in, for example, advertising scenarios where ads are displayed to
those individuals who pass through particular landmarks which means that the
shortest path between their source and destination locations contains them.
Computing road network distance is computationally intensive and hence the
Euclidean distance ("as the crow flies") is often used but at the price of
greatly under-estimating the true distance and possibly leading to impossible
paths. This award attempts to adopt the investigator's distance oracle methods
which enable approximate road network distance to be obtained using order of the
number of vertices in the road network divided by the square of the error
tolerance and by table lookup instead of search. The second application also
deals with motor vehicles, although is not limited to them. The goal is to find
similar trajectories where similarity is measured by a distance metric. This is
a well-studied problem in that it depends on the similarity metric that is used.
One commonly used metric is the Hausdorff distance metric. However, the
computation of the Hausdorff distance only takes into account the vertices of
the trajectory while this award focuses on the computation of the Frechet
distance which also takes into account the edges of the
trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.