* 2114278
* Towards van der Waals Crystal Based Thermal Superconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 435,022.00

In 1955, Fermi, Pasta, Ulam, and Tsingou reported their “shocking little
discovery” that an excited vibration mode in single atomic chains did not
dissipate into heat over a long period of time. This finding attracted
tremendous attention due to its broad implications, suggesting a type of thermal
superconductors of ever-increasing thermal conductivity with length. However,
the concept remains purely conceptual and is regarded as only of academic
interest for more than a half century, because single atomic chains of
sufficient length remain experimentally unattainable. Recently, a study has
shown that the thermal conductivity of ultra-thin niobium triselenide nanowires
increases with the wire length beyond a record level of 42.5 µm. This result
indicates a possibility of achieving ultrahigh thermal conductivity in a class
of one-dimensional materials. This project explores the conditions and limits of
persistent divergent thermal conductivity in these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the recent exciting discovery with
niobium triselenide nanowires, the objective of this project is to explore
whether superdiffusive transport in quasi-one-dimensional van der Waals crystal
nanowires can persist to sufficient length that will eventually lead to thermal
superconductors, i.e., materials with thermal conductivity values higher than
that of any known materials. Systematic experimental measurements will be
conducted to answer key scientific questions including: (1) under what
conditions thermal transport in van der Waals crystal nanowires transitions into
physically one-dimensional and becomes superdiffusive? (2) What is the length
limit of superdiffusive transport in these nanowires and how can we extend the
limit? (3) Whether it is possible to create novel nanomaterials with tunable
thermal properties through induced elastic stiffening along the wire axis that
promotes one dimensional thermal transport. The intellectual merit of the
project resides in the fundamental understanding of thermal transport in van der
Waals crystal nanowires. In addition, it is of practical significance to answer
the question of whether the superdiffusive nature of thermal transport in these
materials can persist over sufficient length to provide a class of thermal
superconductors, which can transform various engineering practices that request
efficient heat dissipation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.