* 2114981
* EAGER: SaTC AI-Cybersecurity: Opening Doors for Cybersecurity &amp; AI: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Engaging Middle School Students
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Chandra Orrill, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,481.00

As reliance on technology increases across society, it is critical to develop a
population that is more knowledgeable about and engaged in the topics of
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence (AI). The aim of the Opening Doors
project is to engage industry professionals in the fields of cybersecurity and
AI in conversations with educational researchers, AI and cybersecurity
researchers, and K-12 teachers. These conversations will serve as a means to
identify disciplinary knowledge, including needs and benefits, at the
intersection of cybersecurity and AI. The group will work to identify ways to
engage middle school students and their teachers in learning about AI,
cybersecurity, and the intersections between them. By including this array of
voices, the project will generate knowledge about the differences and
similarities between industry and academic expectations. The discussion will
also drive the development of a survey that can be used to determine what
students know about AI and cybersecurity as well as a proof-of-concept
instructional module that addresses one of the identified gaps in knowledge. The
project team will also document the process for building this interdisciplinary
community of practice to focus on a single issue in ways that shape studentsâ€™
educational experiences. The project will determine whether investing effort
into deciphering what middle school students do know, and what they can know,
will lead to students who are more engaged in cybersecurity and AI as citizens,
users, programmers, or in other roles as they mature into
adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project will advance
understanding of the nature of expertise of researchers and professionals in AI
and cybersecurity, as well as supporting and studying communication between
them, while exploring ways to translate that expertise into curricula for
widespread dissemination to middle school teachers and students. The project
team will use a combination of qualitative and quantitative approaches to
accomplish the following outcomes: (1) the development of an interdisciplinary
think tank along with a documented process for creating it that can inform
others interested in building similar partnerships; (2) the development of
survey instruments designed to uncover what middle grades students understand
about AI, cybersecurity, and the intersection of these two areas as they affect
their lives, as well as possible careers available in this interdisciplinary
space; (3) findings from the survey on possible gaps as well as what middle
grades students understand about these areas; and (4) one proof-of-concept
learning module that can be implemented by any middle school teacher anywhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.