* 2114843
* I-Corps:  A Multi-system Platform for Addressing Women's Health Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Charleson Bell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform that may advance women's health research and
the knowledge base of the causes of vaginal dysbiosis (VD), or an imbalance of
the vaginal microbiome. Globally, the rates of VD are highest in North America
(27%), Sub-Saharan Africa (25%), and Latin America (24%). Upwards of 32% of HIV
infections are attributed to VD. To date, there is no evidence to explain fully
the cause of VD-associated conditions; However, there is an urgent need to
further understand these processes and identify biomarkers for early detection
of vaginal dysbiosis. In addition, given the prevalence of VD globally,
addressing VD issues and targeting prevention may decrease the burden of VD-
associated conditions and decrease global costs of VD and VD-associated
conditions. Currently, 3.24 million women have never consulted an
&lt;br/&gt;obstetrics and gynecology (OB/GYN) professional, and existing vaginal
health solutions are inaccessible, lack gender inclusivity, and do not fully
address issues of child-bearing individuals with specific vaginal health needs.
Also, self-diagnosis may result in lack of treatment of the condition, leading
to additional medical burdens and financial costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a software platform that aims to
engage, educate, and empower individuals of all ethnicities and genders to
research and advocate for vaginal health. This multi-system approach
incorporates three aspects: 1) an accurate, comprehensive vaginal health risk
assessment algorithm, 2) an interactive educational platform, and 3) an at home
self-sample collection kit. The proposed algorithm utilizes data inputs from
analytical methods like next-generation sequencing (whole exome sequencing and
16S rRNA gene sequencing), matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)
time-of-flight mass spectrometry (TOF-MS), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to assess an individual’s risk for VD and VD-associated conditions.
The goal is to identify novel biomarkers including differentially expressed
immune genes, host-defense metabolites, and bacterial proteins in vaginal swab
samples using publicly available datasets, literature searches, and
microbiological and immunological expertise in addition to detecting known
biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.