* 2114839
* West Antarctic Ice-sheet Change and Paleoceanography in the Amundsen Sea Across the Pliocene Climatic Optimum
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sandra Passchier, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 410,572.00

The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is the most vulnerable polar ice mass to warming
and already a major contributor to global mean sea level rise. Its fate in the
light of prolonged warming is a topic of major uncertainty. Accelerated sea
level rise from ice mass loss in the polar regions is a major concern as a cause
of increased coastal flooding affecting millions of people. This project will
disclose a unique geological archive buried beneath the seafloor off the
Amundsen Sea, Antarctica, which will reveal how the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
behaved in a warmer climate in the past. The data and insights can be used to
inform ice-sheet and ocean modeling used in coastal policy development. The
project will also support the development of a competitive U.S. STEM workforce.
Online class exercises for introductory geology classes will provide a gateway
for qualified students into undergraduate research programs and this project
will enhance the participation of women in science by funding the education of
current female Ph.D. students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project targets the
long-term variability of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet over several glacial-
interglacial cycles in the early Pliocene sedimentary record drilled by the
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 379 in the Amundsen Sea.
Data collection includes 1) the sand provenance of ice-rafted debris and shelf
diamictites and its sources within the Amundsen Sea and Antarctic Peninsula
region; 2) sedimentary structures and sortable silt calculations from particle
size records and reconstructions of current intensities and interactions; and 3)
the bulk provenance of continental rise sediments compared to existing data from
the Amundsen Sea shelf with investigations into downslope currents as pathways
for Antarctic Bottom Water formation. The results are analyzed within a
cyclostratigraphic framework of reflectance spectroscopy and colorimetry (RSC)
and X-ray fluorescence scanner (XRF) data to gain insight into orbital forcing
of the high-latitude processes. The early Pliocene Climatic Optimum (PCO)
~4.5-4.1 Ma spans a major warm period recognized in deep-sea stable isotope and
sea-surface temperature records. This period also coincides with a global mean
sea level highstand of &gt; 20 m requiring contributions in ice mass loss from
Antarctica. The following hypotheses will be tested: 1) that the West Antarctic
Ice Sheet retreated from the continental shelf break through an increase in sub
iceshelf melt and iceberg calving at the onset of the PCO ~4.5 Ma, and 2) that
dense shelf water cascaded down through slope channels after ~4.5 Ma as the
continental shelf became exposed during glacial terminations. The project will
reveal for the first time how the West Antarctic Ice Sheet operated in a warmer
climate state prior to the onset of the current “icehouse” period ~3.3
Ma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.