* 2114718
* AccelNet-Design: Designing a Water, Data, and Systems Science Network of Networks to Catalyze Transboundary Groundwater Resiliency Research.
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Ashley Atkins, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Transboundary aquifers serve as vital resources shared between countries that
oftentimes have distinctive scientific understandings and management approaches.
Groundwater is being depleted in an unprecedented way that is intensified in
transboundary aquifers. This AccelNet design-track project creates a new
international network of networks that connects U.S. and international networks
of hydrology, social science, data science, and systems science to establish a
novel transboundary groundwater resiliency research approach. The project
addresses a key knowledge gap: Why is transboundary groundwater depletion
happening and how can it be reversed? Despite previous attempts to understand
this fundamental question, it remains largely unanswered. Outcomes from this
project will set the foundation for this novel approach that transcends
disciplinary thinking to understand why groundwater depletion occurs and how it
can be changed. The ultimate impacts of the increased understanding of the
systemsâ€™ dynamics could be transformational: improved access to drinking water,
sustainability of transboundary groundwater resources, enhanced water security,
increased transparency and trust, and lower risk of
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design project will link the networks
essential to data-driven system dynamics modeling of transboundary groundwater
systems. These new linkages will enable the infrastructure for transboundary
groundwater resilience research and deliver conceptual advances that the next
generation of water scientist leaders can build on in the future. The novel
approach posits that identifying key data and system drivers would make
significant progress towards producing research that catalyzes transformative
change for transboundary groundwater systems. Objectives of the project are to:
1) catalyze transboundary ground water resilience research to address
groundwater scarcity and its natural and societal impacts, 2) identify the
capabilities of the convergence approach to determine key questions and fill
critical gaps in knowledge and resources, and 3) support the development of
students and early-career researchers who will lead the next generation to
collaboratively integrate water, data, and systems science to address
transboundary groundwater scarcity. The suite of virtual activities includes
annual workshops, biannual coordination meetings, peer mentoring, a free online
transboundary water modeling course, and a strong and active communication forum
for the members. This design project will use surveys to evaluate the quality of
the activities and document the lessons learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Accelerating Research through International Network-to-Network Collaborations
(AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international
collaborations. The AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S.
research networks and complementary networks abroad that will leverage research
and educational resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require
significant coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.