* 2114655
* Ambient Level Hydroxyl Radical (OH) Detection Using Broadband Cavity Enhanced Absorption Spectroscopy (BBCEAS) in an Open-Path Configuration
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Matthew Asplund, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 398,641.00

This project supports the development and testing of an open-path, broad band
cavity-based absorption spectrometer (BBCEAS) to measure hydroxyl radicals (OH)
at ambient concentrations in the atmosphere. Hydroxyl radicals are one of the
most important oxidizing species in the lower atmosphere, controlling the
atmospheric lifetimes of many gases and reacting with both natural and
anthropogenic hydrocarbons leading to the production of pollutant ozone. If
successful, this instrument will provide data that can be used to improve the
accuracy of models so that there will be better agreement between modeled and
experimentally measured concentrations of OH and volatile organic compounds
(VOC) and their photooxidation products, such as ozone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to build the new instrument to quantify OH radical concentrations, an
open-cavity design is required. The principal investigators will conduct
experiments to characterize the effects of turbulence and aerosols as well as
include the effects of horizontal wind on the quantification of OH using the
open-cavity design. They will then interface a high-resolution spectrometer to
the open cavity BBCEAS instrument and test the initial configuration of the
instrument and spectrograph/detector in the atmospheric simulation chamber at
BYU. If the instrument is able to achieve an adequate limit of detection (LOD),
the next step will be to test it in the field and intercompare it with other
methods for measuring OH in the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.