* 2114591
* CAREER: Establishing Links between Musculoskeletal Morphology and the Biomechanics of Bipedal Hopping in Desert Environments
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Craig McGowan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 04/30/2023
* USD 273,900.00

Movement through their environments is a fundamental characteristic of most
animals, (e.g., running, swimming, flying) and the mechanics of how animals
perform this task have direct implications for evolutionary success because
locomotion is involved with defense, finding mates, and foraging for food in
efficient ways. For centuries, biomechanics research has provided a foundation
for developing and testing hypotheses ranging from general governing principles
of terrestrial locomotion to specific relationships between form and function of
limbs and muscles. However, the vast majority of these studies have been
conducted in laboratories on treadmills and tracks that bear little resemblance
to the environments in which animals actually live. To truly understand the
relationship between an animal's muscular and skeletal anatomy and locomotor
performance, it is necessary to understand the mechanical demands of the tasks
performed in the animal's natural environment. Understanding these relationships
in natural habitats remains an important challenge. Therefore, the goal of this
study is to examine the relationships between anatomy and locomotor performance
through a series of experiments aimed at understanding in detail how different
muscles contribute to movement tasks. Experiments will reveal how specific
features of muscles and skeletons impact the function of particular muscles
during locomotion in mechanically challenging natural environments. The outcomes
of this research will advance knowledge about the functional roles of individual
muscles, a topic that is rare in comparative biomechanics studies, and lay the
groundwork for a better understanding of how mechanical energy is transferred
through complex musculoskeletal systems. Application of this knowledge can lead
to improvements in the design of autonomous robots, lower limb prosthetics, and
other human locomotor enhancement devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this research is to elucidate the relationships between musculoskeletal
morphology and bipedal hopping dynamics in desert environments using desert
kangaroo rats (D. deserti) as an animal model. It is generally believed that
bipedal hopping has evolved because it provides a locomotor performance
advantage (e.g., faster top speed, higher endurance, acceleration capacity)
related to exaggerated hind limb morphology; however a specific advantage has
not been identified for all hopping species. To achieve the proposed objectives,
this study will incorporate analyses of habitat use in the field, gait dynamics
in the lab, in-vivo muscle dynamics and detailed computer modeling and
simulations. This will be the first study to combine all of these methods to
provide a comprehensive understanding of the relationships between
musculoskeletal morphology and performance. This powerful, integrated approach
will be used to pursue two specific research objectives: 1) Quantify the
mechanical demands of bipedal hopping on substrates and terrain utilized by D.
deserti in their natural environment and, 2) Elucidate the relationship between
musculoskeletal morphology and habitat use. The outcomes of the proposed
research will establish direct links between locomotor performance under natural
conditions and musculoskeletal morphology and muscle function in a way that has
not been previously possible. An enhanced understanding of how and why animals
hop will advance the fields of evolutionary biology, comparative anatomy, and
biomechanics, and lead to improvements in the design of autonomous robots, lower
limb prosthetics, and other locomotor enhancement devices. This proposal
supports an Educational Plan to develop a field course to provide an opportunity
for students to integrate what they have learned about ecology and evolution
through research-driven, field-based analyses of habitat use, functional
morphology, and behavior. Data for behavior and habitat use from multiple years
of this course will provide a broader context for interpreting morphological and
biomechanical results.