* 2114942
* EAGER: Quantifying Great Basin butterfly-pollen networks across spatial and temporal disturbance gradients.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2023
* USD 283,420.00

From the food on our table, to the flowers that enrich our lives, pollinators,
which include a diverse group of bees, butterflies, moths, and other insects,
are required for the persistence of thousands of plant species in the United
States. However, the webs of interactions between flowering plants and their
pollinators are not very well resolved. Much of what we know about plant-
pollinator networks, even for some common and economically important plants, is
based only on observations of insects visiting flowers. One way to be sure that
insects are acting as pollinators of a particular plant species is to examine
their bodies for pollen of that plant. Large collections of insects in museums
provide a perfect resource for quantifying pollen on insect bodies. Using the
insect collections at the University of Nevada Museum of Natural History
(UNRMNH), researchers will identify large webs of pollen-butterfly interactions,
with a focus on the Great Basin Desert in Nevada. These networks will also allow
inferences about how plant-pollinator interactions have been affected by changes
in climate in the Great Basin over the last century. Additionally, the research
will provide insight into how pollinators may be threatened by a changing
environment. The project will include training students in ecology and museum
science, expanding UNRMNH collections with pollen samples collected from museum
specimens and butterflies encountered in the field, and creating large
interactive displays for the public that illustrate the roles of butterflies as
pollinators in the Great Basin. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research will
integrate new techniques, combining data gleaned from museum specimens, field
observations, and artificial intelligence (AI) to characterize insect-pollen
networks over the last 100 years. Data from the combined approaches will allow
quantification of historic and contemporary pollen-butterfly interaction
networks in the Great Basin. This information will be used to test hypotheses
about changes in pollination networks in response to extreme weather events and
other commonly measured global change parameters. The project will produce an
associated pollen collection, an online pollen image database, and an AI model
for identifying pollen species from images. The results from this work have the
potential to transform what is known about how climate change will affect
networks of interacting plants and insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.