* 2114586
* Combining Smartphone Light Detection and Ranging with Augmented Reality to Enhance Position-Based Teaching and Learning in STEM
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Colleen Megowan-Romanowicz, American Modeling Teachers Association
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 573,461.00

Understanding how to measure, display, and interpret motion is important for
many STEM-related careers, particularly in the physical and data sciences.
Educational researchers have advocated for numerous approaches to support sense-
making with mathematical models of motion, but teachers often struggle to enact
them due to limited resources. This project will make high-precision position
sensing a reality for anyone who owns a smartphone by building on light-based
mobile sensors (LiDAR) that are able to detect one’s distance from objects and
location within a space. The educational research will measure the effect of
using this new technology to improve student learning and engagement with regard
to mathematical models with motion graphs, by producing a classroom-ready
application and gamified lessons for teachers and students to use in traditional
classrooms as well as the home. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers and
educational software developers will develop new data visualization technology
based on iOS’ scanning LiDAR and Android’s time-of-flight depth imaging. The
proposed technological innovation will make use of the novel back-facing
infrared beam array to significantly increase precision in position measurements
and the placement of augmented reality (AR) visualizations based on users’
movements and environmental data. This project will determine the extent to
which LiDAR-aided AR technology can enable high-precision, position-based, and
real-time data visualization. It will explore how the new technology can provide
the kind of cognitive scaffolding and embodied experiences needed for advancing
teaching about modeling motion with graphs and vectors. Research in the learning
sciences will entail a collaboration with STEM educators to develop and test the
effectiveness of scenarios for exploration in traditional and remote learning
contexts. This proposal will assess full-body movement to make sense of motion
graphs with a focus on embodied learning and practice with data visualization
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.