* 2114148
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Toward safe, private, and secure home automation: from formal modeling to user evaluation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ljudevit Bauer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 871,566.00

IoT devices such as smart door locks and platforms and applications that connect
these devices and other online services (e.g., IFTTT, Zapier) make life more
convenient but have also raised security and privacy concerns. These concerns
arise because smart home devices can collect potentially sensitive data about
their users and the data and devices can be accessed (e.g., to unlock doors or
disable home security systems) in the absence of physical human actions.
Further, the risks posed by smart-home devices can impact people other than the
device owners, such as home service workers and children. There is a need for a
systematic understanding of the security and privacy impact of such platforms.
However, existing work is often too coarse-grained to capture the context in
which these devices are used (e.g., camera in public area vs. in the bedroom)
and mostly focuses on risks and harms to device owners rather than more broadly.
This project aims to gain a deeper understanding of smart homes' security and
privacy impact, with a focus on end-user programming platforms like IFTTT and
Zapier, and to mitigate potential harms via formal modeling and automated
analysis tools. One of the identifying characteristics of this project is that
user studies are used to both identify user needs and to evaluate potential
solutions, including models and formal analysis tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project follows an iterative process, where tools and models are first built
(based on results of preliminary user studies); next, user studies are conducted
to evaluate the tools and learn about users' needs; then, results from user
studies are used to refine the tools and models. This project builds detailed,
context-rich models and characterizations of risks and harms from home
automation platforms, customized to individual users' perspective, and thus
fills the gap between what existing models and tools can do and users'
perceptions and needs. This project also builds usable, context-aware,
configurable analysis tools that extend traditional information-flow analysis to
calculate attackers’ precise knowledge of and influence over the system. These
analysis tools take into consideration different threat models, which account
for attackers’ different capabilities to observe relevant events and interact
with the system. Finally, the project designs warnings and nudges to help users
understand their smart home systems better and avoid potential
harm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.