* 2114588
* Cross-Chiral Genetic Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gerald Joyce, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 881,161.00

This project enables biologists to reach “through the looking glass” to
construct and manipulate the mirror-image counterparts of the genetic molecules
of life — the nucleic acids DNA and RNA. Complex molecules and their mirror-
images are structurally distinct, like left and right hands, a property known as
chirality. The biomolecules found in all known life on Earth are homochiral,
consisting exclusively of left-handed proteins and right-handed nucleic acids.
The mirror-images of these biomolecules, such as left-handed nucleic acids, are
neither made nor recognized by the machinery of the cell. This property can be
exploited to provide synthetic materials that are resistant to biological
disruption and can be engineered to interact with their biological counterparts
across the mirror for use in biotechnology and medicine. In this project, tools
are being developed to synthesize unnatural left-handed nucleic acids, using
recently developed right-handed nucleic acid enzymes. These “cross-chiral”
enzymes also are being used to study why life as we know it is homochiral, and
whether life that functions on both sides of the mirror is possible. The aim is
to expand the reach of synthetic biology across the mirror, providing robust
methods to generate mirror-image biomolecules, which will be made widely
available to other researchers. This project is also training a diverse set of
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scientists to use cross-chiral biology
in their own research and will cultivate the next generation of scientists
through a hands-on laboratory experience for high school students in chiral
biology, encouraging their exploration of STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research builds on a toolkit of cross-chiral RNA enzymes, or “ribozymes”, that
catalyze the synthesis of RNA polymers of the opposite handedness. New
techniques for the directed evolution of polymerase ribozymes are being used to
provide generalized methods for the synthesis of L-RNAs from simple and readily
available starting materials and to amplify those L-RNAs using a cross-chiral
form of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). This toolkit will enable the
construction of adaptive genetic systems that function in a fundamentally
different way than known biology, addressing the meta-biological rules for how
macromolecules of opposite handedness can interact to support enzymatic
catalysis, genetics, and evolution. In parallel, the cross-chiral toolkit
enables the scalable preparation of complex L-RNAs having a user-defined
sequence, as exemplified by the synthesis of functional mirror-images of the RNA
machinery of the cell. Molecular and synthetic biology have benefited from the
progressive development of tools to manipulate the microscopic world, and the
tools developed here aim to demonstrate that, likewise, there is plenty of room
across the mirror.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.