* 2114028
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Sensor Application to Peatland Hydrology in Remote Environments (SAPHIRE)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anne Carey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,810.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and both the via an NSF/Republic of
Ireland/Northern Ireland Lead Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single
proposal to be submitted and merit reviewed by NSF, for which there are PIs from
each of the three participating countries. Upon determination of an award by
NSF, the Agency in each country funds the proportion of the budget and the
investigators associated with its own investigators and component of the work.
Peatlands make up approximately 3% of surface land globally but peatlands
contain as much as 40% of the total global soil carbon, making bogs an important
component of the Earth’s carbon system. Yet there is little information on the
relationship between the impact of changing water flows and climate with the
chemical processes that store and transport elements such as carbon from
peatland environments. This work will apply off-the-shelf sensor technology to
assess the impact of changing hydrological conditions on peatland water quality
in a remote area in Ireland. The understanding of these processes can be applied
to other important peatland regions such as those in the United States and
Canada. This project is joint between the Ohio State University group and
collaborators from Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. The
collaboration will allow an early career scientist from the United States to
develop international research connections. In addition, outreach activities
will be developed to communicate the importance of peatlands on the global
carbon cycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will integrate a state-of-the-
art sensor network with conventional water sampling techniques to develop an
improved, more quantitative relationship between hydrological variations and
peatland biogeochemical processes and elemental fluxes. This will include
evaluating the relative importance of high energy events like stream floods on
bog hydrology and chemodynamics. The project will also use machine learning to
integrate data on stream flow collected by the sensor network to grow knowledge
about how hydrology influences the flux of chemicals from bogs. Overall, the
information generated will lead to an enhanced understanding of the influence of
hydrological variations on water quality and watershed scale processes in areas
dominated by peatland landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.