* 2114220
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing IoT and Edge Devices under Audio Adversarial Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yingying Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Powered by the advancement of artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, the next-
generation voice-controllable IoT and edge systems have substantially
facilitated peopleâ€™s daily lives. Such systems include voice assistant systems
and voice authenticated mobile banking, among many others. However, the
underlying machine learning approaches used in these systems, are inherently
vulnerable to audio adversarial attacks, in which an adversary can mislead the
machine learning models via injecting imperceptible perturbation to the original
audio input. Given the widespread adoption of voice-controllable IoT and edge
systems in many privacy-critical and safety-critical applications, e.g.,
personal banking and autonomous driving, the in-depth understanding and
investigation of severity and consequences of audio-based adversarial attack as
well as the corresponding defense solutions, are highly demanded. This project
will perform a comprehensive study and analysis of the vulnerability and
robustness of voice-controllable IoT and edge systems against audio-domain
adversarial attacks in both temporal and spatial perspectives. The research
outcome of this project will form solid foundations for building trustworthy
voice-controllable IoT and edge systems. The developed defense techniques will
improve the security of many intelligent audio systems, such as automatic speech
recognition (ASR), keyword spotting, and speaker recognition. This project will
involve underrepresented students, undergraduate and graduate students, and K-12
students through a variety of engaging programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to demonstrate the feasibility of audio adversarial
attacks in the physical world, determine the attack severity and consequences,
and further develop defending strategies in practical environments to build
attack-resilient voice-controllable Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices and edge
systems. To study the possibility and severity of audio adversarial attacks in a
practical time-constraint setting, the project will develop low-cost audio-
agnostic synchronization-free attack launching schemes, including audio-specific
fast adversarial perturbation generator and universal adversarial perturbation
generator. To investigate how the adversarial perturbations survive various
propagation factors in realistic environments, the project will analyze the
audio distortions caused by the over-the-air propagation using an advanced room
impulse response simulator and physical environment measurements. The project
will also develop several defense techniques, including defensive denoiser,
model enhancement, and microphone-array-based liveness detection. The presented
technique will help to secure the voice-controllable IoT and edge devices under
audio adversarial attacks. The project will also contribute to a new computing
paradigm in audio-based adversarial machine learning in both theoretic
foundations as well as safety-critical audio-oriented emerging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.