* 2114198
* Convective Cloud Urban Boundary-layer Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Fred Moshary, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 675,301.00

The research seeks to leverage a planned field campaign to investigate
convective storms in the coastal urban area around Houston, Texas. Commonly
observed convective systems in the region cause severe damage to life and
property in the coastal urban area. Excess heat and aerosols released from the
urban environment and sea breeze impact the dynamics of convective cloud
systems. However, the interaction and feedback between urban areas and
convective cloud systems are not well understood. The study will use enhanced
atmospheric observations and numerical modeling to study how urban areas impact
the formation, journey, and dissipation of convective cloud cells. The research
will link human activities in coastal urban environments to convective cloud
systems by conducting a field experiment in coordination with the planned
Tracking Aerosol-Convection Interactions Experiment (TRACER) sponsored by the
Department of Energy at the same area. In addition, the investigators will
develop a comprehensive urban modeling framework that will integrate atmospheric
dynamics and aerosol impacts with key anthropogenic influences. The project will
involve education and outreach activities for university students and the local
public as well as train undergraduate and graduate students in Earth System
science and develop new courses and course modules related to urban climate
systems. The research team will also work closely with the Texas Air Quality
Commission as well as TRACER scientists from various US universities and
national laboratories for sharing observations from a variety of platforms to
understand convective storms over the area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
experimental campaign will concentrate on the ocean-urban-rural interface. The
campaign will continuously monitor the evolution of cloud characteristics,
surface-atmosphere forcing, boundary layer state, aerosol forcing, sea-breeze
circulation, and precipitation. The setup will aid in understanding coastal-
urban land-atmosphere interactions, an area of research with significant
knowledge gaps and their connections with convective cloud systems. Numerical
models constrained by observations will be used to investigate urban-cloud
interaction and thunderstorms to understand and quantify the impacts of various
urban forcings on the evolution and characteristics of convective storms. The
primary objectives of the study are: 1) To understand how critical urban
boundary layer processes impact convective cloud formation. 2) To investigate
the impact of urbanization on storm formation, movement, and dissipation. 3) To
investigate the feedback of convective clouds in urban atmospheric and surface
energy processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.