* 2114437
* The Research Advancement among Careers and Education for Success in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (RACE for Success in STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ana Perez-Matos, Pontifical Catholic University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,967.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to diminish weaknesses in
solving problems and critical thinking skills in mathematics, English, and
Spanish among first-year science students. The Research Advancement among
Careers and Education for Success in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (RACE for Success in STEM) at Pontifical Catholic University of
Puerto Rico-Ponce Campus (PCUPR) is a two-year interdisciplinary research
project with a holistic approach. The project also aims to integrate social
issues, which are vital elements of their emotional stability, self-confidence,
and self-motivation at the undergraduate level. Students who will participate in
our project are affected by today's socioeconomic hardships, academic adversity,
and natural events like Hurricane Maria, Earthquakes, and COVID-19. Therefore,
this project plans to compensate with a complete set of components that address
the academic disparities and interpersonal intelligence. This project design
will enhance the educational capacity, research skills, and sense of belonging
of first-year undergraduate Hispanic students to improve retention and
graduation rates in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RACE for Success in
STEM specific aims are: (1) To improve students' foundational academic skills
needed to excel in STEM education; (2) To develop new strategies that support
student transitions to advanced STEM careers through the information obtained
from the student's family and social context; (3) To promote retention and
inclusion by providing research, critical thinking and reading comprehension
activities, empowering the students with skills necessary for the future; and
(4) To elicit a sense of belonging in STEM education through peer-leading and
research-leading activities. This proposal is a pilot project that will use a
mixed-method design with qualitative (interviews and focal groups) and
quantitative (GPA, course grades, and surveys) data. The proposed project
consists of a pilot group compared to the rest of the student group (control) of
freshman students registered in mathematics, English, and Spanish. The pilot
group will also participate in the Student Developmental Plan consisting of the
Self-Management Skills Development Program and the First Experience Summer
Research Internship. The expected outcomes will show improvements in retention,
academic performance, and persistence among first-year students and within the
workforce in STEM. The proposed project will impact the curriculum in courses
like Math, Spanish, and English, leaving an Institutional legacy with a new
program in peer-leading and research-leading activities well designed and
essential for students' success in STEM. The researchers will disseminate the
project outcomes to the community through brief reports and local and national
meetings (e.g., HSI Program). This study's activities and results will also be
available online to the interested public through our home page:
http://pucpr.edu, a section dedicated to the Pilot Project: RACE for Success in
STEM. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.