* 2114168
* Catalyzing STEM Gender Equity at Drexel: Building a Foundation for Systemic Transformation
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sharon Walker, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

It is fundamentally important to ensure diversity and equity across the career
lifespan of faculty in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
Motivated by this core tenant and priority for Drexel University, the long-term
goal for this project team is to create a pipeline of outstanding, diverse women
leaders at Drexel. However, this can only be accomplished through the retention
and promotion of women faculty at the institution. Drexel has a long history of
recruiting talented women faculty at the Assistant Professor level, who are then
promoted to Associate Professor. However, a recent internal audit identified a
consistent and persistent gap in promotion to Full. The gap is particularly
stark for underrepresented minority women. This study is designed to evaluate
the current policies, procedures, and practices at Drexel for faculty
transitioning from Associate to Full Professor, identify best practices
developed through other ADVANCE programs, and to use this insight to develop an
evidence-based fair and equitable promotion policies, procedures, and practices
for use campus-wide. Recognizing the need to eliminate systemic gender and race
barriers impeding progress across the academic lifespan, this project will focus
on the intersections of gender and race/ethnicity, while also paying attention
to gender identity and expression, country of origin, different abilities,
family status, and faculty appointment type and rank. Drexel prioritizes
diversity and equity for university leadership. This project aims to develop a
transparent and sustainable professional “roadmap” to Professor, which is
essential for attaining gender parity and diversity at that
rank.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three goals of this project are: 1) understand
the policies, procedures, and practices that negatively impact or facilitate
women’s retention and promotion to Full Professor; 2) identify best-practice
strategies developed by other ADVANCE institutions that might be tailored to fit
Drexel’s context; and 3) utilize findings to create a comprehensive strategic
action plan for developing inclusive and diverse leadership at Drexel
University. This two-year mixed-method study will prepare Drexel for future data
collection and data analyses of faculty equity which can be used by
institutional leadership to inform decision-making. The ADVANCE “Catalyst” work
will also prepare the institution to implement evidence-based strategies to
enhance retention and promotion for all faculty which will be outlined in a
five-year faculty equity strategic plan that will be produced as part of this
project. Results will be disseminated via conferences, peer-review publications,
industry press, popular media, and shared with other ADVANCE institutions. The
NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at an academic, non-profit institution
of higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.