* 2114697
* Organ-to-Cell Multiscale Modeling of Concussion
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Songbai Ji, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2024
* USD 350,324.00

This work will generate new scientific knowledge about how concussion occurs in
the brain. Concussion is caused by impact to the head that deforms the brain.
Computational models of head injury are used to study how and where the brain
deforms, and how the deformation leads to concussion. Many injury models exist
to study deformation of the whole brain, or the deformation of an individual
axon (nerve fiber). However, these models have not been unified to study how
whole brain deformation translates down to the axonal level. This award supports
research to unify brain injury models at the large, medium, and small scales.
The unified models will then be used to study brain deformations at all scales
caused by real-world head impact. This process will enable a comprehensive
understanding of how a head impact causes injury. In the future, the results of
this work may help correlate head impact with concussion symptoms and
neuroimaging findings. The comprehensive understanding of how concussion occurs
within the brain can be used to design better head protective gear, improve
diagnosis of concussion, and support more precise treatment plans. Therefore,
results from this award will benefit the U.S. society and eventually improve
human health. Finally, this research will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concussion occurs across the length
scales of the brain. Current brain injury models focus on either the whole brain
or an individual axon. However, little is known about how impact-induced brain
deformation is transmitted through the length scales in specific regions of the
brain. This research will fill the knowledge gap on the energy transmission
process of external head impact at the macro, meso, and microscales. It will
develop detailed injury models in key vulnerable brain regions. A microscale
injury model will also be developed capable of adapting to local geometry. These
organ-to-cell models will then be unified through a multiscale modeling
framework to provide a comprehensive understanding of the biomechanical
mechanism of concussion across the length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.