* 2114579
* Holocene Upper Atlantic Temperature Trend: AMOC Variability or Anomalous Heat Uptake
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Delia Oppo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 599,798.00

Whether and how the Atlantic Meridional Ocean Circulation (AMOC) has changed
during the last 11,000 years is uncertain. Yet, the AMOC influences the
distribution of heat, salinity, and nutrients, and variations in its strength
can affect global climate, with ecological impacts. Initial data suggest the
tropical Atlantic, at about 1000 meters water depth, cooled from approximately
11,000 to 5,000 years ago. Other evidence also hints similar cooling in this
region during this time. Changes in the strength of the AMOC influence how heat
is distributed within the deep ocean and may have caused the observed cooling
trend. Temperature of the deep ocean is also affected by temperature changes in
the regions where surface waters sink into the deep ocean. These surface
temperatures may change due to global temperature change or due to regional
climate changes at high latitudes (e. g. winds, sea ice distribution). The goal
of this study is to generate data to confirm the observed cooling trend and to
assess whether the trend is due to cooling of high latitude waters flowing to
these sites or to changes in AMOC, or to both of these mechanisms. Identifying
the cause of this cooling has important implications for understanding Holocene
climate and variability. A post-doctoral scientist will participate in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Initial results suggest an early – middle Holocene
cooling in the western tropical north Atlantic, at a depth (about 950 m) where
Antarctic Intermediate Water (AAIW) is the dominant water mass. This cooling
began at approximately 11 kyBP and culminated in near-modern bottom water
temperatures (BWT) by about 7-5 kyBP. Hypotheses to explain this cooling include
(1) a strengthening Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) in
response to a decrease in the input of deglacial freshwater to the North
Atlantic, or (2) cooling in one or more of the source waters to the site.
Researchers will confirm this cooling by reconstructing BWT at several shallow
tropical sites within modern AAIW depths, and test the alternative hypotheses
with measurements from other subtropical sites within AAIW and northern source
waters. A suite of marine sediment cores from the north, south, and tropical
Atlantic, and ranging from 300 to 1100 meters water depth will be used to
reconstruct the spatial pattern of temperature change and help distinguish
between the two likely causes of the temperature trend, a high-latitude cooling
in waters flowing to the tropical Atlantic, or a strengthening of the AMOC
during this time period. As model simulations do not predict a cooling at these
sites over this time period, confirming and understanding the cause of this
cooling may help identify where models or model set-up can be
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.