* 2114465
* Physiology of hypoxia adaptation in the worlds highest-dwelling mammal
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jay Storz, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 827,312.00

This research project is to discover how mice living at extremely high
elevations in the Andes are able to survive and function in spite of extreme
cold and lack of oxygen (hypoxia). The study species, Phyllotis vaccarum, holds
the record as the world’s highest-dwelling mammal, and it also has by far the
broadest altitudinal range. The species is continuously distributed from sea
level to the crest of the Andes at &gt;6700 m (&gt;22,000’). Because of its
extraordinarily broad elevational range and extreme hypoxia tolerance, Phyllotis
vaccarum is an ideal study species to address questions about physiological
mechanisms of high-altitude adaptation and the way such mechanisms evolved. The
discoveries will provide a basis for comparison with human populations that are
native to extremely high elevations in the Andean Altiplano and the Tibetan
Plateau, and there is the potential to identify general principles associated
with genetic adaptation and physiological acclimatization to extreme
environments. The research is likely to yield novel discoveries because mammals
that live at such extreme elevations have never been experimentally studied. The
project includes an international exchange program for trainees from the Chilean
and North American institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
investigate mechanisms of hypoxia adaptation in an Andean mouse species
(Phyllotis vaccarum) that lives at altitudes far higher than any other mammal
species in the world and which also has by far the broadest altitudinal range.
The research project is designed to address fundamental questions regarding the
role of phenotypic plasticity in environmental adaptation and the extent to
which acclimatization responses generally align with genetic responses to
selection. Experimental insights into the relative contributions of genetic and
environmentally induced changes in hypoxia-responsive phenotypes – and the
potential synergy or antagonism between them – will advance our understanding of
physiological adaptation and the process by which complex physiological
phenotypes evolve. To identify and characterize mechanisms of hypoxia
acclimation and adaptation, a common-garden experimental design will be used to
examine physiological differences between natural populations of leaf-eared mice
sampled from contrasting high- and low-altitude extremes of the species’ range.
The experimental analysis of systemic physiology will involve measurements of
whole-animal physiological performance (thermogenic capacity in hypoxia) and a
comprehensive set of subordinate traits in pedigreed, captive-bred highland and
lowland mice. Since Phyllotis vaccarum lives at altitudes that were previously
considered completely uninhabitable, identification of mechanisms of hypoxia
adaptation in this vertebrate extremophile will have transformative value in
comparative/evolutionary physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.