* 2114169
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Functional design of siphonophore propulsion and behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sean Colin, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 08/31/2024
* USD 182,156.00

Siphonophores are a highly diverse group of colonial jellyfish that are
widespread and important components of the world’s largest ecosystem, the
midwaters of the open ocean. Very little is known about how these jellyfish
function. It is thought that the majority of siphonophores spend their entire
life suspended in water and move through the ocean via jet propulsion. However,
this is likely a gross over-simplification of how this highly diverse group of
jellyfish function. The goal of this project is to study how siphonophore shape
and body design are related to how they swim, and their swimming and feeding
behavior. The main reason so little is understood about these jellyfish, and
really most other gelatinous animals in the open ocean, is that scientists have
had very limited access to these delicate, remote animals. However, our team has
developed tools and techniques that enable our team to study these animals in
their natural habitat. In this project, siphonophore swimming movements and
mechanics will be quantified using a combination of novel imaging tools
controlled by both SCUBA divers and remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). This
research will provide an understanding of how the body form of these jellyfish
determines how they function. This is critical information for understanding
their role in the largest ecosystem of the world. It is also information that
can be used by engineers to design better underwater vehicles that move more
efficiently and are more maneuverable than current state-of-the-art
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Siphonophores are colonial cnidarians that are
widespread, important components of open ocean communities. It is thought that
the majority of siphonophore species spend their entire life suspended in water
moving through the ocean via jet propulsion. However, this is likely a gross
over-simplification of how this highly diverse group of jellyfish function. The
historic obstacle to broader understanding of how these jellyfish function has
been the difficulty of accessing these animals. Imaging advances that our team
has made in both blue-water SCUBA and with remotely operated vehicles (ROVs)
have addressed these limitations. In situ high-speed imaging, bright field, and
particle image velocimetry (PIV) for both diver-controlled and ROV operations
now allow detailed quantitative measurements of propulsive mechanisms and
swimming behavior (short- and long-term) for both surface and deep-dwelling
siphonophores. This combination of in situ systems enables our team to collect
the multi-scale morphological, kinematic, hydrodynamic, and behavioral data
required to be able to establish the benefits and limits of different
siphonophore body forms. These results will allow a broad comparison of form and
function that is required to understand the trophic role of different
siphonophores in the pelagic ecosystem. The results will also contribute to
understanding design principles of these colonial species that will inform novel
engineered designs that combine jet propulsors in small vehicles, and could
ultimately expand exploration and discovery in the oceans. This project will
train young scientists, and with the help of our partners, will use video and
visualizations for education outreach and engagement of the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.