* 2114825
* Nonequilibrium Control of Magnetism and Topology Through Selective Phonon Excitations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gregory Fiete, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 370,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities with an aim to understand and predict novel regimes of
matter in quantum materials. The PI will focus his theoretical research on
materials driven out-of-equilibrium from illumination by lasers of different
light frequencies and polarization. The high purity light of a laser, which is
very nearly of a single frequency in contrast to light from the sun or a light
bulb, allows one to selectively deposit energy into the different (e.g. lattice,
electronic, magnetic) degrees of freedom of a solid material. Because these
different degrees of freedom interact with one another, energy deposited in one
will ultimately be distributed among the others after some time, but at
intermediate times interesting non-equilibrium phenomena can result. The goal of
this project is to uncover interesting electrical and magnetic possibilities
theoretically, and help guide experimental groups in their realization in the
laboratory. Ultimately, this research may enable new quantum technologies based
on light control of matter, including sensing, computing, and communication
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will support the
training of graduate and undergraduate students through direct involvement with
the PI in the research described. The PI will continue to deliver a wide range
of public lectures with a focus on pre-college students from historically
underrepresented backgrounds who have had limited exposure to theoretical
physics and/or quantum sciences. Some of these lectures will be delivered
through Northeastern University’s Center for STEM Education. The PI will
participate in the Building Bridges Program at Northeastern, an interactive day
to introduce prospective college students to the sciences and engineering, and
the Young Scholars program at Northeastern, a 6-week intensive summer program
where rising high-school seniors work on cutting edge research problems and
receive mentoring from faculty and university
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities with an aim to understand and
predict novel regimes of matter in quantum materials out-of-equilibrium. The PI
will theoretically study the influence of laser-induced lattice changes on the
electronic states of correlated electronic materials with strong spin-orbit
coupling. The project will substantially extend equilibrium studies of systems
with both strong spin-orbit coupling and electronic correlations to the non-
equilibrium regime. By directly targeting selected phonon modes in a material
with light, heating effects can be minimized, and coherent electronic and
magnetic responses generated. Topological transitions, including higher order
topological states, in the electronic and magnon band structures and
redistribution of Berry curvature in the Brillouin zone will be a focus, as well
as phase transitions/phase stabilization of unusual charge-ordered,
magnetically-ordered, and superconducting states. Of particular interest will be
nonlinear effects that may be induced in the materials through intense light.
Nonlinear phononic studies and effects beyond the linear response regime (such
as higher harmonic generation) will be studied as a means to drive and detect
novel physical regimes and excitations created by intense, low-frequency light.
The PI will use complementary theoretical methods that start from both the
strong coupling limit and the weak coupling regime to explore the link between
laser-induced lattice changes and electronic/magnetic property changes.
Numerical and analytical approaches, including model Hamiltonian and first-
principles studies, along with symmetry arguments will be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, this project will support the
training of graduate and undergraduate students through direct involvement with
the PI in the research described. The PI will continue to deliver a wide range
of public lectures with a focus on pre-college students from historically
underrepresented backgrounds who have had limited exposure to theoretical
physics and/or quantum sciences. Some of these lectures will be delivered
through Northeastern University’s Center for STEM Education. The PI will
participate in the Building Bridges Program at Northeastern, an interactive day
to introduce prospective college students to the sciences and engineering, and
the Young Scholars program at Northeastern, a six-week intensive summer program
where rising high-school seniors work on cutting edge research problems and
receive mentoring from faculty and university
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.