* 2114035
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Modeling and Defense of Cyber Attacks for Improving Social Virtual Reality Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Social Virtual Reality (VR) Learning Environment (VRLE) technologies offer a new
medium for flexible learning environments with geo-distributed users. Secure
Social VRLEs can augment human performance in a wide range of domains including
special education, disaster response training, and healthcare. This projectâ€™s
goal is to investigate Social VRLEs deployed on networked systems that need to
be properly designed for performance and resilience to prevent unique cyber-
attacks. The consequences of ill-suited design make Social VRLEs vulnerable to
security breaches and privacy leakage attacks that significantly impact users
(e.g., STEM education students, first responders, patients). More severely, poor
design as well as security and privacy attacks can cause disruption of user
immersive experience. Hence, the project activities are focused on ensuring the
security, privacy, and safety (SPS) in social VRLEs to enable safe and effective
student learning activities. The project outcomes include theory and techniques
for defense of attacks in social VRLEs. These outcomes will be disseminated to
the broader community via open-source code, educational materials, peer-reviewed
publications, design case studies, and data sets to foster the setup of
trustworthy learning environments with a co-operative setting of geographically
distributed users and VR devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Towards meeting the
above goal, this project aims to create a transformative co-design of learning
and resilient aspects of social VRLEs. Project activities help address the
knowledge gap in the understanding and quantitative measurement of how cyber-
attacks influence the system and network factors that hinder the uninterrupted
user immersive experience. Examples of these attacks include immersion attacks
such as occlusion attack, Chaperone file attack and network fault scenarios.
More specifically, the project objectives are: (i) to investigate techniques for
formal modeling and scalable analysis of SPS threats/faults to model as well as
analyze their inter-dependencies, inspired by attack-fault trees (AFTs). This
investigation will include novel threat models in terms of AFTs and scalable
techniques for formal analysis of AFTs; (ii) to collect threat intelligence on
cyber-attacks in social VRLE deployments to detect critical anomaly events in
real-time before the user safety gets compromised. This will lead to novel
anomaly detection techniques based on machine learning models and statistical
analysis techniques for the detection of cyber-attacks (single and multi-attack
scenarios). The research outcomes validation features a real-world social VRLE
that is hosted on available public cloud platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.