* 2114210
* Research: Collaborative Research: Non-Academic Career Paths of Master’s and PhD Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maura Borrego, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2024
* USD 207,916.00

Most engineering Master’s and PhD graduates will enter careers in sectors such
as industry and government, yet research and resources focused on graduate
education have historically focused on preparation of future faculty members in
academia. This project will meet the call for enhancing the professional
preparation of engineers by focusing on non-academic career pathways of both
Master’s and PhD students in engineering. Advanced engineering degrees are
becoming increasingly important in these non-academic sectors for both
individual career trajectories as well as for continued competitiveness within
the global innovation landscape. The project will identify how graduate programs
can better support students for these careers so that they may successfully and
quickly make contributions in their new positions. Additionally, both industry
and government have emphasized the need to broaden participation in engineering,
and this project will pay particular attention to the experiences of how
minoritized graduate students may be best supported on their career paths. The
project aligns closely with the goals of the Professional Formation of Engineers
funding program “to create and support an innovative and inclusive engineering
profession for the 21st century.” At its core, the project aims to understand
and identify ways to enhance the professional formation of engineers at the
graduate level so that they are best prepared to transition successfully into
the non-academic workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to
understand: 1) how recent alumni of engineering graduate programs describe being
exposed to, preparing for, and making decisions about non-academic careers, and
2) how engineering faculty, staff, and administrators support students to
prepare for such careers. The project will use an ecological theoretical
framework to organize data collection and analyses, which will allow the
investigators to consider individual decisions within broader systems and
environmental factors that influence engineering graduates’ pursuit of non-
academic careers. The project will triangulate multiple data sources to
understand the issue from different perspectives. First, the investigators will
conduct national-scale quantitative analyses of non-academic career pathways in
engineering using the Survey of Earned Doctorates (SED) and Survey of Doctoral
Recipients (SDR) and provide benchmarking data to all institutions with
engineering graduate students. Second, the investigators have purposively
sampled four institutions that are active members of multiple engineering
research centers (ERCs) and/or Industry-University Cooperative Research Centers
(IUCRCs) and, as such, are well positioned to support career pathways for
engineering graduate students beyond the academy. This project will investigate
experiences of alumni, center directors, and faculty to understand how these
institutions and programs prepare engineering graduates for non-academic careers
and to gain insight on how graduates make career decisions. The sampling
strategy to focus on Centers is a unique strategy that purposefully collects new
data from NSF-supported collaborations that theoretically put students in
research spaces that transcend the boundaries of academia. Minority-serving
institutions are intentionally included in the sample to understand how
minoritized graduate students in particular can be best supported. Prior work on
PhD students has shown that despite many calls from industry and the government
that broadening participation is needed, women and students from
underrepresented minority groups still are more likely than their white, male
peers to have no job offers at the time of graduation. Third, based on findings
from that initial sample, the project will generate and administer
questionnaires to graduates, directors, and faculty at 44 additional
institutions leveraging the ERC/IUCRC network as a sampling mechanism. This step
will increase the representativeness of the sample and enable exploration of
differences across institutions, disciplines, and
ERC/IUCRCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.