* 2114790
* CAS: Towards sustainable sunscreens: identifying chemical structures in sunscreens linked to phototoxicity in corals
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* John Pringle, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

A large fraction of the world's coral reefs are at a high risk of extinction.
Although much of the threat is due to global factors, coral declines can also be
significantly exacerbated by local factors. Recent concern has focused on
oxybenzone, a common sunscreen component, due to observations that oxybenzone is
toxic to adult corals and reduces survival of juvenile coral. The reasons for
this toxicity are unclear, and improved understanding is needed to enable the
design of sustainable sunscreens that are truly safe for coral reefs. This
research project will characterize the chemical structures within organic
sunscreen components or their metabolites that are responsible for phototoxicity
to corals, focusing on five of the most common organic sunscreen components:
oxybenzone, homosalate, octisalate, octinoxate, and octocrylene. This improved
understanding will lay the groundwork for the design of new and sustainable
sunscreen components that do not exhibit phototoxicity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis is that the presence or absence of
a hydroxyl group adjacent to the aromatic carbonyl (present in each of the five
compounds) is a critical determinant of whether a sunscreen component is
phototoxic. Sunlight absorption forms excited triplet states of aromatic
carbonyls that can generate Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS), resulting in
phototoxicity. However, the hydroxyl group adjacent to the aromatic carbonyl in
oxybenzone, homosalate, and octisalate inhibits ROS production during sunlight
illumination by quenching excited-state triplets. The hypothesis, backed by
preliminary evidence, is that oxybenzone, homosalate, and octisalate themselves
are not phototoxic, but that coral metabolism glycosylates the hydroxyl groups
to form glucoside metabolites that produce ROS and are thus phototoxic.
Octinoxate and octocrylene should be directly phototoxic because they lack a
hydroxyl group adjacent to the aromatic carbonyl. The research will employ both
hard- and soft-coral adults but mainly use the sea anemone Aiptasia, a well
characterized model system for corals; like corals, Aiptasia are anthozoans
containing endosymbiotic photosynthetic algae. Objective 1 will characterize the
mechanism of oxybenzone phototoxicity by: (i) testing whether the presence of
oxybenzone leads to mortality only in the presence of the UV wavebands of
sunlight, (ii) quantifying the conversion of oxybenzone to glucoside metabolites
by the host animal and/or the symbiotic algae, (iii and iv) testing for ROS
production under sunlight from glucoside metabolites (iii) in vitro and (iv) in
vivo, and (v) quantifying mortality from exposure to glucoside analogues.
Objective 2 will replicate these experiments with homosalate, octisalate,
octinoxate, and octocrylene to characterize the relevance of this mechanism to
sunscreen components being considered as alternatives to oxybenzone.
Undergraduate students from underrepresented groups and a high-school science
teacher with an accompanying student from an underrepresented group will be
recruited to participate in summer research by partnering with existing Stanford
University programs. The research should inform policy discussions about which
components to regulate in sunscreens and be relevant to the management of coral-
reef reserves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.