* 2114052
* Fabrication of Antimicrobial Textiles by Roll-to-Roll Electroless Plating
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Lili Cai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2024
* USD 306,821.00

Recent technological advancements in textile manufacturing has focused on the
production of various functional and smart textiles, among which antimicrobial
textiles have found a niche. Textiles are often substrates susceptible to
microbial growth under appropriate temperature, humidity, and nutrient
conditions. Therefore, antimicrobial textiles have become a necessity,
especially for critical applications such as personal protective equipment or
PPE, sportwear and air filters. However, current antimicrobial agents and
manufacturing technologies suffer from one or more key limitations, for example,
low antimicrobial activity, poor durability, and lack of manufacturing
scalability. This grant supports fundamental research to bridge the knowledge
gap in scalable manufacturing of novel antimicrobial textiles with high activity
and durability. This project establishes a new paradigm for the economical
production of antimicrobial personal protective equipment and air filters in
response to the current COVID-19 pandemic and future public health crises. This
project provides transferable knowledge for the manufacturing of other
functional textiles. The results from this project promote the progress of
science and benefit the U.S. textile industry, economy, national health and
welfare. Furthermore, this multidisciplinary project involves material science,
chemistry, nanotechnology and manufacturing science and provides research
opportunities for women and underrepresented minority students. The integrated
education and outreach activities promote engineering education for K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Silver nanoparticles
have been researched as promising antimicrobial agents for protective textile
applications. However, to realize practical low-cost and large-scale
manufacturing of silver nanoparticle-functionalized textiles, fundamental
understanding is still lacking on a series of key factors, including the
heterogeneous interactions between the nanoparticle and fabrics, the engineering
of the nanoparticle properties, and the manufacturing process that allows for
mass production. To gain such basic knowledge, this project performs fundamental
investigations into a continuous and scalable production process toward the
manufacturing of silver nanoparticle-decorated textiles, by integrating
electroless plating of silver nanoparticles with roll-to-roll manufacturing. The
research generates new knowledge in (1) interfacial nucleation of silver
nanoparticles assisted with biocompatible molecules such as polydopamine, which
functions as an adhesive and reducing agent to facilitate the growth of the
silver nanoparticles during electroless plating on different textile surfaces;
(2) the growth mechanisms of silver nanoparticles on textiles for optimized
antimicrobial potency; and (3) how fabric materials and structures impact the
roll-to-roll coating quality. Research tasks involve systematic design of
experiments for process construction, crystal growth analysis, materials
synthesis and characterization, and antimicrobial performance
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.