* 2114727
* ATD: Relational Point Process Models: Theory, Methods, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Abel Rodriguez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 455,395.00

Data consisting of time-stamped relational events between a set of entities
(such as interactions between individuals in a community, messages between users
of an online social network, or financial transactions in a stock market) have
become widely available and are of great importance in disciplines as diverse as
epidemiology, computer science, and finance. The literature on mathematical
models for this class of problems is limited, and mostly focuses on situations
where the occurrence of an event is likely to create additional ones. While this
type of self- and mutually-excitatory processes are of interest in many social
sciences applications, they are not appropriate in numerous other settings. This
project aims to develop novel mathematical models for time-stamped relational
data that allow for a wider range of behaviors, along with the computational and
theoretical tools necessary to learn those models from data, and to predict the
future behavior of the systems. The methods developed in this project have
direct relevance to the mission of agencies such as the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency, the National Security Agency and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the Department of Homeland Security, and various National
Laboratories. Hence, the project is likely to have a clear and direct impact on
defense and natural security (DNS). Besides technical advances, this project
will also contribute to the development of a workforce with strong skills in
mathematical and statistical sciences, familiarity with DNS applications and
awareness of the career opportunities in the public sector. Finally, the project
will also assist in the dissemination of the work performed by all PIs supported
by the ATD program and contribute to broader workforce development by providing
logistical support to the organization of an annual ATD workshop. This project
will provide support for one graduate student per
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Time-stamped relational event data is often analyzed
using static or discrete time network models by aggregating events over time to
generate network snapshots. However, while this kind of aggregation can be
helpful in some applications such as change-point analysis, it discards a
significant amount of information that can be critical to understanding the
underlying micro-processes that drive the generation of the data. This project
will develop a general framework for continuous time relational point process
that can be used to directly model the time-stamped data, thereby avoiding the
need for aggregation. In addition to presenting a general framework that can be
used to design and evaluate relational point processes, this proposal develops
novel instantiations of this general class of models that are suitable for
various applications related to epidemiology, human mobility, information
diffusion, and finance. These applications are all highly relevant to the
defense and national security community in general, and the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency in particular. Our contributions include relational versions
of repulsive Matern and Markov renewal process, as well as novel constructions
of relational Hawkes processes that rely on its branching Poisson cluster
construction and allow for simultaneous interactions between
nodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.