* 2114466
* RCN: Feedbacks between geological, climatological, and biological dynamics associated with the formation of the Gal√°pagos Islands: The Island Systems Integration Consortium (ISIC)
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Christine Parent, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,866.00

The dynamic and changing nature of our planet has long been recognized by
researchers in fields such as geology, climatology, and biology. Geological and
climatological forces influence the formation and maintenance of biological
diversity, and evidence from these disciplines is often used to understand these
biological patterns. Yet, how signatures of current and past biodiversity
patterns may inform geological and climatological models has often been
overlooked. This project establishes the Island Systems Integration Consortium
Research Coordination Network (ISIC-RCN), a consortium of geologists,
climatologists, and biologists focused on determining the potential for each
field to inform the others in novel, previously unexplored ways. To do so, the
researchers will focus on the Galapagos Archipelago, an oceanic island system
for which ample data have been assembled and that is ripe for such cross-
disciplinary analyses. The ISIC-RCN participants will: (1) form a long-lasting
community of researchers whose discipline-focused skills will spawn new
interdisciplinary ideas and research directions; (2) quantify the current state
of the knowledge about the geological, climatological, and biological
understanding of these islands and of ocean islands around the world; and (3)
move that understanding forward by addressing outstanding questions in new ways.
Finally, the ISIC-RCN will extend its interdisciplinary framework to wider
audiences in both the scientific and public spheres by maximizing the diversity
of participants, conducting hands-on training in science communication,
providing opportunities and tools to organize Galapagos outreach activities, and
creation of a website to share Galapagos Research, ISIC-RCN scientific advances,
outreach activities, and a student-led interactive learning
app.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ISIC-RCN will use the Galapagos
Archipelago as a model to leverage the power of cross-disciplinary research to
address fundamental questions too challenging or impossible to address through
single disciplinary approaches. Activities will align along three primary axes:
(1) fostering a unique interdisciplinary community around island systems, using
the Galapagos Archipelago as a focal point, (2) creating new research directions
through cross-disciplinary collaboration, and (3) facilitating training and
educational activities for scientists and the general public. To develop and
maintain this novel scientific community, the ISIC-RCN will conduct a series of
virtual and in-person meetings, facilitate data sharing and dissemination of
scientific knowledge through a web-portal, and support the formation of working
groups focused on specific cross-disciplinary scientific questions. Products of
the ISIC-RCN include a new community focused on innovative research approaches,
new collaborations, white papers on the state of the field and promising avenues
of interdisciplinary research, and scientific
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.