* 2114716
* AccelNet-Implementation: International Biomanufacturing Network (IBioNe)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Seongkyu Yoon, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Health care costs continue to rise, limiting the availability of potentially
lifesaving medicines. Technology innovation in biomanufacturing represents one
of the best options to both lower costs of medicines and vaccines and to save
time in getting these treatments to market. However, a major bottleneck is the
lack of partnerships between the U.S. and our international allies, which
stymies innovation and forces each region to reinvent key manufacturing
technologies. This implementation track project addresses the global challenge
to coordinate, organize, and facilitate research and technological advances in
biomanufacturing. The International Biomanufacturing Network (IBioNe) will link
14 networks including NSF-funded centers, Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing
Innovation Center and Membrane Science Engineering &amp; Technology Center, and
partner organizations in Canada, Mexico, Portugal, South Korea, Japan, United
Kingdom, Ireland, Austria, Australia, and Africa. By adding to the collective
knowledge base and educating the next generation of biomanufacturing experts,
IBioNe will accelerate discoveries and developments to make lifesaving drugs and
vaccines available for the patients and public that need
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a wealth of biological information emerging from
revolutions in â€˜omics, sensors, and systems and synthetic biology, a multitude
of opportunities exist to build a stronger, more connected international
community dedicated to advancing biomanufacturing excellence. IBioNE will serve
as a catalyst for technology innovation in biomanufacturing by bringing together
researchers across the ecosystem to improve biologic drugs manufacturing
capabilities. Project goals are to: 1) understand the biology of
biomanufacturing systems and compile omics datasets and models, 2) create
references and standards for relevant cell lines, media, and platforms, 3)
implement innovations in production, analytics, and control and 4) educate the
future innovators and workforce leaders. With established standards, innovation
will proceed rapidly across therapeutic modalities by comparing new technologies
against a known reference to speed breakthroughs. IBioNe will expand websites
that enable users to deposit genomes, transcriptomes, proteomes and other omics
datasets and host mathematical models including those based on machine learning
and artificial intelligence. Knowledge exchanges will be fostered through
collaborative laboratory, conference, and workshop experiences. By creating and
exchanging standards, models, expansive datasets, and expertise, IBioNe will
accelerate discovery, development, and implementation of time- and cost-saving
bioproduction methodologies by academic, industrial and government researchers
across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.