* 2114535
* Exploiting excitons in atomic monolayers for dielectric sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Jie Shan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 446,175.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;Many crystals including semiconductors are
made of weakly bonded layers, and as such, can be separated into stable units of
atomic thickness. Electrons (negatively charged particles) and holes (positively
charged particles) in these isolated atomic membranes are bound by strong
attractions to form excitons. Excitons are hydrogen atom-like particles; they
possess a series of quantum states and display characteristic peaks in the
absorption spectrum. On the other hand, excitons are much larger than hydrogen
atoms; while the electrons and holes are confined in the atomic membrane, their
interactions extend substantially outside. This property endows the excitons--
both the energy and the intensity of the absorption peaks--with extreme
sensitivity to surroundings. When a membrane is placed near a metal, the
electron-hole interactions are significantly screened; and the exciton
absorption spectrum is substantially altered. Conversely, a nearby insulator
affects the exciton spectrum much less. In this project, the research team
exploits this unique property of excitons in atomic membranes to develop a new
sensing technique that can be applied to a wide range of materials including
those that are inaccessible by conventional techniques. The team applies the
technique to probe new forms of insulators and superconductors in two
dimensions. The project supports the research and development of one graduate
student and several undergraduate students. Other activities involve modernizing
the physics advanced laboratory course at Cornell University and developing
materials for outreach activities, including several science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) programs on campus that specifically target
young girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Atomically
thin transition metal dichalcogenide semiconductors have emerged as a new
platform for strong light-matter interactions. The optical response of
monolayers is dominated by excitons (bound electron-hole pairs), which are
extremely sensitive to the surrounding dielectric environment because most of
the electric-field lines responsible for exciton binding are outside the
monolayer material. The project exploits this unique property of excitons in
monolayer semiconductors to develop a new optical sensing technique for
dielectric function or electronic compressibility of nanoscale materials. The
goals are to develop imaging and time-resolved measurement capabilities, as well
as a comprehensive understanding of the technique, its applicability and
limitations. Two experiments are selected to focus on each of the measurement
capabilities. The first experiment studies the sensitivity of the technique to
the quantum Hall effect in graphene and explores the possibility of imaging the
chiral edge states in the quantum Hall regime. The second experiment
investigates the sensitivity of the technique to superconducting transitions and
explores ultrafast dynamics of two-dimensional superconductors following photon-
excitations. The methods involve the fabrication of van der Waals
heterostructures and devices and optical spectroscopies, including the
reflection contrast, hyper-spectral imaging and pump-probe spectroscopy. The new
sensing technique can be applied to a wide range of materials including those
that do not form good electrical contacts for conventional capacitance or
transport measurements. It opens up unprecedented opportunities for studies of
quantum many-body dynamics in correlated materials, topological chiral edge
states, and two-dimensional superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.