* 2114121
* Collaborative Research: Amorphous-Crystalline Switching in Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Toney, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 174,852.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hybrid organic-inorganic
perovskite (HOIP) semiconductors represent an emerging materials class that
offers a unique opportunity to combine and individually tailor desirable
characteristics from organic and inorganic systems within a single molecular-
scale composite, and such systems already provide outstanding properties for
next generation solar cells, light-emitting devices, and photodetectors. Current
HOIP research generally focuses on the crystalline state, in which constituent
atoms repeat in a periodic and well-ordered fashion. With this project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, Prof. David Mitzi at Duke University and Prof.
Michael Toney at the University of Colorado and their research groups will
investigate methods to extend beyond the current state-of-the-art in HOIPs to
demonstrate and understand how controllable disorder can be introduced within
HOIPs through an accessible melt and glass state, and how this disorder can be
employed to significantly expand the range of properties for the HOIP family.
Such research targets creation of design rules to guide future development of
meltable and glass forming HOIPs and to understand how properties of the glass
and melt states differ from the crystalline state. Reversible switching between
crystalline and glass states, employing small changes in temperature, vastly
broadens the prospective application space for HOIPs to include low-power phase-
change memory, neuromorphic computing, advanced sensing, and reconfigurable
photonics. The research closely connects with education and outreach. Involved
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers engage with the national
labs for structure-property studies, and this experience gets conveyed to the
broader student body through an on-going student-oriented energy materials
seminar series. Structure-property data for the glasses are made broadly
available to the community through a perovskite-focused database, representing
the first collection of HOIP glass state data. Project research connects to
traditionally underserved STEM communities through an NSF REU, "Nanoscale
Detectives -- Elucidating the Structure and Dynamics of Hybrid Perovskite
Systems," and through a Pre-Collegiate Development Program that prepares first
generation/low-income students from inner-city and rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, combines targeted synthesis, with
detailed structure and property characterization for a new class of hybrid
organic-inorganic perovskite (HOIP) semiconductors that offers facile access to
melt and glassy states, focusing on two key directions. First, the project uses
targeted HOIP synthesis using developed design rules for low HOIP melting
temperature and prospective glass-crystalline switching, seeking to broaden the
family of HOIPs that can effectively access melt/glass states. Successfully
created materials are structurally characterized using X-ray/neutron scattering
techniques, coupled with extended X-ray absorption fine structure, Raman
spectroscopy and rheometry. This intensive characterization captures the
extended crystalline and local melt/glass state structures, as well as
underlying mechanical properties. Second, while HOIP crystalline state
properties are broadly studied and understood, the current project connects HOIP
melt and glass local structure with corresponding thermal and optoelectronic
properties, studied using differential scanning calorimetry and various optical
spectroscopies, targeting a pathway for enhancing and tuning these properties.
By exploring fundamental structure-property connections associated with the HOIP
melt and glass states, the research seeks to ultimately create a pathway for
predictably designing HOIPs with targeted glass and melt state properties, as is
increasingly already possible for the crystalline
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.