* 2114565
* Multiscale Mechanics of Composite Hydrogels Exposed to Shock Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jaime Juarez, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 09/30/2024
* USD 548,815.00

This grant will support research to examine the response of hydrogels to shock
waves, which is not well understood. A hydrogel (e.g. Jell-O, styling gel) is a
material that consists of a water soluble polymer that can swell to form an
interconnected three-dimensional network. Hydrogels have also been used as
surrogate material for soft biological tissue due to their similarity in
mechanical properties. The passage of a shock wave through hydrogels may serve
as a model for investigating blast-induced traumatic brain injury as, for
example, sustained by United States’ military service members. However,
characterizing the mechanical response of shocked hydrogels is first needed. The
project will test the hypothesis that the energy from shock waves disrupt the
hydrogel network, leading to changes in hydrogel mechanical properties. An
understanding of the behavior of shocked hydrogels would aid material scientists
in developing tissue surrogate materials for blast studies, along with more
resilient hydrogel formulations for wearable sensor and soft robot applications.
Additionally, this research project will be complemented by engaging with
existing organizations such as Iowa State University’s Academic Program for
Excellence and the Program for Women in Science and Engineering. Initiatives
that support the recruitment and retention of underrepresented students in the
field of engineering will be established through outreach activities that
introduce students to topics such as rheology and
biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
fundamentally understand the effect of shock wave exposure on the bulk and
microstructural properties of composite hydrogels that act as tissue simulants.
Molecular dynamic simulations of shock waves in hydrogels have shown a decrease
in local concentration of water, leading to changes in bulk mechanical
properties. However, experimental observations of hydrogel exposure to shock
waves are needed for validation. Thus, the research objectives of this project
include: (1) probing hydrogel microstructure at quasistatic conditions using
optical video microscopy to measure viscoelastic behavior; (2) measurement of
hydrogel mechanical response before and after shock wave exposure to connect
microstructural changes to modified bulk mechanical behavior; and (3)
quantification of the conformational changes of hydrogel due to shock wave
exposure at the microstructural level. The overarching focus will be on the use
of experiments to (i) obtain a better understanding of the macrostructural and
microstructural changes that hydrogels undergo when exposed to a shock wave and
(ii) correlating the structural changes with viscoelasticity behavior. This
project will advance knowledge in mechanics and material science, along with
computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.