* 2114593
* AccelNet-Implementation: Crustal Ocean Biosphere Research Accelerator (COBRA)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Andrew Fisher, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,156,626.00

The deep seafloor covers two-thirds of Earth’s surface area, but there is
limited understanding of the deep-ocean ecosystems and resources and the ability
of these ecosystems to withstand human impacts. Human uses such as deep-sea
mining and carbon sequestration are poised to fundamentally alter physical,
chemical, and biological conditions of the seafloor and surrounding
environments. These activities have the potential to rival negative effects from
bottom fishing and other human impacts to the deep sea, yet the science to
inform and evaluate the impacts of these new industries is lacking. The Crustal
Ocean Biosphere Research Accelerator (COBRA) project connects diverse
stakeholders and experts – interdisciplinary academic and government scientists,
private institutions, policy makers, industry experts and other stakeholders –
through virtual meetings to coordinate efforts. The goal is to generate new
knowledge and inform decision-making relating to emergent industrial uses of the
deep ocean and decrease the likelihood of serious harm to the environment while
maintaining the broad benefits that society currently
enjoys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COBRA network of networks has nine key partners
that bring access to international science and crustal ocean exploration assets
(Ocean Exploration Trust, Schmidt Ocean Institute, Ocean Networks Canada,
Cluster Ocean Floor at MARUM, and C-DeepSea), to experts that provide science-
based recommendations to policy makers (Deep Ocean Stewardship Initiative
working groups, including the Challenger 150 program), to governmental groups
responsible for assessing crustal ocean resources (USGS Global Marine Minerals
Group), and to experts in team science (CREDITS program). COBRA unites these
partners in a common mission to accelerate research on the structure, function,
resilience, and ecosystem services of the crustal ocean biosphere to inform
decision making. COBRA will help to close knowledge gaps by facilitating
dedicated and coordinated expedition and observatory efforts combined with
emergent characterization approaches. In parallel, COBRA will train at least 50
globally distributed early-career researchers in ocean exploration, science, and
policy through innovative virtual expedition leadership training and support two
dozen international research exchanges that promote team science collaboration,
diversity, equity, and inclusivity. COBRA will also establish a web-based search
portal that points to all data types deposited in appropriate internationally
accessible data repositories to promote data discovery and accelerate knowledge
transfer and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research
through International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is
designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.