* 2114307
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Governance, Organizational Complexity, and the Role of Pastoral Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2022
* William Honeychurch, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 10/31/2022
* USD 24,570.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research project explores whether barriers to governance could be influenced by
the incorporation of disparate pastoral communities into processes of governance
to service the dietary and mobility needs of herders and livestock. This project
is relevant to research on nomadic pastoralism and mobile societies, and is
especially pertinent to studies dealing with the relationships between
governance, mobility, and herding at the community level. This is an immediate
concern currently, as modern herders everywhere grapple with globalization,
forced sedentarization, and reduced mobility due to international borders,
environmental change and pasture degradation. In addition to providing funding
for the training of a graduate student in archaeology in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance public
understanding of science and the scientific method by broadly disseminating its
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using two existing models of state formation,
this research assesses hypotheses for a decentralized and centralized political
structure based on changes in human and livestock diet and mobility patterns
through time. Data for this analysis comes excavations at two cemeteries and
stable (δ13C and δ15N) and radiogenic (87Sr/86Sr) isotope analyses of human and
sheep skeletal remains. This project holds promise to generate insights from an
understudied area, elucidate unique endogenous and indigenous forms of complex
political organization, and evaluate the veracity of historical documents. Such
findings would highlight the variability that exists in global forms of pre-
industrial political complexity and reinforce the broader anthropological need
to examine data generated from patterns of human organization that are not
agriculture-centric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.