* 2114661
* RUI:Drosophila F Element Expansion: A Window on the C-value Paradox.
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Cindy Arrigo, New Jersey City University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 05/31/2024
* USD 434,154.00

This research award funds an investigation of the evolutionary causes and
consequences of genome size variation. The DNA of all organisms contains the
genes that code for proteins, the building blocks of cells. Humans have
approximately five times as many protein-coding genes as do bacteria, but about
1000 times the amount of DNA. This phenomenon, the C-value Paradox, will be
studied using a chromosome (the F element) that has undergone a rapid change in
size during the evolution of the fruit fly, Drosophila. Initial analysis of the
F element genes in four species with an expanded F is being done by
undergraduates in the Genomics Education Partnership (GEP). The GEP involves
&gt;150 faculty from across the United States who are using this project to
introduce students to research in genomics, focusing on gene annotation. One of
the most diverse universities in the nation, New Jersey City University, is the
hub for this national research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An F element
region containing ~80 genes is 1.3 megabases in Drosophila melanogaster, but
19.1 megabases in Drosophila ananassae, a 15-fold increase in size. Expansion of
the F element is largely due to a higher repeat load, dominated by transposable
elements (TEs). Using a comparative species approach to analyze the expansions
within and between genes, the project will document the rate and timing of TE
acquisition, and characterize the impacts of TEs on gene structure and on
chromosome organization. Examining SNPs from 15 strains of D. ananassae will
illuminate whether change in genome size is associated with change in effective
population size. The mechanisms that limit recombination will be examined using
both codon bias and substitution rates. These studies and others enabled by the
GEP student annotations will contribute to a better understanding of the nature
of the genome that can be broadly applied to eukaryotic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
program in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate
of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.