* 2114721
* AccelNet-Implementation: The International Pulsar Timing Array
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Maura McLaughlin, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,107,865.00

Gravitational waves are ripples in spacetime, predicted to exist by Einstein's
theory of general relativity. They are emitted by accelerating, massive objects
and travel at the speed of light, unimpeded by matter such as galaxies, stars,
and gas. Gravitational waves from the merger of two black holes were detected by
the LIGO collaboration in 2015, allowing astronomers to "see" previously
invisible objects and probe the most energetic processes in the universe. The
International Pulsar Timing Array (IPTA) is a world-wide network of researchers
and students working to directly detect gravitational at frequencies 11 orders
of magnitude smaller than LIGO through observations of precise celestial clocks
called radio pulsars using the world's largest radio telescopes. This AccelNet-
Implementation project will broaden the reach of the IPTA beyond researchers and
students from North America, Europe, and Australia to include China, India, and
South Africa. In addition to enhancing observations of pulsars distributed
across the sky, the expanded IPTA network will provide sophisticated cyber-
infrastructure and training for students and postdoctoral researchers in
astrophysics, radio instrumentation, signal processing, and data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IPTA expects to detect gravitational waves from
supermassive binary black holes at the cores of merging galaxies. These
detections will provide new insights into galaxy growth and evolution through
cosmic time, transforming our understanding of the Universe. By the end of the
award period, the IPTA will detect and characterize the stochastic background of
gravitational waves produced by all the supermassive binary black holes in the
Universe. It is also likely to detect the first individual supermassive black
hole binary that stands out above the background. This international
coordination of research will also result in very high impact synergistic
science such as neutron star mass measurements, characterization of the
interstellar medium, tests of general relativity, and the discovery of exotic
pulsar systems and radio transients such as Fast Radio Bursts. Coordination will
be facilitated through annual workshops, meetings, and shared data and analysis
portal. Students and postdoctoral researchers in the IPTA will be involved in an
international mentoring network and will learn valuable outreach skills, while
at the same time bringing the excitement of this work to K-12 students
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.