* 2114509
* Molecular machinery of the bacterial nucleotide excision repair pathway
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2025
* David Jeruzalmi, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2025
* USD 914,819.00

The goal of this project is to understand how cells repair damaged DNA. The
process of DNA repair is essential to ensure that the genetic information in the
DNA genome remains intact. Inside cells, DNA is continually under assault from
multiple sources, including its watery environment, chemicals produced by
metabolism, or exposure to external radiation or toxins. To protect the DNA,
cells have evolved biochemical processes that patrol the genome, detect damage,
and organize responses aimed at restoring the integrity of the DNA. This project
focuses on one such repair process, called nucleotide excision repair, in which
damaged segments of DNA are removed and replaced with normal DNA. This work will
be carried out in bacteria, but because DNA repair mechanisms are similar in
higher organisms, including humans, the results should have wide-ranging
scientific impact. The project also will have educational impact through
programs for engaging undergraduates in research and creative arts and for
outreach to public schools in New York City. These educational activities will
help fulfill two broad missions: for scientists to attract and retain students
in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields, and for the
City College of New York to provide a high-quality and affordable education to
children of New York City, immigrants, minorities, and those without economic
means. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA repair is a fundamental process dedicated to
maintenance of genetic information, yet many mechanistic details of DNA repair
remain obscure. This research will fill gaps in our understanding of one DNA
repair pathway, bacterial nucleotide excision repair. Previous research
established roles for three proteins, UvrA, UvrB, and UvrC, which function via a
series of large and dynamic multi-protein complexes. By applying biochemical,
biophysical, and structural approaches, experiments will test structure-based
models for three mechanisms: 1) identification of damaged DNA from a background
of native DNA, 2) nucleotide binding and hydrolysis, and 3) the molecular
choreography of UvrA and UvrB on lesion-containing DNA. The results are expected
to provide new insights into how nucleotide excision repair occurs in the
context of genome surveillance and repair. Moreover, this knowledge will
influence our views of other cellular activities, including DNA replication,
gene expression, evolutionary processes and the cellular processes of apoptosis,
senescence, and tumorigenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by
the Genetic Mechanisms and the Molecular Biophysics programs in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Directorate for Biological
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.