* 2114573
* NNA Track 2: Developing coordinated monitoring networks across Alaska and Northwest Canada to evaluate and address rapidly changing environments
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Leanna Heffner, ALASKA CONSERVATION FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 10/31/2023
* USD 220,099.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, and integrates the co-production of knowledge. This award fulfills
part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Arctic where, environmental
conditions are rapidly changing, the need to monitor these changes is critical
to inform natural resource management and land management, protect built
infrastructure, reduce risk to human lives, and enhance community resilience for
Arctic communities. Currently in Alaska and northern Canada there exist numerous
environmental monitoring programs that are led and implemented by a diverse
array of indigenous communities, government agencies, and research institutions,
often with little coordination or connection to one another. Led by a diverse
team representing dozens of entities, this project fosters the development of
coordinated monitoring networks by linking existing programs across Alaska and
northern Canada. This project aims to achieve the following objectives: 1) to
better understand important phenomena and dynamics (e.g. long-distance wildlife
migration patterns, shifting climate patterns, species and habitat shifts) that
can only be observed by collecting information across large landscapes; 2) to
provide individual programs with the opportunity to address shared needs, while
reducing duplication of effort and leveraging limited capacity and resources;
and 3) to support and strengthen community-based monitoring programs, which are
led and/or implemented by indigenous communities. Over a period of 2 years, the
team regularly engages participants from multiple stakeholder groups involved in
environmental monitoring, including indigenous peoples, scientists, engineers,
and resource managers. Together the group co-develops coordinated monitoring
networks that will bring together data collected across Alaska and northern
Canada and apply this information toward tacking critical challenges linked to
food security, infrastructure vulnerability, human safety, land and resource
management, and indigenous cultural practices sustained by the land and
resources. Working groups co-create and implement strategies to tackle commonly-
shared challenges to leverage resources, build capacity and expertise, reduce
duplication, and facilitate synergy among programs. Drawing from best practices
and strategies developed through this project, an education curriculum
containing tools, resources, and training also is developed to strengthen
community-based monitoring programs, including the ability for indigenous
communities and scientific researchers to successfully collaborate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building off previous workshops, this diverse group of
stakeholders collaborates during two face-to-face work sessions and forms long-
term working groups to tackle specific topics remotely. The project is executed
through an iterative process by which participating stakeholders guide the
desired outcomes, priorities and topics to address, as well as the focus,
design, and guidelines for establishing coordinated monitoring networks. The
initial scope for monitoring networks includes themes of socioeconomics (hunting
and fishing access, competition, technology), environmental hazards (erosion,
flooding, ice conditions, wildland fire), and biological factors about dramatic
changes affecting important subsistence resources (species abundance, disease,
contaminants). These topics are expanding and will be finalized by participating
stakeholders. The overall structure over a 2-year period centers around two in-
person convenings (staged one year apart), two trainings, the formation of long-
term working groups, and the development of a curriculum and written products.
Project leaders and participants also co-organize sessions at major
environmental conferences in the region - Alaska Tribal Conference on
Environmental Management and the Alaska Forum on the Environment - to reach out
to a broader audience regarding project activities and to receive feedback and
engage in dialogue with community leaders, scientists, and
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.