* 2114775
* Circadian Regulation of Olfactory Modulation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Andrew Dacks, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Serotonin is a signaling model that is nearly ubiquitous both throughout the
entire body and the animal kingdom. Within the brain, serotonergic neurons
influence a wide array of neural processes and there is a rich history of
exploration of the underlying consequences of serotonin at the molecular,
cellular, and network levels. However, there remain many open questions about
the contexts in which serotonin affects different features of healthy brain
function, especially in sensory processing. This is in part due to the diversity
of serotonergic neurons that differ in their intrinsic properties, the networks
they influence and the mechanisms that regulate their activity. This project
leverages the genetic accessibility and small number of neurons that can be
reliably studied across individuals to explore the molecular and cellular
regulatory mechanisms that underlie the interplay between serotonergic neurons
and the daily rhythm of Drosophila melanogaster. This work will combine
neuroanatomy, molecular biology and physiology to explore the behavioral
consequences of interactions between the serotonergic system and neurons
regulating daily activity rhythms. We will also use publicly available electron
microscopy volumes of the brain of Drosophila to generate learning modules and
instructor manuals to be implemented in biology classrooms to provide students
with guided immersive experiences within large
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Serotonergic neurons project broadly throughout
the nervous system, making them well positioned to influence many aspects of
normal brain function. However, the cellular diversity of serotonergic neurons
presents a challenge for understanding the context in which they will influence
neural functions, including sensory processing. Using Drosophila melanogaster
which has a small number of genetically accessible, identified serotonergic
neurons, we will explore the molecular and cellular mechanisms that regulate the
activity of two identified serotonergic neurons that project to multiple
processing stages within the olfactory system. These two serotonergic neurons
have been implied to be regulated by the circadian system in other species, but
no circuit mechanisms for this are currently known. We will use molecular
biology, neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and behavioral assays to determine how
the clock network of the brain may influence these neurons, the consequence of
these circuit interactions for the behavior and the consequences of regulation
of serotonergic neurons for their downstream partners within the olfactory
system. We will also use the Female Adult Fly Brain dataset to generate learning
modules and instructor manuals that can be implemented in high school and
undergraduate biology classrooms. These learning modules will expose students to
different fields of cellular and molecular neuroscience by allowing users to be
immersed in a large publicly available dataset with guided instruction as well
as an open exploration component.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.