* 2114269
* AF: Small: Online Decision-Making under Uncertainty: Prophets and Secretaries
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Mohammad Hajiaghayi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

We often assume worst-case analysis in theoretical studies of algorithms. This
often means we have complete uncertainty about an instance before it is handed
to an algorithm, which is too pessimistic. In practice, however, often this
assumption is not quite right and instances of optimization problems arising
from different application domains often have significant structure. In this
project we exploit statistical data and distribution information on inputs of
online decision-making algorithms to relax the pessimistic view. Such online
decision-making algorithms had considerable momentum lately due to profound
applications in the electricity market, advertisement auctions, dynamic
mechanism designs, (reinforcement) learning, investment procedures, stock
market, and even federal agency inspection programs. Our algorithms will build
on and develop new general frameworks for solving algorithmic problems in the
above real-life scenarios. The project will involve Ph.D. students and postdocs,
undergraduate students, and even high-school students (especially students among
minorities, women, LGBT, and persons with disabilities), many of whom will
continue their research at other academic institutions and research centers,
further broadening the impact of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The classic
online setting requires us to make decisions over time as the input is slowly
revealed, without (complete) knowledge of the future. In this project we study
stochastic uncertainty about input demands which are considered very realistic
and has been widely studied in the past. Online settings of interest in this
project are the ``prophet'' setting, the ``secretary'' setting, the ``prophet
secretary'' setting, as well as the ``i.i.d.'' setting that for each of them,
the investigator has already had pioneering work and deep contributions. In the
prophet setting, demands are coming from possibly different distributions known
in advance while in the secretary setting, demands are coming in a random order.
In the prophet secretary setting, demands are coming from different
distributions (at different times) which are randomly permuted but known in
advance. Finally, in the i.i.d. setting, a special case of all previous
settings, demands are coming from the same distribution all the time. In these
settings, we consider fundamental problems as well as applications in mechanism
design, network design, and motion planning. The goal of this project is to
combine tools, from areas such as stopping theory, online algorithms, machine
learning, mechanism design, and operations research to resolve important
research challenges in the field via novel techniques and to forge deeper
connections among these areas. We will have special considerations for practical
applications and simplicity of our algorithms and underlying principles to real-
world settings. We will also incorporate our discoveries into existing and new
courses about approximation algorithms, foundations of machine learning, and
algorithmic game theory, and discuss further incorporation with statisticians
and economists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.