* 2114649
* Analysis, Simulation, and Applications of Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 01/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Gang George Yin, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 01/31/2023
* USD 209,688.00

Stochastic systems are systems in which random disturbances play a significant
role. Stemming from emerging and existing applications in networked systems,
wireless communications, signal processing, economics, and ecology, this project
encompasses the study of dynamically evolving stochastic systems with
uncertainties, switching among different configurations, and complex structures.
The networked systems of interest include financial, communication, social,
biological, and ecological networks. The work will be devoted to learning the
intrinsic properties of stochastic network systems, developing mathematical
models and novel mathematical methods for analyzing such systems, and designing
efficient computational schemes for optimization and control of such systems to
meet desired goals. The results of the research will be useful for applications
to economics, nonlinear system identification and estimation, un-manned vehicles
and other multi-agent systems, biodiversity in ecological systems, and social
networks. This projects will involve undergraduate and graduate students and
will integrate the research with teaching and student training. This work will
contribute jointly to the further development of mathematical theory,
computational methods and applications, and the improvement of mathematics
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by a wide variety of applications,
this project will study the following research topics. (1)Stochastic models with
random switching will be developed and analyzed. Novel features of the systems
include (i) past-dependent switching having a countable state space, and (ii)
switching jump diffusions with non-local operators, finite switching set, and
sigma finite jump measures. Criteria for recurrence, positive recurrence, and
ergodicity will be obtained. (2) Kolmogorov-type systems under white noise
perturbations, where the diffusions are degenerate, will be investigated.
Applications to control dependent environmental protection zones, infectious
disease and ecology will be studied. (3) New algorithms for switching diffusions
and stochastic approximation will be developed and their rates of convergence
will be studied. (i) For Milstein-type algorithms for solutions of switching
diffusions, it will be shown that the algorithms preserve order 1 convergence
rates as their diffusion counterpart. (ii) Motivated by applications to multi-
agent systems, consensus, and swarming, the novelties of the stochastic
approximation algorithms include the inclusion of state-dependent switching,
state-dependent observation noise, and general time-dependent nonlinear
functions. (4) Precise error estimates for identification of Hammerstein
nonlinear systems with quantized observations will be obtained. It will be
proved that the estimates escape from a small neighborhood of the true parameter
with a probability that is exponentially small. (5) Accurate error bounds for
approximation schemes of duplication-deletion random networks in the sense of
strong approximation will be obtained. This will have impact on the study of
random dynamic graphs and applications to social networks. Extensive numerical
experiments and simulations will be performed to complement the analysis and
algorithm design. The projects will involve the participation of undergraduate
and graduate students.