* 2114382
* Opening and reestablishment of Kilauea's lower east rift zone magma plumbing system during the 2018 eruption
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Helge Gonnermann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2024
* USD 333,279.00

The project is focused on computer modeling of magma flow in the subsurface
beneath Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. During Kilauea's 4-months long 2018 eruption
magma flowed beneath the ground surface over a distance of approximately 15
miles from Kilauea's summit before erupting onto the surface. Once erupted, the
magma formed lava flows that covered approximately 875 acres of land, destroyed
approximately 700 houses, and resulted in close to 1 billion dollars of damage.
Volcanoes typically encompass areas of thousands of square miles, but the actual
location where magma breaches the surface is difficult to predict and contingent
upon the flow of magma at thousands of feet beneath the surface. Subsurface
magma migration can be detected by satellite and geophysical observations, but
potential forecasting of volcanic activity and assessment of eruption hazards
are contingent upon predictive computer modeling of subsurface magma flow and
deformation of the surrounding rock, in particular the magma's ability to break
rock in order to advance toward the surface. This project will leverage the
exceptionally diverse and extensive set of observational data from the 2018
eruption of Kilauea in a case study with the goal of advancing the state of the
art in computer modeling and forecasting prior to and during an eruption. The
project will benefit national health, prosperity and welfare by advancing
societal resilience against natural disasters. A substantial component of the
project involves the education of high-school teachers within the Houston
Independent School District, the largest school district in Texas and serving a
highly diverse urban student population with approximately 80% economically
disadvantaged students. Beyond it importance in scientific and industrial
research, computational modeling has become a valuable skill as part of the
modern manufacturing process and the goal is to promote the teaching of
computational modeling at the high-school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed project is to advance understanding about the
interaction between magmatic and tectonic components of volcanic systems. It is
focused on physics-­based modeling of magma transport during the 2018 eruption
of Kilauea volcano, Hawaii. It has been suggested that abrupt seaward movement
of Kilauea’s south flank, as during the 2018 M6.9 earthquake, can be facilitated
by intrusive magma migration. Buildup of magma pressure at Kilauea was detected
for several years prior to the 2018 eruption, eventually causing magma to
intrude for 15 miles down Kilauea’s east rift zone before erupting. A key
objective of the project is to quantify the spatiotemporal evolution of magma
pressure within Kilauea’s east rift zone in order to provide constraints on
stress conditions that may have led to the abrupt displacement of Kilauea’s
south flank during the M6.9 earthquake. The proposed approach includes numerical
simulation of magma transport prior to and during the 2018 eruption, integrated
with elastic deformation modeling of the magmatic-­tectonic system, using a wide
range of observations (GPS, InSAR, tilt, gravity, earthquakes, eruption rate,
magma chemistry) as constraints. Advancement of forecasting capabilities in
volcanic systems is contingent upon physics­-based models to reliably predict
observational data. The intellectual merit of the proposed project lies in the
advancement of physics-based computer modeling through leveraging one of the
best­-monitored volcanic eruptions of all time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.