* 2114712
* I-Corps: Enhancing Autonomous Capabilities of Unmanned Aerial and Underwater Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Animesh Chakravarthy, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of enhanced autonomous capabilities for unmanned vehicles in aerial
and underwater domains. The use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for multiple
applications including search and rescue, maintenance inspections,
entertainment, precision agriculture, communication networks, law enforcement,
etc. is increasing at a rapid pace and is now a multi-billion dollar industry.
Similarly, the use of unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs) for applications such
as mine-sweeping, maritime inspections, and marine life monitoring is also
increasing. The proposed technology may provide greater autonomous capabilities
to UAVs and UUVs. When used in UAVs, successful deployment of the proposed
innovations may strengthen the use of these vehicles to aid firefighters in
search and rescue operations, which can save lives. The proposed innovations
will also enable a team of defense UAVs to protect airspace sectors from
infiltration by hostile and unauthorized drones, thereby benefitting homeland
security. When used in UUVs, these innovations may enhance the use of such
vehicles to aid inspections of floating underwater infrastructure such as wind
turbines and oil platforms, and have a positive economic as well as
environmental impact.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of guidance and control algorithms in conjunction with Artificial
Intelligence methods to impart increased autonomous capabilities to unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) and unmanned underwater vehicles (UUVs). Two algorithmic
innovations, referred to as Innovation A and Innovation B, have been developed.
Algorithmic Innovation A is designed to enable UAVs and UUVs to perform
autonomous maneuvers that facilitate their passage through narrow orifices that
can be stationary or moving. There are multiple scenarios in air and underwater
domains where small orifices may occur. The small size of these orifices
requires the maneuverability of the vehicle through the orifice with a high
level of precision. Algorithmic Innovation B is designed to enable a team of
defense UAVs to intercept and potentially disable drones that have intruded into
protected airspace. These algorithmic innovations are developed in a general
framework that makes them applicable to a broad range of aerial vehicles,
including fixed wing, quadcopter, and flapping wing configurations. The plan is
to determine the required user interfaces to benefit the end-users of these
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.