* 2114595
* Atomic Scale to Micro Scale Understanding of Low Temperature Degradation Mechanism in Zirconia-Based Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Olga Wodo, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 516,594.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Zirconia-based ceramics such as yttria-stabilized
tetragonal zirconia possess a unique combination of advantageous mechanical,
electrical, and chemical properties as well as biocompatibility, which has
allowed for a wide variety of applications (orthopedics and dental implants,
thermal barrier coatings for turbine engines, oxygen sensors, and solid oxide
fuel cell electrolytes). However, a key issue remains in these material systems,
namely the occurrence of phase transformation when a stimulus (e.g., low
temperature) is applied that degrades the mechanical properties and stability of
this material system. Although zirconia-based ceramics are one of the most
studied ceramic systems, there is a lack of understanding in terms of the
mechanism causing this low temperature degradation. This project aims to close
this gap by using integrated multiscale microscopy techniques and material
informatics to establish a quantitative understanding of the phase
transformation. The proposed methodology, acquired learning, and data analysis
methods create a pathway for the optimization of materials and their
performance. This is critical for many fields such as energy, structural, and
biomedical applications . For example, preventing early-onset of low temperature
degradation in zirconia-based ceramics widely used in the fabrication of dental
crowns and fixed dental prostheses will extend the longevity of ceramic dental
implants. The educational and workforce development activities impact graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 students, and the community to enhance the global
competitiveness of the national engineers and scientists. New knowledge is
disseminated in an education toolkit designed to explain the principles of
atomic scale microscopy. Tutorials at the Materials Research Society and
Microscopy and Microanalysis meetings stand to impact students at various
levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The research project seeks to
gain fundamental understandings of the mechanism of aging-induced low
temperature degradation in zirconia-based ceramics. The novel approach of
employing advanced microscopy techniques coupled with microstructure informatics
provides insights into the local chemistry, grain boundary evolution and oxygen
vacancy generation with varying dopant concentration and processing conditions
stands to increase the understanding of ceramic systems beyond conventional
characterization methods and provide advanced correlation between structural and
material performance. The proposed methodology, acquired learning, and data
analysis methods generate a pathway for the optimization of materials and their
performance. Graduate and undergraduate students are mentored and trained in
this critically important area of ceramic science and technology. Minority K-12
students from South Park High School are inspired and trained through summer
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.