* 2114321
* EAGER: Integrated Team Science Curriculum Development &amp; Support for the Convergence Accelerator Program
* TIP,ITE
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Michael O'Rourke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,854.00

This project will support the development and delivery of a novel team science
curriculum for the Convergence Accelerator program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Convergence Accelerator is a new effort at NSF to accelerate use-inspired
convergence research in areas of national importance. The most vexing challenges
require collaborative melding of expertise from different disciplines and
partnership among different kinds of organizations – convergence! Essential to
the Convergence Accelerator’s approach is a tailored curriculum provided to
grantee teams. A crucial part of that curriculum is “Team Science.” The goal of
the team science elements of the curriculum is to facilitate convergence team
development and effectiveness. The funded teams are all highly interdisciplinary
and incorporate expertise from different types of organizations, but in order to
be effective in their projects – and truly convergent – grantee teams need to
communicate and collaborate effectively and rapidly. Because Phase I Convergence
Accelerator awards are only 9 months in duration, it is particularly important
that teams build their communication and collaboration skills rapidly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project expands upon previous successful NSF-
supported work by the Toolbox Dialogue Initiative (TDI) that has resulted in
TDI’s professional development tools that have been used at more than 350
workshops around the world since 2005 to help researchers enhance their capacity
for collaboration within cross-disciplinary teams. It also builds upon an
effective train-the-trainer workshop provided to the first cohort of Convergence
Accelerator grantees. The project will extend the Toolbox Dialogue effort to
create an even more comprehensive Team Science communication and collaboration
curriculum. The project will facilitate development of a training effort that
integrates “social-relational” as well as “cognitive-epistemic” dimensions of
collaboration. The project will do this by coordinating team science curricular
offerings with two other experts. The project will result in new knowledge about
and methods for facilitating productive collaborative environments that is
likely to foster project innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts
of this project include increasing the effectiveness of Convergence Accelerator
grantee teams. By helping the teams that participate in the curriculum to
rapidly identify and resolve differences, those teams will be more able to
develop translational research products that positively impact the American
people. The project will also develop online resources such as videos and
webinars which can then be adapted to share with teams beyond the Convergence
Accelerator program. Further outcomes are expected to include generalizable
knowledge that will inform effective professional development in team science
and convergence research broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.