* 2114869
* Collaborative Research: Role of soil microbiome resilience in ecosystem recovery following severe wildfire
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Corey Hutchins, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 61,969.00

Wildfire is a natural feature of healthy forest ecosystems. There is concern
because the frequency and intensity of these events are increasing as our
climate warms. Among their many impacts, wildfire disturbances impact the
microorganisms present in forest soils that catalyze a series of key ecosystem
processes, ranging from the establishment of tree seedlings to the cycling of
carbon and nitrogen. Research to date has revealed that the composition of soil
microbiomes is altered by wildfire, but critical information is lacking on how
increasingly severe wildfires in western US forests will affect the recovery of
soil microbial communities, with cascading impacts on forest ecosystems. This
research uses a unique series of burn pile scars in a lodgepole pine forest in
northern Colorado as a proxy for the decadal recovery of the soil environment
following severe wildfire. The work will use diverse microbiological and
geochemical analyses to determine how soil chemistry and microbiomes change up
to 50-years following fire. Insights gained here will assist with forest
management following severe wildfire in the western US and will be incorporated
into new educational opportunities at the participating research institutions.
The project will enrich a variety of courses taught by the researchers, include
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and provide
cooperative extension to forest managers as well as public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an increasing appreciation that
changing wildfire regimes may drive long-term alterations in both above- and
below-ground ecosystem structure. This research will investigate the resilience
of soil microbiomes (i.e., their ability to return to pre-fire levels) following
severe wildfire in lodgepole pine forests, (2) the functional implications of
shifts in microbiome structure, and (3) the ability of altered soil microbiomes
to support tree regeneration via rhizosphere interactions. Together, this
research will test the hypothesis that altered soil chemical and physical
properties drive the soil microbiome to an alternate steady state following
severe wildfire, with implications for the establishment of new pine seedlings
and subsequent ecosystem recovery. To test this, the work leverages a unique
experimental opportunity consisting of burn pile scars throughout a forest
ecosystem, thus ensuring that the chrono-sequence controls for fuel type and
load, elevation, climate, and aspect. Furthermore, the approach integrates
diverse analytical tools including metagenomic interrogations of soil
microbiomes, mass-spectrometry characterization of soil chemistry, and
vegetation manipulation greenhouse experiments. Together, our results will
represent the first insights into the extent of resilience of burned soil
microbiomes across a 50-year post-fire recovery period, and the ability of
lodgepole pine seedlings to recruit beneficial rhizosphere communities that aid
in tree re-establishment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.