* 2114682
* AccelNet Implementation: International Network For Researching, Advancing and Assessing Materials for Environmental Sustainability (INFRAMES)
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Sherine Obare, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2026
* USD 1,762,679.00

The history of civilization is often described by the materials used: the Stone
Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, the Age of Plastics, and the Silicon Age.
Materials shape our architecture and art, transportation, clothing, the way we
harness energy, produce and store food, and, most recently, technologies from
electronics to medicine. Assessing the sustainability of the materials our
society produces is a global challenge. This AccelNet Implementation-Track
project assembles substantial investments in the area of environmental
nanotechnology into a coordinated international community of researchers
dedicated to the challenge. INFRAMES includes researchers from eighteen U.S.
universities associated with the Center for the Environmental Implications of
NanoTechnology and the Center for Sustainable Nanotechnology along with eight
on-going European networks (SAbyNa, Gracious, NanoCommons, RiskGONE,
NanoInformaTIX, SERENADE, ACENano, and Nanosafety Cluster), and the Kwame
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology in Ghana, and researchers at six
synchrotron X-ray facilities in four countries. INFRAMES provides facilitated
access to experimental facilities, expansion of accessible data sets, and the
evolution of a common basis for evaluating potential impacts of materials on the
environment and human health. INFRAMES activities will vastly expand the network
and career paths for students, postdoctoral researchers, and early-career
researchers by immersion in a diverse culture and innovative system of
international convergence science, with international lab rotations, webinars
and annual workshop experiences in development of protocols and interoperable
informatics platforms and collaborative studies. These initiatives will ensure
continued U.S. engagement and cutting-edge workforce training across the
international scientific community in environmental materials
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INFRAMES will draw on boundary-spanning methods
from the science of team science to build and strengthen collaborations across
broad range of expertise, co-creating convergent approaches to perform
assessments on materials-related challenges or applications. The five focus
areas are: 1) particle-based delivery systems for nutrients and pesticides in
agricultural applications; 2) materials used in transportation; 3) advanced
materials for resource recovery and water treatment; 4) engineered and
incidental bio-particles; and 5) consequences of micro/nano plastics. In
addition to the social infrastructures and communication pathways generated by
the network itself, a suite of shared resources will facilitate coordination,
including spectroscopy and imaging facilities, mesocosm and ecotoxicity
facilities for the investigation of particulate materials in complex systems,
informatics platforms for novel materials, and modeling platforms for predicting
the fate, behavior, and impacts from particulate materials in the environment.
INFRAMES will nurture fundamental advances in understanding of surface
interactions, nano-bio behavior, and particle transformations and will
accelerate U.S. research activities in the area of assessing the sustainability
of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.