* 2114223
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Material Transfer Mechanisms in Corona-Enabled Contactless Electrostatic Printing of Binder-free Nano-/micro-Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Long Wang, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2024
* USD 164,298.00

Printed electronics have a potential to transform the public health, the
national security, and society as a whole. Manufacturing innovations are
essential to enable cost-effective and scalable production, enhance the
performance of printed electronics, and realize their broad applications.
Current printing techniques, however, still face long-lasting challenges in
addressing the tradeoff between the printing speed versus the print resolution
and performance. This award supports fundamental research to advance a novel
corona-enabled contactless electrostatic printing (CEP) technique that utilizes
the ultra-fast electrostatic attraction phenomenon to achieve the material
transfer and manufacturing of binder-free nano-/micro-structures at a large
scale. The contactless force control and binder-free nature lead to reduced
manufacturing times and temperatures, with broader material options, and an
ability to manipulate and assemble nano-/micro-structures, and improved device
performance. The roll-to-roll compatibility of the CEP process may also
facilitate a pathway for transition from fundamental research to commercial
marketplaces, potentially beneficial to large-area and high-performance
electronics and versatile applications of flexible functional systems. Through a
close collaboration between an R1 university and a minority-serving institution,
with additionally an industrial partner, this project also provides hands-on
research opportunities and industrial experiences to minority undergraduate
students and hosts “Future Electronics” community engagement workshops to local
high schools, intended to inspire more students and engineers to participate in,
benefit from, and contribute to the blooming U.S. electronics
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance the CEP process, the project will
focus on three basic research thrusts by a combination of numerical and
experimental approaches. First, through mapping the distribution of charges and
computing the distribution of the electric field, the formation and dynamic
evolution mechanisms of the electric field will be revealed, which is essential
to achieve precision controls. Then, the material transfer mechanism during the
CEP process will be studied by investigating the impacts of the material
conductivity, geometry and density. The project will also explore methodologies
to manufacture aligned nano-/micro-structures by combining an electric field
with a mechanical field. Further, the responsive mechanisms of the printed
structures to external stimuli will be studied by monitoring the microstructure
evolution and electrical performance simultaneously, together with the effects
on the performance of the binder-free CEP electronics. Overall, the fundamental
understanding of the CEP process is expected to substantially enhance the
capability to precisely control an electric field to realize ultra-fast material
manipulations, nano-/micro-structure constructions, and high-end electronics
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.