* 2114057
* Small Aerial Bathymetric/Topographic LiDAR System for Tropical Marine and Terrestrial Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Patrick Colin, Coral Reef Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 300,996.00

A hexacopter drone with a scanning LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging)
instrument is being used by the Coral Reef Research Foundation
(https://coralreefpalau.org) to survey and map marine and terrestrial habitats
in the Republic of Palau (Micronesia). The system measures heights of
terrestrial vegetation, island ground level (land) and water depth along its
flight path. The timing of laser pulse return times, while the drone flies an
overlapping survey pattern, enable complete maps of land elevation (digital
elevation models) and water depth (bathymetric maps) to be prepared. These are
important for studies on coral reefs and other shallow marine habitats,
terrestrial forests, grasslands and mangroves. They form the quantitative basis
of estimating shoreline inundation from storms or rising sea levels, stability
of islands, risks of tsunamis in given areas, coastal planning, forest
sustainability and understanding human environmental impact in Palau. Survey
results will be shared with government agencies and the public. Previously there
has been no local LiDAR drone capability in Palau, although many local agencies,
organizations and individuals have needed data and surveys. The system/data will
also be an excellent teaching tool to supplement ongoing programs in local STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The high-resolution data, otherwise
unobtainable, are impactful across a wide variety of field disciplines related
to tropical marine/island environments, including bathymetric/topographic and
habitat mapping, quantitative imaging for coral reefs, stability of islands,
marine megafauna habitats, terrestrial ecosystems and human-influenced habitats.
These are relevant to many aspects of conservation, protected area management,
coastal oceanography, and dynamic elements of climate change/variation. The data
sets are used to prepare mapping to provide a quantitative basis for inundation
modeling, tsunami risk prediction, protected area surveys for National and State
governments, coastal planning, forest sustainability and understanding the
environmental impact of human history in Palau. The system is being incorporated
into existing educational programs (bathymetric mapping, robotics, "Back to
Nature" scientific field trips) to have a positive influence on local students.
There previously was no research/commercial drone/aircraft based LiDAR
capability in Palau, hence the requested equipment represents a singular
capability for Palau with many local users (agencies and organizations) needing
data and surveys&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.