* 2114102
* Infrastructure Systems Planning of Integrated Preparedness Logistics Networks for Large-Scale Foreseen Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Halit Uster, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 315,580.00

Effective response to foreseen natural disasters requires careful infrastructure
development decisions made in strategic sense and coordination of
planning/management efforts in the tactical sense for evacuation and relief
supply activities. The complexity of such coordination became obvious in the
recent events of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma in 2017 as well as earlier ones,
such as Katrina and Rita in 2005, which created significant awareness in the
shortcomings in existing response plans. This research is motivated by the
recognition of the stakeholders involved and their individual objectives in the
course of decision-making for preparedness planning activities upon an imminent
hurricane. As commonly witnessed in real situations, conflicting motivations of
stakeholders can lead to decisions driven by individual objectives rather than
what is best under a system view, and, thus, lead to unintended consequences.
One main reason for this occurrence is the current paradigm of emergency
logistics that has largely overlooked the important interdependence between
evacuation (demand) and relief (supply) sides. This grant will investigate such
integration from the perspective of both cost- and operation-effectiveness in
emergency preparedness planning. If successful, the outcome of this grant will
facilitate future development of sophisticated and easy-to-use decision support
tools for emergency logistics planners. It will help to bring services to a
wider group of citizens by making it possible to move out of harmâ€™s way
efficiently in case of an impending disaster. Undergraduate and graduate
students from diverse backgrounds and underrepresented groups will be engaged
and trained with state-of-the-art tools and means to conduct socially impactful
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While significant advances have been made in
past decades, comprehensive efforts to understand and leverage the linkage
between demand and supply sides within an integrated framework do not exist.
Especially in the presence of uncertainty that carries from hurricane
characteristics to supply planning through evacuation decision-making and
evacuee behavior presents a major challenge in optimization when employing an
integrated systems framework. This grant addresses this critical gap in theory
and practice. This work will be the first to systematically explore the
integration of demand and supply sides in infrastructure design and operations
planning for emergency preparedness/response logistics. The overall system will
be considered in two layers of decisions within an optimization framework:
strategic infrastructure related and tactical/operational decisions by
explicitly modeling uncertainties based on potential disaster events and evacuee
behavior. Thus, collectively, the components of the research fully capture the
stakeholder activities, and rather than planning for their actions
independently, as is commonly done in existing literature, this research aims to
improve efficiency and cost-effectiveness at the system level. The methodology
brings together new perspectives and purpose to investigate new and challenging
optimization models under uncertainty and solution algorithms for their optimal
solutions and it will also establish a framework to examine the benefits of
integration over the existing approaches by addressing optimization of current
decision-making in a comparable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.