* 2114701
* AccelNet-Implementation: PEER2PEER International Convergence Research Networks in Transboundary Water Security
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* David Feldman, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Transboundary river basins cover about 72% of the U.S. landmass and more than
47% of the Earth’s land area, providing homes to 3 billion people in 150
countries. Shared by two or more countries, transboundary river basins are often
hotspots for both water conflicts and efforts at cooperation. PEER2PEER, an
implementation-track project, will advance transboundary water security
research, education, and outreach by catalyzing novel international and
interdisciplinary cooperation. This network of networks brings together networks
managed by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine and
partner organizations in the United States, Middle East, North Africa, and
Central Asia. PEER2PEER leverages mature regional networks focusing on different
aspects of transboundary water management, including the Partnership for
Enhanced Engagement in Research (PEER) program, the Arab-American Frontiers of
Science, Engineering and Medicine Program, and partnering international
networks. PEER2PEER participants will synergize research initiatives, share data
and tools, and foster collaboration in transboundary water security scholarship
and capacity building. The project will create an innovative ecosystem designed
specifically for translating engineering, physical science, and social science
research into plans and policies for local, state, and national government
agencies. PEER2PEER will develop rigorous training programs of the next
generation of water scientists for addressing interdisciplinary challenges
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PEER2PEER will collectively address critical
gaps in transboundary water security research and education. One gap is the lack
of scientific evidence on drought trends and variability, along with the
corresponding disparate impacts on regional water security in different
transboundary river basins. There is also limited understanding of how: (a)
water security is affected by transnational propagation of the impact of extreme
drought events through tele-connected food trade networks; and (b) socio-
cultural context, levels of economic development, environmental concerns, and
technical and political collaboration affect science diplomacy to support
transboundary water security. This project will address the lack of knowledge
exchange and data/tool sharing vehicle to leverage multiple data streams,
including remotely sensed observations and ground-based data for transboundary
drought monitoring, and the limited capacity and educational materials to
prepare future researchers in interdisciplinary, holistic, convergent approaches
in transboundary water security. PEER2PEER will feature workshops, technical
trainings, faculty and student exchanges, field visits, outreach and
dissemination. It will develop an online platform for network members to
facilitate sustained engagement and research collaboration. Research data will
be shared with network members through a partnership with the NSF-funded
Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sciences, Inc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International Network-
to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate the
process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.