* 2114529
* Collaborative Research: A Workshop on Pre-emergence and the Predictions of Rare Events in Multiscale, Complex, Dynamical Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Lydia Bourouiba, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 01/31/2022
* USD 9,999.00

Although pandemics have threatened human civilization since ancient times, how
to predict and prevent them remains one of the most pressing challenges, calling
out for innovative insights and practices. Pandemics emerge through incidental
‘perfect storms’: molecular changes in pathogens, gradual trends in climate,
subtle shifts in ecological interactions among potential hosts, and even
individual behavioral decisions by people, all colluding to make up the
difference between an interesting but rare new variant of a known disease and an
existential worldwide crisis. Being able to predict the emergence of pandemic
threats, therefore, requires a fully integrated, multidisciplinary approach,
able to consider the complexity of these realms across scales of interaction to
predict and, ideally, prevent. This workshop will include experts from otherwise
disparate scholarly communities in biology, mathematics, engineering, computer
science, ecology and social science to come together and discuss how to
integrate the approaches taken by each community into a more effective, unified
science of pandemic prediction. Discussions will leverage recently developed
advances in disease ecology, computational biology and biophysics, information
and network science, sensing, and statistics to analyze pertinent data, enabling
inference of difficult-to-measure information and the integration of real-time
observation, computation, and experimentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop aims at formulating a new science base on pandemic preparedness,
identifying scientific gaps that need to be addressed, and discussing how to
design solutions to fill those gaps in ways that anticipate multidisciplinary
use. Participants will consider how to construct integrative and
multidisciplinary frameworks to enable better insights into the fundamental
processes of pandemic emergence and translate those insights into practical
tools for preventing and/or mitigating pandemic threats. It is anticipated that
the workshop will result into concrete recommendations for how the critical and
diverse relevant fields can move forward together to increase global safety,
guarding against future pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.