* 2114425
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Generation versus Degradation: Striking the optimal balance for wind farm profitability via digitization, predictive and prescriptive analytics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Feng Qiu, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2024
* USD 224,999.00

The rapid increase in scale and sophistication of wind farms poses a critical
challenge relating to the cost-effective management of wind energy assets. A
defining characteristic of this challenge is the economic trade-off between two
concomitant processes: electricity generation (the primary driver of short-term
revenues) and asset degradation (the major determinant of long-term expenses).
This NSF project aims to formulate a decision-theoretic approach to jointly
optimize generation and maintenance in wind farms. The project will bring
transformative change into the status-quo of asset management in the wind
industry which, to-date, relies on single-faceted strategies that largely
overlook the dependencies between the generation and degradation in wind turbine
assets. The intellectual merits of the project include the formulation of novel
data and decision science models, blended within a digitization platform, to
predict and co-optimize operations and maintenance requirements. The broader
impacts of the project include disseminating research findings via coursework,
publications, data/software, and industry-academia workshops. A set of use case
demonstrations, co-developed with industrial partners, will accelerate the
translation of scientific knowledge into tangible industrial impact, in a step
towards meeting the 35%-by-2050 U.S. wind energy target. Summer internships and
undergraduate researchers, especially from underrepresented groups, will
contribute towards educating the next-generation workforce in data, decision,
and energy sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Without formally considering the
intrinsic dependencies between electricity generation and asset degradation,
wind farm operators reap sub-optimal benefits from their operations and
maintenance policies. This project aims to formulate a decision-theoretic
framework which seeks an optimal balance of how wind loads are leveraged to
harness short-term generation revenues, versus alleviated to hedge against
longer-term maintenance expenses. The framework comprises decision-aware
predictive models for power and asset health degradation forecasting, integrated
within mixed integer programs with decision-dependent uncertainty. New
reformulations and constraints will ensure an effective predictive-prescriptive
coupling, thereby enabling the optimization to search within the prediction
space for an optimal prediction-decision pair. An end-to-end digital twin of the
wind farm will bind the proposed predictive-prescriptive methodologies within an
integrative asset management solution. Engagement of industrial partners and a
national laboratory will ensure a sensible impact on asset management in the
wind industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.