* 2114119
* Collaborative Research: 3D Printing of Bioinspired Hierarchical Structures with Controllable Roughness for Stable and Long-term Air Retention
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xiangjia Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 207,287.00

Stable and long-term air retention is essential for numerous applications,
including energy-efficient low friction fluid transport and drag reduction for
ships, three-dimensional cell culture, oil pollution removal, de-icing, and
underwater robotics. The ‘Salvinia Molesta’ plant provides an innovative concept
to develop biomimetic surfaces with stable and long-term air retention. However,
current fabrication approaches make it challenging build hierarchical structures
consisting of microscale superhydrophobic hair with dual-scale roughness and
wrinkled hydrophilic patches to replicate the ‘Salvinia effect.’ This grant will
support fundamental research needed for the development of a multiscale additive
manufacturing (AM) process that can selectively control the roughness and
wettability of printed bioinspired hierarchical structures for stable and long-
term air retention. This project builds knowledge in several areas, including
advanced manufacturing, process planning, materials development, mechatronics,
control, fluid theory, modeling, and simulation. To enhance science and
engineering education, high school students, underrepresented minorities, and
females will be involved in the research and new curricula for students and mid-
career professionals will be planned at both collaborative universities.
Biomimetic design and manufacturing learning modules for K-12 outreach and
workshops will be developed by incorporating the research outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the limitations of current AM techniques, an
electrical-field-assisted multi-scale AM process will be established for
fabricating bioinspired hierarchical structures with controllable roughness and
wettability. The research will test the hypothesis that long-term stable air
retention can be modulated by changing the morphology, roughness, and elasticity
of bioinspired hierarchical structures. The approach utilizes the electric field
to control the distribution of carbon nanotube (CNT) bundles during the printing
process for selective roughness. This project aims to fill the knowledge gap on
controllable roughness during the 3D printing process. The project includes
tasks involving electric field design, multiscale printing process planning,
biomimetic morphology design, multi-physics modeling, air retention evaluation,
and application development. The research team will characterize the roughness,
elasticity, fluid contact angle, and the volume and stability of trapped air of
printed bioinspired hierarchical structures. The fundamental mechanisms for
long-term stable air retention will be determined as a function of dual-scale
roughness and the morphology of bioinspired structures. The research will
provide scientific and engineering knowledge for fabricating bioinspired
functional surface/interface structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.