* 2114482
* Force Sensing Surgical Forceps Using Novel Piezoelectric TFT Array for Robotic Surgery
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Shadi Dayeh, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2023
* USD 360,000.00

Minimally invasive robotic surgery offers many advantages over conventional
surgery because it can reduce risks including smaller incisions, faster
recovery, less trauma to the patient, and the potential to be conducted from a
distance. To exploit these advantages, surgical robots must be equipped with
tactile feedback in the surgical site, thereby equipping them with the sense of
touch. Tactile feedback is critically important for surgeons to characterize and
manipulate various types of healthy tissue with different mechanical properties,
manipulate tumors, and suture incisions with arbitrary geometries leading to
improved patient outcomes. To bring the capabilities of tactile sensation to
minimally invasive robotic surgery, multiple sensors should be placed at the
surgical forceps, such that the interaction between the tissue and the forceps
can be recorded and delivered to surgeons via haptic and/or visual interfaces.
However, deploying sensors at the surgical forceps is very challenging due to
their extremely limited space. In this project, we will directly integrate high-
resolution force sensor arrays with tips of the surgical forceps and demonstrate
their integration with the da Vinci surgical robot to provide high
spatiotemporal tactile sensation for haptic feedback to the operating surgeon.
The project provides training opportunities for undergraduate, high school, and
under-represented minority students in interdisciplinary research in materials
science, engineering, and medicine. It augments and improves the course
curriculum and fosters a robust translational exchange with clinical
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To integrate novel microforce sensor arrays with
surgical forceps to give surgeons the sense of touch, we will develop
piezoelectric zinc oxide (ZnO) thin film transistors (TFTs) on flexible
substrates that can simultaneously sense and amplify normal forces. By
integrating three-dimensional silicone pillars on top of groups of four ZnO
TFTs, we will be able to measure the amplitude and direction of shear forces
that are mechanically transduced from the silicone pillars to the ZnO TFTs that
produce an amplified electrical signal in response. The proposed technology can
scale sensors down to sub millimeter scales with thin and flexible form factor.
By mounting sensors on the jaws of the robotic surgical forceps, we will
demonstrate real-time monitoring of normal and shear force applied to the
forceps during their interaction with tissue. The monitored force information
will be linked with a feedback apparatus to a haptic glove. Visual feedback will
also be provided on the operator display to indicate the amplitude of the force
that the forceps exert on the tissue. The effectiveness of the proposed
technology will be evaluated by multiple surgeons to derive the advantages in a
statistical way. The advances proposed in this research are envisioned to
greatly benefit patient care and to further the understanding of the mechanical
aspects of the interaction between forceps with tissues, an important step
towards developing fully autonomous robotic surgery in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.