* 2114675
* Dynamic Interrogation using Bimodal Sensing and Statistical Game Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Chang-hee Won, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 321,481.00

Many of the current medical imaging devices on the market are static in the
sense that the source and detector positions are fixed. If the source and
detector positions change intelligently, superior performance medical imaging
devices could be created. Developing such a high-performance system demands
novel sensor and actuator coordination. We will design, build, and test a
Dynamic Interrogation System that will be able to differentiate between benign
and malignant tumors. The system will non-invasively characterize tumors by
dynamically adjusting the sensor geometry. Our system will capture the
elasticity and physiological changes of the lesions when pressure is applied
from the surface via robotic arms. A novel cooperative control theory will be
developed for the robot arm control. This proposal displays both scientific and
conceptual innovation as it works to develop a new sensing system that provides
the touch and color properties of a tumor through dynamically obtained images.
This will be especially useful in medical robotic systems because it would allow
for more accurate performance, deeper interrogation depth, and larger
interrogation areas. The Dynamic Interrogation System that identifies malignant
tumors in a non-invasive and harmless (no ionizing radiation) manner will have a
significant impact on the screening, diagnosis, and biopsy rate. One particular
application for this medical imaging device is in reducing breast tumor
overdiagnosis, which would lead to improved mortality rates and overall reduced
health care costs. Perhaps, the main benefit to society may be that the device
will accurately assess the risk of breast cancer for women in rural and remote
regions. We will train one graduate student and two undergraduate researchers in
this project and will also introduce a new Sensing Systems course for
engineering students. Our prototype system will be the focus of outreach
activities for high school students through Engineering Open Houses, and K-8
children through the Ayuda Community Center Summer Camp, which serves low-
income, African-American and Hispanic children in the north Philadelphia
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goals are to (1) develop a dynamic
interrogation system, (2) intelligently coordinate the sensor/actuator geometry
using Stackelberg Statistical Game Control, and (3) integrate the system and
test the dynamic interrogation system. Conventional X-ray source/detector
geometry is static, so it leads to two-dimensional information. Optimally
varying the source and detector geometry will lead to more accurate three-
dimensional information. The scope of this project is to develop a procedural
game control method to improve the performance by dynamically changing the
spatial geometry of the sensors. We will develop a Dynamic Interrogation system,
where the position and orientation of the light source and the position of the
detectors are optimally controlled to characterize embedded inclusions.
Viscoelastic and physiologic properties of tumors will be measured by Tactile
Imaging Sensor and Diffuse Optical Spectroscopy, respectively. These bimodal
sensors will be dynamically controlled with the robotic manipulators. For
dynamic sensor/actuator geometry control, a novel game control strategy,
Stackelberg Statistical Game Control, will be developed. This is a leader-
follower type of game control strategy that shapes the cost distribution.
Consequently, the position and orientation of the sources and sensors will be
optimized. This will allow the system to measure tactile and spectral properties
with higher accuracy. We propose to develop bimodal breast tumor models for
testing. Investigators will determine the sensitivity and specificity of
detecting malignant tumors using one hundred chicken breasts. The system will
non-invasively characterize inclusions by dynamically adjusting the
sensor/actuator geometry through a novel control theory. Finally, dynamic
sensor/actuator control will allow the system to have higher sensitivity and
specificity compared to a static system. This project will advance the field of
sensing systems by intelligently controlling sensor geometry and integrating
multiple modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.