* 2114864
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research:  AWERRS Arctic Wetlands Ecosystems – Resilience through Restoration &amp; Stewardship
* GEO,RISE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* James Powell, University of Alaska Southeast Juneau Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 10/31/2024
* USD 65,378.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will address key areas
of arctic resilience understanding and action. This collaboration of academic
and non-academic knowledge systems constitutes a transdisciplinary approach that
will advance not only understanding of the fundamentals of arctic resilience but
also spur action, inform decision-making, and translate into solutions for
resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to address the challenge of
building resilience in a rapidly changing Arctic by focusing on human activities
that impact Arctic wetlands ecosystems. The project will support and help
communities to strengthen their capacity to engage in wetlands restoration and
stewardship. At a local scale, wetlands buffer heavy precipitation and snowmelt
and filter and store water. They provide crucial habitat for biodiversity,
providing nesting and breeding areas for migratory bird species and spawning
areas for fish species. As such, they support traditional livelihoods activities
including reindeer husbandry, hunting and fishing, other cultural and
recreational activities, and tourism. Less widely known is that intact wetlands
store a large amount of global carbon. While they make up only about 3% of the
Earth's land area, wetlands store an estimated 20% of the worlds terrestrial
carbon – the largest regional store of carbon on the planet. Identifying and
testing approaches for strengthening the engagement of local communities and
other actors in the restoration and stewardship of Arctic wetlands ecosystems
helps increase community resilience though shared engagement - and through the
ecosystem service benefits derived from improving wetlands ecosystems'
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.