* 2114415
* SHF: Small: High-Performance Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Guru Prasadh Venkataramani, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,835.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) has rapidly become a critical domain with
applications in autonomous driving, robotics, aerospace, healthcare, and others.
For a machine (AI agent) to closely mimic human behavior and operate
effectively, it should possess the capabilities of robust decision making and
learning simultaneously as it operates in the environment. Multi-Agent
Reinforcement Learning (MARL) is a promising research area that can model and
control multiple distributed decision-making AI agents. However, recent studies
have shown that the MARL algorithms suffer from inefficiencies that can severely
limit their adoption in real-world systems. These problems occur due to
complexities in decision-making processes arising from having to observe and act
upon a large number of events present in the environment, along with the growth
in the number of AI agents needed to interact with each
other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ameliorate the learning efficiency and
scalability issues of MARL algorithms, the project investigators adopt a novel
interdisciplinary solution approach, harnessing computer architecture, machine-
learning theory and optimization. Specifically, the project will seek techniques
to improve neural-network throughput, to efficiently manage the state-action
space in a dynamic fashion and to scalably encode states and observations of a
large and varying number of agents. A hardware-software co-design approach is
adopted to accelerate the concurrent optimization of software and hardware
layers. The research outcomes of this project will significantly enhance the
adoption of MARL frameworks in real-world applications and positively impact
university curricular development and the computing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.