* 2114401
* Collaborative Research: HSI Pilot Project: Research for Improved Student Experiences in STEM (RISE in STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Armando Rodriguez-Duran, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,887.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project, Research for Improved Student
Experiences (RISE) in STEM aims to promote student success in STEM on the Ponce
and Bayamon campuses of the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico (IAUPR) by
implementing improved teaching practices and student supports in select
introductory STEM courses. Using collaborative undergraduate research
experiences and academic advising, this program seeks improve student success
rates in “gateway” lab courses. The two campuses that will collaborate in this
project to serve a population of students that is 99% Hispanic, majority low-
income and first-generation college students. By improving success rates in
these gateway courses, the RISE in STEM project will allow these students to
persist and succeed in STEM degree attainment, thereby broadening participation
in STEM. Additionally, this pilot program will generate evidence to support
track 2 funding and expansion of the program for its future system-wide
institutionalization at IAUPR’s nine campuses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CURE-
laboratory courses, in a collaborative setting, will be designed and piloted,
academic advisement will be implemented, and faculty development workshops will
be conducted as mechanisms for improving student perceptions and performance on
the Ponce and Bayamon Campuses of the Interamerican University of Puerto Rico.
This innovate project is based on the importance of collaborations between teams
at different campuses which provide robust learning experiences for future STEM
professionals, including developing skills for graduate studies and jobs in the
21st century. It is expected that students develop psychological and behavioral
gains such as increased confidence, self-efficacy, project ownership, scientific
identity and a sense of belonging. Many of these psychological “gains” are
evidence-supported metrics for quantifying changes in student perceptions that
are linked to improved retention and graduation rates in STEM. This project will
generate new knowledge about how a multi-campus, multi-faculty, multi-peer
leader collaborative model in CUREs, combined with academic advisement, can
contribute to increased student perceptions and performance at HSIs. External
evaluation of the program will measure student perceptions on key, evidence-
based constructs (sense of belonging, science identity, self-efficacy, interest
in STEM and intention to persist in STEM) in a pre/post-test designed
specifically for the pilot program and will generate preliminary longitudinal
data. Finally, student performance will be measured and analyzed via quasi-
experimental design methods, comparing treatment and non-treatment student
grades using matched t-tests to generate evidence of program impacts. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.