* 2114071
* Collaborative Research: Testing Hypotheses about Rates of Diversification &amp; Controls on Diversification related to the Opportunities for Speciation vs Fate of Incipient Diverge
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* JoVonn Hill, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2025
* USD 487,275.00

All of combined planetary biodiversity owes its existence to the formation of
new species. It is the newly formed boundaries separating one group of
individuals from others that maintain the distinct and unique characteristics of
individuals in each species. New species can form quickly or slowly. Depending
upon this pace of species formation (i.e., the rate of diversification), the
numbers of species within a group will differ. However, the diversification rate
itself is not sufficient to understand why species diversity varies because
there are multiple potential explanations for any estimated diversification
rate. This research project will focus on statistically distinguishing among
these different explanations in order to understand why species diversity
differs across space, time, and among different groups of organisms.
Specifically, by applying newly developed statistical models of species
formation to genomic sequences from individuals collected across multiple
populations within each of several hundred species, the research will
distinguish between various potential controls on diversification. These
alternative controls have never previously been tested within a single study. As
such, the research will provide unprecedented insights into how the frequency of
formation and persistence of isolated populations (and hence, the opportunities
for new species to form) affects diversification rates. The targeted study group
(North American Melanoplinae grasshoppers) includes representatives that span
the climatic, geographic, and ecological conditions theorized to affect species
formation, which will provide robust tests of how biodiversity is shaped. By
illustrating the utility of population-level sampling within species in tests of
species formation, the project will set a new benchmark for other researchers to
consider for their own biodiversity studies. Such research is important to avoid
misinterpretations about why biodiversity differs across geographic regions, or
among habitats, or among groups of organisms that co-occur. The research will
also highlight the importance of museum collections for genomic-era biodiversity
studies, while enhancing this publicly accessible community resource through the
addition of newly collected and curated specimens, including their DNA,
ecological and geographic information. A complementary program of public and
educational outreach activities built around the core research objective of why
diversification might be promoted (or inhibited) across different landscapes or
organismal groups will reach a diverse
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversity differences observed across
taxonomic groups reflect different rates of diversification. However, there are
two fundamentally different controls on diversification dynamics (meaning there
are different explanations for any given diversification rate): the evolution of
reproductive isolation that affects the fate of incipient divergences versus the
frequency with which isolated populations form and persist affecting the
opportunities for speciation. Because diversification studies are typically
carried out on phylogenetic estimates of species lineages, it has not been
possible to test hypotheses about the opportunities for speciation. This
research addresses this knowledge gap. Through combined theoretical and
empirical studies and the generation of large-scale genomic data, the research
will apply newly developed analytical methods to test hypotheses about
diversification rates (based on phylogenetic estimates of species lineages) vs.
the controls on diversification dynamics (based on phylogenetic estimates of
species and population lineages). By testing for linkages between different
controls on diversification dynamics with factors potentially affecting the
formation of new species (e.g., fragmented habitats, topographically complex
landscapes, or periods of climatic change, and species-specific traits), the
work will address why these conditions might promote or inhibit the formation of
new species. This will be the first study to establish potential linkages
between the various controls on diversity dynamics (e.g., topographic
complexity, geologic and climatic events, and selectively driven divergence).
Leveraging the researchers’ extensive specimen collections with advances in
collecting large-scale genomic data across hundreds of thousands of individuals
and state-of-the-art analytics, the empirical dataset will contain almost
complete taxonomic coverage of over 600 closely related grasshopper species (355
of which are from a single genus) that radiated recently (i.e., within the
Pleistocene and Pliocene) in North America and Mexico. By combining the
skillsets of researchers with taxonomic expertise and genomic and quantitative
analytics, the research team will promote broad training and mentoring of
graduate students, while also offering public and educational outreach
activities developed by researchers with different backgrounds to reach diverse
audiences and underserved communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.