* 2114454
* RAPID: International Collaborative Airborne Sensor Deployments near Antarctic Ice Shelves
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Jamin Greenbaum, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 199,929.00

The ice shelves around the perimeter Antarctica hold back inland ice that has
the potential to raise global sea level by meters. By how much and how rapidly
this could occur is a central question in glaciology. The underside of these ice
shelves is in contact with the ocean, and there are signs that warming of ocean
water is causing melting and retreat of these shelves, with direct implications
for sea-level rise. This project will seize an emergent opportunity to work with
Australian and South Korean colleagues to acquire snapshot profiles of ocean
temperature, salinity, and velocity, and improve bathymetric knowledge, where no
prior data exist. The team will work near three glaciers draining ice with
substantial sea-level potential from the East and West Antarctic Ice Sheets. The
targets are Shackleton and Cook Ice Shelves in East Antarctica, and Thwaites
Glacier in West Antarctica. An undergraduate student will be engaged through the
Scripps Undergraduate Research Fellowship program and the team will work through
the Scripps Educational Alliances program to identify educational outreach
opportunities through which to build community engagement in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use high-resolution general
circulation model simulations to optimize sensor targeting (to be deployed from
helicopter and fixed-wing aircraft) and evaluate the relative roles of
subglacial freshwater discharge and ocean forcing on subglacial melt rates. The
aim is to better understand why grounding-line melt rates are higher at the East
Antarctic sites despite data indicating warmer ambient ocean temperatures at the
West Antarctic sites. Such behavior could be explained by discharge of
subglacial freshwater into ice-shelf cavities, but insufficient data currently
exist to test this hypothesis. The team aims to build on ongoing international,
collaborative airborne oceanographic sampling with colleagues in the Republic of
Korea, Australia, and the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.