* 2114931
* Defect-Rich Quasi Two Dimensional Metal Oxides with Strong Ferromagnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Dane Morgan, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials that form permanent
magnets or are attracted to magnets are called ferromagnetic. Such materials
have many uses, ranging from data storage to power systems. However,
ferromagnetism is an unusual property that occurs only in a few substances such
as iron, nickel, cobalt and their alloys, and some rare earth materials. This
project aims to understand how strong ferromagnetism can arise from ultrathin,
two-dimensional (2D) materials, that are not magnetic in bulk form. Vacancies, a
type of defect arising from “missing” atoms, appear to play a crucial role in
stabilizing magnetism in 2D semiconductors. The investigators will perform a
combined experimental and theoretical study to determine the concentration of
vacancies that can be formed in these nanosheets and quantify how they impact
magnetic properties. This research has the potential to realize low-dimensional
ferromagnetic materials with a broad range of applications, including memory
devices and quantum computing. This project offers opportunities to provide
research experiences to underrepresented minority undergraduate and provides
education and training on experimental and computation materials research. This
project enriches the Informatics Skunkworks to engage undergraduates in research
at the interface of data science and materials science and engineering. The
research project and results will be integrated into outreach to high school
teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
the formation and stabilization mechanisms of massive cation vacancy
concentrations in quasi two-dimensional (2D) transition metal oxides and
demonstrate that strong ferromagnetism can be induced in non-ferromagnetic
oxides by dimension confinement and point defect engineering. This project is
based on an overarching hypothesis that cation vacancies can be created and
stabilized at a high level in oxides when their thickness is reduced to the
nanometer level, which in turn introduces a strong ferromagnetism to the 2D
material. The PIs discovered orders of magnitude enhancement of room temperature
ferromagnetism from zinc vacancy-rich 2D ZnO nanosheets. A strong cooperative
coupling phenomenon stabilized a vacancy concentration greater than 30% in ZnO
nanosheets, enabled by ionic layer epitaxy. The combined experimental and
theoretical research project consists of three specific research tasks. Task 1
is a theoretical study to understand the fundamental mechanisms of massive
cation vacancy concentration stabilization and associated strong ferromagnetism
in 2D oxide lattices. Task 2 is an experimental investigation of zinc vacancy
evolution and stabilization mechanisms in ZnO nanosheets to understand the
cation vacancy formation and stabilization mechanisms in correlation to the
nanoscale thickness, surfaces and grain boundaries. In task 3, the extraordinary
magnetic properties rising from the cation vacancies in ultrathin nanosheets are
quantified in cerium and manganese oxides, as representative examples to reveal
vacancy ordering contribution, and cation vacancy and transition metal moment
coupling effects, respectively. Success of this project brings transformative
knowledge for the design and synthesis of a new family of ferromagnetic 2D
nanomaterials with high magnetization and multi-
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.