* 2114474
* EAGER International Type II: Inclusiveness and Diversity as Building Blocks of Resilient International Research Teams in the Age of COVID-19
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Olivier Walther, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 01/31/2024
* USD 297,955.00

Recent COVID-related events have significantly disrupted many international
teams, especially those focused on basic and applied research in developing
countries. Collaborative groups at all stages of development are impacted,
including long-standing teams, recently established teams, and groups in the
making. While impromptu transitions to online, video conferencing have allowed
basic communications to continue as a stopgap measure, significant knowledge
gaps remain in building resilient, adaptive and innovative research teams into
the post-COVID future. Traditionally, international research teams have been
built based on efficiency in satisfying funding priorities, past alliances, ease
of communication and similarity of institutional culture. Such teams may not be
inclusive and diverse beyond a superficial level required to be competitive by
funding priorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We hypothesize that international
research teams can be designed to be more resilient and that inclusiveness and
diversity are key considerations in building resilient teams. We propose to
study three exemplars of trans-disciplinary research groups, all working in
Africa on complex socio-ecological issues ranging from food security, land use
planning and ecosystem services. (1) Large, successful, well-established teams,
(2) Recently established teams (FY 2020) disrupted in their first year with
COVID-related limitations and (3) New teams attempting to form in the post-
COVID, “new normal” of closed borders and virus hotspots. Team resilience will
be quantified using semi-quantitative (Resilience Matrix after Linkov et al.,
2013) and quantitative (Network Science) approaches. The Resilience Matrix
approach integrates multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) to integrate
disparate sources of quantitative and qualitative information regarding team
resilience in Respond/Recover/Adapt phases of resilience across different
domains of collaborative activities (physical, cyber and social). Instead of
utilizing aggregated metrics, a network science approach would represent team
connectivity across the same domains as networks interconnected by links and
nodes. These interconnected networks will be stress-tested through disruption of
link and node connectivity or degradation of functional recovery, efficiency and
adaptation capacities. Subsequently, team designs and connection structures will
be compared for emergent qualities related to team performance. Our goal is to
quantify resilience in several research teams and assess how the inclusiveness
and diversity results in better research outcomes along with recovery and
adaptation to the COVID-19 crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.