* 2114296
* Collaborative Research: Using Herbivorous Insect Genomes for Crop Tracking
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrew Forbes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 220,786.00

This project uses insect genomes to examine the histories of crop range
expansions by Indigenous North Americans. The domestication and assisted
dispersal of plant and animal species by humans has dramatically changed global
ecosystems, but the direct study of historical domestication of some species is
often limited by methodological challenges. For example, while the ancestral
ranges and subsequent range extensions of some North American crops are well
studied, others remain relatively inaccessible. This research explores whether
historical signals of range expansion captured within the genomes of insects,
parasitic on focal crop plants, can be used as proxies for the histories of the
plants themselves. This research provides a general proof of principle for using
parasitic insects to study demographic histories of their plant hosts, but also
specifically tests hypotheses for the pre-domestication ranges and histories of
expansion for three crops of the Eastern Agricultural Complex (EAC): Common
sunflower, Jerusalem artichoke, and sumpweed. This research results in the
training of graduate and undergraduate students, lead to design and
implementation of new materials for public outreach demonstrations, and bring
about a large public science event focused on the Indigenous
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses information captured in the
genomes of specialist insects to reconstruct signatures of past cultivation and
subsequent range expansions for three North American crops; the work addresses
the questions: where did these plants grow before they were first used as crops,
and where (and when) were they subsequently moved by people? Common sunflower,
Jerusalem artichoke, and sumpweed are known to have been cultivated by
Indigenous North Americans as part of the Eastern Agricultural Complex, but
beyond this there is great variance in how much is known about their respective
ancestral ranges and subsequent patterns of range extensions. Two fly species in
the North American genus Strauzia feed on, respectively, common sunflower and
Jerusalem artichoke, while caterpillars of the slender flower moth are
specialist herbivores on sumpweed. The researchers are making large collections
of these three insect parasites from across their host plantsâ€™ ranges in the
North America, and then interrogating their genomes for signals of historical
population size changes and the direction and timing of range expansions. A
general prediction is that the region of highest genetic diversity for each
insect will correspond to the historical boundaries of the EAC, implicating this
area as having been part of the ancestral range for each plant. A second
expectation is that tests of demographic scenarios using genetic data will best
support relatively recent range expansions, radiating out from their respective
native range(s).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.