* 2114489
* Measuring and modeling particle enrichment in jet drops from bursting bubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* James Bird, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 338,457.00

Particulates, such as bacteria and viruses, can be aerosolized from contaminated
water sources when air bubbles rise to the surface of the water and pop, forming
jet drops. The concentration of bacteria in these jet drops can be surprisingly
high, up to 1000 times more concentrated than in the source. This enrichment may
occur because the bubble scavenges particles as it rises. If so, the degree of
enrichment should depend on how close particulates are to the bubble immediately
before it pops. However, predictions based solely on these ideas are
inconsistent with existing data sets. The goal of this project is to uncover the
fluid dynamics that determines the enrichment factor for various types and sizes
of particles that are encapsulated into these droplets. The results could be
important to a variety of problems related to health and the environment.
Specifically, the research will lead to a mechanistic understanding of the
extent that a particular pathogen is enriched in a particular-sized jet drop.
This information is critical to predicting the risk of infection to people
exposed to contaminated water sources and to determining appropriate mitigating
strategies. Furthermore, the transport of viruses and other marine-derived
particles in jet drops has an impact on cloud formation, which is relevant to
global climate models. Additionally, the transport of other marine particulates
such as microplastics is an important environmental concern, and an
understanding of particulate enrichment is critical to estimate transfer rates
across the air-water interface. This project will also provide opportunities for
early childhood education teachers and engineering graduate students to use
drops and bubbles as a pathway to increase the visibility and accessibility of
STEM processes to educators and young learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decades of
research has explored how rising bubbles can scavenge suspended particulates in
a contaminated water source and bring the particulates along with the bubble to
the water surface. Similarly, significant research has explored how bubbles can
create jet drops as they rupture, motivated in part by the impact that particles
within these jet drops can have on health and environment. However, there is
limited understanding of how particulates are transported into jet drops during
the bubble rupture process. This understanding is critical to predict the
enhanced concentrations observed in jet drops and is the objective of this
project. Through a combination of direct experiments, numerical simulations, and
appropriately dimensionalized mechanistic models, the microscale fluid dynamics
by which particles are encapsulated will be investigated. Particular attention
will be given to particles that may be brought to the surface by scavenging, but
not encapsulated due to their size, physical properties, and location. By
modeling the encapsulation process, the degree to which aerosol droplets are
concentrated can be predicted for particulates for which experiments are
unfeasible or potentially hazardous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.