* 2114669
* AccelNet Design: Inter-American Network of Networks of Quantum Chromo-Dynamics Challenges
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carlos Bertulani, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,222.00

Quarks and gluons are fundamental building blocks of all the visible matter in
the universe. They are described by the theory of strong nuclear interactions:
quantum chromo-dynamics. A complete understanding of how the observed properties
in the universe emerge from these interactions has remained elusive. Addressing
open questions in quantum chromo-dynamics is a global effort. This design-track
AccelNet project will focus on deeply fundamental questions: How did visible
matter come into being, and how does it evolve? How does subatomic matter
organize itself and what phenomena emerge? This project will focus on designing
and establishing a network of networks across the United States, Canada and
Latin America to accelerate the process of tackling quantum chromo-dynamics
challenges in nuclear physics. It will enable the training of students,
postdoctoral researchers, and early-career scientists in international multi-
team nuclear physics projects that will have a strong participation of networks
from this region. Such activities will promote the integration of nuclear
physics communities across the Americas. It will also serve to identify ethics
norms and scientific guidelines for U.S.-led network-to-network projects in
nuclear physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AccelNet project will engage the
domestic and international network partners around four main goals: (1) develop
strategic partnerships across the various nuclear physics research networks in
the Americas; (2) identify the needs, strengths and synergies of network
partners for developing U.S.-led large scale nuclear science projects; (3)
design activities for researchers in the U.S., Canada, and Latin America that
will facilitate leveraging complementary resources for quantum chromo-dynamics
research, and (4) enhance the training of the next generation of researchers in
nuclear physics in a novel set of skills that include international multi-team
experience. To enable diverse network opportunities, the research themes will be
broad, including research in theory, data analyses, high performance computing,
particle detectors and accelerator technologies, real-time event selection, as
well as software and Monte Carlo simulation development. Applications of
emerging technologies, such as artificial intelligence and quantum technologies,
will also be part of the coordination effort. The activities will include
scientific retreats, meetings, workshops, and the development of a website to
facilitate coordination. The project will also design and carry out exchange and
mobility programs between networks in the U.S., Canada and Latin American
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by AccelNet Program
and the Established program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.