* 2114430
* Synthetic Control over MOF Particle Growth and Surface  Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Carl Brozek, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membranes based on metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs), which are three-dimensional (3-D) organic/inorganic
compounds, attract intense interest for industrial petroleum refining and gas
separations due to their exceptional tunability and synthetic diversity. For
MOFs to reach widespread attraction and implementation in the industrial sector,
however, researchers will be required to go beyond 3-D MOFs and develop new
types of MOF nanoparticles, as they exhibit superior separation performance and
generate membranes with superior stability. For the past two decades, bulk
powders of MOFs occupied the focus of academic MOF research, but very recent
attention has turned to preparing MOF nanoparticles and polymer composites with
precise control of particle sizes. Despite preliminary demonstrations of the
great potential of MOF nanoparticles, key fundamental questions remain for
achieving reproducible control over MOF particle composition and for
understanding how particle size and composition impact membrane performance.
With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, Prof. Carl Brozek at the
University of Oregon and his research group will investigate the chemical
principles that control the precise sizes and compositions of MOF nanocrystals.
Mechanistic growth models will be developed in the context of growth models
established for other classes of materials so that these results inform the
broad field of materials chemistry. Similarly, the synthetic techniques pursued
in this proposal will influence materials design beyond MOF particles, by
outlining fundamental tools for molecular control over materials across multiple
size regimes. The proposed research is practically relevant to society because
precise control over MOF nanocrystal sizes will open new frontiers in improved
gas separation membranes for industry and the opportunity for elevating MOF
application performance to becoming practically relevant.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research at NSF, will investigate the fundamental growth
mechanisms of metal-organic framework (MOF) particles, develop methods to
control particle surface chemistry for enhancing their colloidal stability and
interfacing with polymer composites, and understand the impact of size and
surface composition on molecular- and charge-transport properties. Tackling this
goal will require basic investigation into the parameters that dictate particle
sizes, defect incorporation, and surface functionalization. Insight into
controlling prenucleation crystal growth of materials in general, reproducible
synthesis of MOF-based heterostructure composites, and improving the practical
relevance of MOF materials will result from this research. Broader impacts of
this proposal include 1) integrating these research aims into educational
outreach initiatives that communicate the science of carbon capture technology
to underserved students, 2) fostering interdisciplinary training programs that
pairs chemistry with architecture students to design air-purification modules,
3) sponsoring industry-academia seminar series on MOF-based carbon-capture, and
4) implementing a teaching course on designing outreach initiative offered year-
round to University of Oregon (UO) chemistry PhD
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.