* 2114417
* Actin regulation of CD36 receptor organization and signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Khuloud Jaqaman, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 950,000.00

The goal of this project is to deepen our understanding of how cells regulate
the process of sensing and responding to their environment. This will be
achieved by investigating the interplay between cell surface proteins, called
receptors, which allow cells to sense and respond to their environment, and the
actin cortex, a component of the cell skeleton that is subjacent to the cell
surface and that is a major regulator of cell surface receptors. The research
will take one particular receptor, called CD36, as a model system, as it is
likely representative of many cell surface receptors that are influenced by the
actin cortex without directly binding to it. Using novel integrative microscopy
and computational analysis tools, the investigator’s research team will (i)
quantitatively characterize the influence of the actin cortex on nearby cell
surface receptor behavior, (ii) shed light on the molecular mechanisms
underlying this influence, and (iii) investigate how this influence may render
receptor function sensitive to the stiffness of the cell’s environment, because
of the sensitivity of the actin cortex to environmental stiffness. Through
participation in the described research, as well as through a companion entry-
level summer course on computational image analysis for undergraduate students,
this project will train graduate, undergraduate and high school students in
cutting-edge quantitative microscopy, an increasingly critical technique for
modern biological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CD36 is an integral membrane
protein that is expressed on the surface of many cell types and that binds
diverse ligands. As for many receptors, CD36 signaling requires clustering, for
which the actin cytoskeleton plays an important role. However, there still is a
lack of mechanistic and quantitative understanding of how the actin
cytoskeleton, and in particular the actin cortex, regulates the organization and
signaling of cell surface receptors. To fill this gap, this project will pursue
three specific aims: (i) Determine the influence of the actin cortex on CD36
signaling through a quantitative understanding of its influence on cell surface
CD36 organization. (ii) Test the hypothesis that integrins and tetraspanins form
the molecular link between cell surface CD36 and the actin cortex. (iii) Test
the hypothesis that the actin cortex mediates crosstalk between
microenvironmental stiffness and CD36 signaling. For this, the investigator’s
research team will employ a novel approach combining simultaneous high
spatiotemporal resolution imaging of cell surface receptors and cortical actin
in live cells with statistical analysis of the relationships between them, as
well as mutagenesis of CD36 and exposure of cells to microenvironments of
different stiffness. Altogether, these studies will help reveal general
principles of the mechanisms and signaling consequences of actin-mediated cell
surface receptor organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.