* 2114282
* The Origins of Modern States
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Michael Cosmopoulos, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 278,233.00

The transition from a world without states to a world where states are the
dominant political institutions is one of the most crucial turning points in our
history, and one that is fundamental to our understanding of modern society and
government. This project will investigate the processes of state formation, with
emphasis on the origins of the two-tiered types of administration that preceded
modern federal government. This award will examine the earliest recorded states
in the western world, which appear to have been administered by both central and
district governments. At the heart of the issue is the applicability of neo-
evolutionary models: Are states the products of a linear evolution from
simpler/non-hierarchical to complex/hierarchical political forms, or can they be
the outcomes of multilinear trajectories? And are they created by powerful
agents at the top of the sociopolitical scale, or can they be affected by groups
outside the top-tier palatial centers? As the training field for scores of
graduate and undergraduate students, with substantial representation of women
and minorities, the project will have significant value in terms of
inclusiveness and education. Finally, in terms of protecting our cultural
heritage, the project will conserve, restore, and protect one of the worlds
earliest state capitals and create the infrastructure for opening up
archaeological sites to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
explanations of state formation, framed in terms of neo-evolutionary theory and
based on the evidence from a handful of top-tier palaces, consider that
formation to be a product of the coalescence of preexisting chiefdoms. Recent
theoretical advances and fieldwork have, however, shown the weaknesses of
exclusive top-down approaches and the unreliability of general heuristic
explanations. More nuanced hypotheses are needed, that would define the agents
and the processes behind state formation, using region- and culture-specific
models and combining evidence from both top- and lower-tier centers. Through
systematic excavation and detailed historical modelling, this project will
produce the datasets needed to test existing and new hypotheses about state
formation and operation; the results will then be contextualized within general
models explaining state formation in other regions. In terms of methods, the
combination of top-down and bottom-up approaches, and the wider
contextualization of specific historical models will add important new blocks to
the emerging comparative framework about state formation and evolution around
the world. In terms of interdisciplinarity and international cooperation, the
project will serve as the vehicle for large-scale international, collaborative,
multi-disciplinary research that will integrate the humanities, the social
sciences, and the natural sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.