* 2114756
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Child Production and Comprehension of Counterfactual Wishes and Conditionals
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Ailis Cournane, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 18,410.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utterances such as "If pigs had
wings, they could fly" or "I wish pigs could fly", express a possibility (flying
pigs) that is in contrast with what we know to be true in the actual world (pigs
don't have wings). This dissertation project investigates how children learn to
produce and understand such 'counterfactual' utterances. To use counterfactual
expressions in a mature manner, children need to develop both complex reasoning
and complex language abilities. This project aims to disentangle the
trajectories of reasoning and language development by investigating whether
complexity of the counterfactual expression affects the age at which children
start using and understanding counterfactual language when reasoning demands are
the same. The proposed research will advance our understanding of the typical
development of counterfactual reasoning, which is essential for advanced types
of critical thinking such as contrasting possibilities and evaluating past
events. The knowledge and methodologies obtained from this research can be used
to further develop diagnostic tools to identify children with developmental
delays, like autism-spectrum-disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically,
this dissertation research compares the acquisition trajectory of constructions
dedicated to express counterfactual meaning (e.g. wishes in English) against
constructions that are not (e.g. if/then-conditionals in English), and
investigates the acquisition challenge posed by the fact that the past tense
marker in counterfactuals expresses present non-actuality rather than past
temporal orientation. This project consists of cross-linguistic (comparing
English and Mandarin-Chinese) corpus research on children's spontaneous
counterfactual productions, a picture-selection task to investigate
counterfactual comprehension in 4- and 5-year-olds, and an eye tracking study to
investigate 2- and 3-year-olds' implicit comprehension of simple counterfactual
utterances. This dissertation thus complements prior research on children's
counterfactual reasoning by raising the issue of form-to-meaning mapping in
language learning and introduces methodology suitable to investigate
counterfactual comprehension in populations where heavy task demands may mask
underlying abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.