* 2114457
* Labor and Environmental Implications in the Commodification of Natural Resources for Sustainably Branded Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Christian Zlolniski, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 255,256.00

The market for sustainably branded products is part of a massive and rapidly
growing industry. In meeting the environmental sustainability demands of the
consumer, companies rely on supply chains that may have mitigating labor and
environmental implications at the point of origin. This project explores such a
supply chain, asking whether consumer demand for products designed to improve
sustainability at the point of sale adversely impact sustainability in the
communities from which those products originate. The project looks specifically
at small-scale extractive contexts, and whether in the aggregate they have
consequences for overall measures in environmental and economic sustainability.
Data from the study will be disseminated to improve the public's understanding
of science and the scientific method, and inform public policies related to
mining and commercialization in new markets. The project broadens the
participation of groups underrepresented in science and advance scientific
education by providing research opportunities for first-generation minority
students at the researcherâ€™s home institution, a Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the labor-intensive extraction
of products that service demands for environmentally sustainable products. It
looks specifically at artisanal and small-scale mining contexts, which are major
sources of employment in extractive contexts, and have intensified since 2000,
but relatively understudied. Social scientists have mainly studied mass-scale
industrial extraction of natural resources such as oil and gas while paying less
attention to small-scale and more labor-intensive types of mining. The study
focuses on three areas: the labor arrangements and working conditions involved
in small-scale extractive industries; the strategies used by companies to market
those products; and the purposes for which consumers use them. The researcher
integrates ethnographic methods including participant-observation, semi-
structured interviews, and photo documentation, with quantitative data on mining
volumes at extractive sites. The study contributes scientific knowledge on the
economic, social, and environmental impacts of natural resource
extraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.