* 2114041
* Bioelectronic Sensor using Synthetically Engineered and Electroactive Bacteria for Detection of Aquatic Nutrients
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jonathan Dordick, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 04/30/2024
* USD 374,907.00

Across the globe, freshwater and marine ecosystems are threatened by the effects
of multiple, co-occurring environmental pressures including pollutants, invasive
species, climate change, acidification, and excess nutrients. Ecologists strive
to monitor, understand, and model the effects of excess nutrients, including
phosphates and nitrates, in combination with other human threats. Understanding
dynamic spaces with complex and interdependent factors will require a new
generation of sensors. Biology-enabled sensors have significant advantages with
respect to sensitivity, error-tolerance, scalability, selectivity, and
versatility. However, readout and long-range interconnectivity are currently
problematic, if not impossible, with biology alone. Biohybrid devices can
exploit and tune the strengths of both electronic and biological sensing through
a dynamic bioelectronic interface. To achieve it, electroactive bacteria
(dissimilatory metal/sulfate reducing bacteria) and their extracellular electron
transport mechanisms are employed to transduce their environmental response to
measurable biocurrent. A three- dimensional nanofabricated electrode can collect
a bacterially derived current for signal processing. The response to a target in
the environment is more precisely selected and intensified by the collective
response of engineered and highly versatile Escherichia coli. By distributing
the sensing and actuation roles between synthetic E. coli and the dissimilatory
reducing powerhouse Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, confidence in the presence of a
select target is enhanced with the aggregation of individual responses from
large number of E. coli bacteria to the community of electroactive bacteria. The
bioelectronic interface design is a foundational step toward a new generation of
sensing hardware that can meet the vast and expanding promise of machine
learning and artificial intelligence. Cross-disciplinary training modules will
be developed to designed by the on-campus community of researchers including
graduate and undergraduate students. By including new researchers, accessible
content is created for the local and international GK-12 community. Local
students from the Independent Sanctuary for Independent Media Nature Lab will
create informative and creative content for the international cohort starting
with the H20 Virtual Academy at the Karada Mixed Secondary School in Kisumu,
Kenya. The international connection of gifted local and international students,
a flow of stimuli, to convey state-of- the-art knowledge about the environment
around them reflect the goals of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed
work, a mechanism for the detection of phosphate will be investigated using an
interconnected network of E. coli and S. oneidensis MR-1. Phosphate detection is
essential to understanding ecological dynamics in aquatic ecosystems. A dynamic
bioelectronic interface will be created for its potential use in the detection
of multiple small molecule targets by engineered bacteria. The system design is
inherently modular where electroactive S. oneidensis serves as the bioelectronic
interface while E.coli is the easily engineered front end. Electroactive
bacteria (dissimilatory metal/sulfate reducing bacteria) and their extracellular
electron transport mechanisms will be employed to transduce their environmental
response to achieve a measurable biocurrent. A three-dimensional nanofabricated
electrode, consisting of a nanomaterial-decorated graphene foam and the two
bacteria will generate and transduce the biocurrent for signal processing. The
response to a target in the environment is more precisely selected and
intensified by the collective response of engineered E. coli. Modules will be
linked via chemical quorum sensing and tuned with respect to transfer function
and signal amplification using synthetic biology approaches. The co-cultured
bacteria configuration will be optimized for cell-viability and signal
transport. The research is accomplished through the following objectives:
Objective 1: Design and fabricate a bioelectronic backend interface from quorum
sensing signal to S. oneidensis biocurrent for signal transduction; Objective 2:
Design and fabricate a bioelectronic frontend interface from target (phosphate)
to E. coli quorum sensing signal; Objective 3: Integrate objectives 1 and 2, and
fabricate, test, and validate bioelectronic sensor from target (phosphate) to
biocurrent signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.