* 2114502
* Pan-Antarctic Assessment of Sedimentary Basins and the Onset of Streaming Ice Flow from Machine Learning and Aerogravity Regression Analyses
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,164.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important part of understanding
future climate change is predicting changes in how fast the ice in Antarctica is
moving. If ice flows more quickly towards the ocean, it will have a direct
impact on sea level rise. One of the things that can influence the ice flow is
the type of rock below the ice coverage in Antarctica. Sedimentary basins are
large regions where sedimentary rocks accumulated in the past, often under
ancient seas. It has been observed that where there are sediments below the ice,
the ice can flow faster. This project seeks to understand what is below the ice
and how the underlying rock influences the ice flow. Is it hard, crystalline
rock? Is it a sedimentary basin? What is the relationship between sediments and
ice flow? The answers to these questions will be addressed by using a
combination of available data and geophysical methods. Information from well-
known rock-types will be used to train the computer to recognize these features
by using an application of artificial intelligence known as machine learning,
which will help the characterization and identification of unknown sedimentary
basins beneath the ice. The results of this project will be disseminated to a
broad audience by holding workshops for teacher and students to explain our
findings under the ice and to introduce the machine learning technique. Open-
source codes used during this project will be made available for use in higher-
level classrooms as well as in further studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, no
comprehensive distribution of onshore and offshore sedimentary basins over
Antarctica has been developed. A combination of large-scale datasets will be
used to characterize known basins and identify new sedimentary basins to produce
the first continent-wide mapping of sedimentary basins and provide improved
basal parametrizations conditions that have the potential to support more
realistic ice sheet models. Available geophysical compilations of data and the
location of well-known sedimentary basins will be used to apply an ensemble
machine learning algorithm. The machine learning algorithm will learn complex
relationships by voting among a collection of randomized decision trees. The
gravity signal related to sedimentary basins known from other (e.g. seismic)
techniques will be evaluated and unknown basins from aerogravity data regression
analyses will be proposed by calculating a gravity residual that reflects
density inhomogeneities. The gravimetric sedimentary basins identified from the
regression analyses will be compared with an independent method of identifying
sedimentary distribution, the Werner deconvolution method of estimating depth to
magnetic sources. The hypothesis, which is sedimentary basins are correlated to
fast ice flow behavior, will be tested by comparing the location of the
sedimentary basins with locations of high ice flow by using available ice
velocity observations. A relationship between sedimentary basins and ice streams
will be defined qualitatively and quantitatively, aiming to evaluate if there
are ice streams where no sedimentary basins are reported, or sedimentary basins
with no ice streams related. The findings of these project can confirm if the
presence of abundant sediments is a pre-requisite for ice streaming. Analyzing
previously known sedimentary basins and identifying new ones in Antarctica is
central to evaluating the influence of subglacial sediments on the ice sheet
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.