* 2114641
* RESEARCH-PGR: Illuminating the Plant Protein Interactome with Genome-wide Signatures of Coevolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Sloan, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 348,223.00

Sequencing plant genomes has unlocked a massive catalog of genes and yet our
ability to understand the specific role of each gene lags far behind, meaning
functions have only been assigned to a fraction of known plant genes. Individual
genes rarely work alone, and a critical aspect of a given gene's function is its
interacting partners. Deciphering genetic interactions throughout plant genomes
will advance our understanding of the function of a large number of
uncharacterized genes; however, most existing methods for identifying genetic
interactions are laborious, expensive, and difficult to scale to the entire
genome. This project will develop scalable, efficient computational analyses
tailored to identifying genetic interactions based on gene-specific rates of
evolution across plant genomes. These computational tools will serve as
resources applicable to any group of plants and be used to generate databases of
genetic interactions for several scientifically and agriculturally important
plant groups, which plant geneticists and molecular biologists can search to
identify new functions for genes of interest. The results will also be used to
probe the emergent properties of entire networks of genetic interactions, which
will illuminate the higher-level functional architecture of plant genomes. The
impact of these resources will be maximized by offering workshops that will
provide training to researchers interested in using these tools and by engaging
with first-year undergraduates to broaden participation in the field of
computational biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic interactions are an
important indicator of gene function but the existing tools for identifying the
genome-wide assemblage of interactions (i.e., the interactome) in plants provide
only a partial view. The phylogenetic signature of evolutionary rate covariation
(ERC) between interacting proteins has been successfully applied on small sets
of genes in plants to demonstrate coevolution between known subunits within
enzyme complexes and on a genome-wide all-by-all basis in non-plant lineages to
discover novel interaction partners. However, ERC has never been applied at
genome-wide scale in plants, likely due to phylogenetic challenges caused by the
especially frequent gene and genome duplication that occur in plants. This
project will develop a novel pipeline tailored to ERC analyses of plant genomes,
which will employ existing theory on reconciling complex histories of
duplication across gene trees. This pipeline will be used to perform ERC
analyses at multiple levels of plant evolution and compile the results to
generate a web-based plant interactome database, which can be queried for
specific genetic interactions. Further, the resulting ERC-based interaction data
will be integrated with existing binding assay and coexpression-based
interactions to functionally validate ERC results. Finally, network analytics
will identify modules of interacting cofunctional proteins and determine how
network structure is driven by gene function. This work will create a resource
that will empower genome biologists to add a needed layer of information to
genome annotation efforts and provide molecular biologists with a wealth of
ready-to-test functional hypotheses. All project outcomes will be freely
accessible through CyVerse and long-term repositories such as GitHub and
Dryad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.