* 2114620
* Sensitivity of Hurricane Intensity Change to Outflow Interactions with the Environment
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gregory Tripoli, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,170,770.00

Tropical cyclone (TC) prediction is often divided into two components: (1) the
prediction of the TC track, defined as the path that the center of the cyclone
traces as it moves, and (2) the prediction of the TC intensity, defined by the
strength of the maximum sustained surface wind near the base of the eye wall.
Despite substantial improvement in the prediction of TC track, the accurate
prediction of TC intensity and intensity change remains a particularly
challenging forecast problem. TC intensity is related to the minimum surface
pressure at the center of the storm, as well as to an overturning (i.e.
vertical) mass circulation. The overturning circulation, comprised of inflow
into the base of the TC eyewall driven by the effects of surface friction,
ascent in the inner eyewall and then outflow away from the TC at high levels in
the upper troposphere/lower stratosphere effectively converges the Earth’s spin
into the eyewall creating the high winds. Traditionally the intensity of the TC
has been explained as an effect of the low surface pressure at the center of the
storm, maintained by upper-level latent heating, that consequently drives the
overturning circulation. This study for the first time will approach TC
intensity as a direct dynamic response to the changing strength of overturning
circulation of the TC and treat the surface pressure change as a dynamic
response to these processes rather than the cause. This approach opens the real
possibility that environmental resistance to, or encouragement of the
overturning circulation, is at the core of why a TC intensifies or struggles,
ultimately attaching TC intensification to environmental interaction.
Anticipated outcomes of this research include: (1) an improved understanding of
how the tropical cyclone overturning circulation interacts with weather
phenomena in the environment surrounding the TC; (2) identification when and
where hurricane aircraft reconnaissance should make observations of tropical
cyclones to improve numerical forecast guidance of TC intensity change; (3)
greater understanding of factors limiting predictability of TC intensity prior
to impacts on coastal communities and marine interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine, through use of cloud resolving simulations, the
relationships between the strength of the overturning mass circulation and TC
intensity. Then, through the novel application of adjoint sensitivities, TC
intensity will be related to perturbations made to environmental conditions in
the outflow layer that are hypothesized to be driving TC intensity changes. The
study will introduce new adjoint-appropriate response functions as measures of
TC intensity and the strength of the overturning circulation that explicitly
monitor the coupling of the overturning circulation to the environment and the
relationship between the overturning circulation and the TC intensity.
Evaluation of the adjoint model output will be performed by diagnosis of the
evolution of adjoint-derived initial condition perturbations, optimally
configured to excite TC intensification along the forecast trajectory. Evidence
of any coupling of the TC overturning circulation to environmental circulations,
particularly those pre-existing the TC will be sought. The project will train
undergraduate and graduate students at University of Wisconsin - Madison,
develop a new course of Dynamic Meteorology and Climatology, and contribute a
session in American Meteorological Society’s annual
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.