* 2114838
* 2021 NSF ENG CAREER Workshop and Assessment of CAREER Workshop Effectiveness from 2004 – 2020
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Rosemarie Wesson, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2024
* USD 99,957.00

This award supports the organization of a National Science Foundation
Directorate for Engineering 2021 Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) Proposal Writing Workshop. The workshop will be held in the Spring of
2021 and will be virtually conducted. It is expected that there will be
approximately 300 attendees. The workshop will take place over 2-3 days to
account for a wide variety of time zones and the participants’ existing
commitments with teaching, family life balance, and research. The workshop will
include interactive sessions on good proposal-writing practices, seminars by
previous CAREER awardees, a mock CAREER proposal panel review. The attendees
will also have an opportunity to interact with current NSF Program Directors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will help to prepare CAREER program-eligible
faculty for careers in education and research by giving them tools and skills of
good proposal-writing for submissions to the CAREER program as well as core NSF
ENG programs. The objectives of the workshop include training for junior faculty
with an emphasis on women and underrepresented minorities in engineering. A
special additional emphasis will be placed on encouraging CAREER program
eligible faculty from non-"Research-1" institutions and Minority Serving
Institutions (MSIs) to apply for participation. The workshop will serve as an
introduction to NSF for many new researchers. The workshop will help
participants to clarify their research and education career plans and to
understand the need to clearly articulate these plans to external reviewers. In
addition, the workshop includes mock panel sessions to give participants the
experience of simulated panel evaluation discussions. All of the content and
experiences will help attendees enrich their skills for writing successful
research proposals on impactful research that benefits societal needs. The PIs
of the grant plan to evaluate past ENG CAREER workshops for best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.