* 2114603
* Understanding plant endosomal sorting mechanisms and ESCRT function in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Marisa Otegui, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 06/30/2025
* USD 949,997.00

This project will analyze how plants regulate degradation of proteins at the
cell surface to control cellular function. Cells remove proteins from their
surface through a process called endocytosis during which cells internalize
portions of their plasma membrane, including proteins, through the formation of
endocytic vesicles. These vesicles fuse with cell compartments called endosomes
that internalize the plasma membrane protein in endosomal vesicles and transport
them to vacuoles for degradation. This is a critical pathway as problems
associated with endocytosis can often be lethal for the development of the
plant. This project will investigate molecular and structural aspects of
endosomal functions in different plant lineages to understand the key components
and mechanisms of endosomal vesicle formation. This research will support the
training of undergraduate and graduate students as well as postdoctoral
researchers. It will also provide fundamental insights into plant cell biology,
relevant for agriculture, biotechnology, evolution, and bioenergy crops. In
collaboration with the Emergency Technologies Hub at the Wisconsin Discovery
Center, virtual reality material representing plant cells and organelles will be
produced for outreach activities at the University of Wisconsin-Madison campus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Endosomal sorting of membrane proteins regulates cell
signaling but how endosomal vesicles form and sequester cargo is not well
understood. The main goal of this project is to analyze the mechanisms by which
budding sites at the endosomal membrane generate vesicles in Arabidopsis
thaliana and to gain an evolutionary and functional perspective of different
patterns of budding activity across lineages, from basal to flowering plants.
This project will undertake a comprehensive approach (genetics, imaging,
biochemistry) to investigate the mechanistic roles of a group of plant-specific
proteins that bind endosomal membranes and to analyze structural features of
endosomes in different plant lineages related to the evolution of endosomal
vesiculation within plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.