* 2114731
* AccelNet-Design: Harnessing Global Science Networks to Accelerate Cultures of Learning
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Andrea Chiba, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 04/30/2023
* USD 249,763.00

This global network of networks aims to fill critical gaps in knowledge
regarding how principles of learning function in diverse cultural contexts.
International data representing a diversity of people from a diversity of
cultures would allow a deeper understanding of what works, for whom, where and
when, and to what extent some scientific principles might generalize. This
design-track project will build an interdisciplinary network of networks
addressing aspects of learning, development, and culture as they relate to
global education needs. The initial focus of the network of networks will be on
the self-regulation of the learner. Globally-inclusive, methodologically-
rigorous data of this kind would allow the scientific community to better
understand variation in self-regulatory behavior based on an individual’s
environment, experience, and situational demands. Educational researchers and
policy-makers around the world would also gain new insights to inform the design
effective educational interventions and implement effective educational
policies.  Forming a network of networks for the global science of learning will
enable a scientific workforce with the intellectual agility to address current
and future challenges, leverage the science of learning to promote a positive
global technology climate at scale, and build a globally inclusive science of
learning. Considering best practices and foundational needs to promote
sufficient scientific fluency for the next generation is a national and global
priority.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design project will link the Global
Science of Learning for Education Network and the Center for Applied Cognitive
Science with partner networks that specialize in global development, learning,
education, equity, and policy. These networks are generally interdisciplinary
and include social scientists, engineers, designers, global development
practitioners, philanthropists, educators, and policy makers. Self-regulation is
the initial focus for this design project because it is consequential for
educational, social, and economic outcomes, yet little understood. The network
of networks will be established through framework for collaborative planning,
including design events, virtual workshops, and trainee workshops. Cross-
functional teams or “bridge networks” comprised of members from multiple
networks will engage in convergence science to create an ecosystem for
integrating communities and scientific networks to tackle a variety pressing
challenges in the science of learning. With the digital divide impacting
learners around the world, the networks will address the future of work at the
human technology frontier, by leveraging the science of learning to create life-
long learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through
International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed
to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
award is provided by the Science of Learning and Augmented Intelligence Program
in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.