* 2114024
* Cosmological and Astrophysical Signatures of Axions
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrew Long, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This award funds the research activities of Professor Andrew Long at Rice
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 40 years ago a hypothetical elementary
particle known as the axion was proposed to explain a perplexing property of the
neutron. For the following decades experimental campaigns have been underway to
try to detect axions and axion-like particles in the laboratory. Through his
work Professor Long aims to make robust predictions for several cosmological and
astrophysical signatures of axions. These theoretical predictions will motivate
future observations and facilitate the interpretation of data, with the goal of
making possible the discovery of the axion. These efforts advance the national
interest by promoting the progress of fundamental science, since the discovery
of an axion would have deep and far-reaching implications for our understanding
of the laws of nature and the composition of the Universe. In addition to its
central science objectives, this project will have substantial broader impacts.
At least one graduate student researcher will assist Professor Long’s research,
thereby providing an opportunity for essential training of early-career
physicists. In addition, Professor Long will deliver lectures at local high
schools and invite students to visit the campus of his university in order to
encourage the next generation of scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, this research program is divided into three objectives. First,
Professor Long's research group will study how axion strings may leave a subtle
imprint on the polarization of the cosmic microwave background radiation. They
will calculate the appropriate two-point correlation function using a
combination of analytical and numerical methods, and by comparing these
predictions with the existing data and the projected sensitivities of next-
generation surveys, they will evaluate the efficacy of these cosmological
measurements to probe axion strings. Second, they will study the electromagnetic
radiation produced when an axion star transits the strong magnetic field
environment of a neutron star. They will model this system with a numerical
lattice simulation, calculate the resultant radiation spectrum, both directly
from the simulation as well as using a dipole approximation, and assess the
prospects for detecting this radiation with radio observations. As the third and
final objective, the PI’s group will study the emission of axion particles from
stars including our own Sun. By focusing on a previously-unstudied interaction
between the axion particles and ordinary matter, the group will calculate the
flux of axions produced by these stars, evaluate the effect that this radiation
has on the temperature of the star, and assess the implications for recent
anomalies related to stellar axion emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.