* 2114343
* Collaborative Research: Interfacial Photopolymerization (IPP): A Method For High-Resolution Digital Printing of Thermoplastics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anastasios John Hart, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,192.00

Additive manufacturing (AM) encompasses many technologies used to produce
objects by successive addition of material in a layer-by-layer manner.
Currently, AM techniques for thermoplastic polymers rely on local heating to
melt and reshape the material. AM processes that form objects by
photopolymerization rely on an intrinsic crosslinking mechanism in thermoset
polymers. These photopolymerization AM methods can produce parts with superior
surface finish and detail relative to the methods available for thermoplastics,
but these attributes come at the expense of compatibility with large-scale
recycling processes. This award will support research on the first AM technique
for recyclable thermoplastic materials that utilizes photopolymerization, called
Interfacial Photopolymerization (IPP). This work combines fundamental materials
science and manufacturing scale-up to enable the digital production of
intricate, high resolution thermoplastic objects using commercially available
feedstock materials. This work will have economic and environmental benefits by
opening new applications in automotive, aerospace, consumer, and medical device
industries that use recyclable plastics, which is a vital contribution to the
sustainability of our world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In IPP, the polymerization
process and resolution are controlled by a LED light source, which is focused at
the reaction zone located at or near a planar liquid-liquid interface.
Realization of this technology requires a detailed investigation into
fundamental transport and reaction kinetics, light management conditions, and
chemical thermodynamics to elucidate the governing physical mechanisms for
polymer formation and the role they play in final print quality (e.g.,
resolution, interlayer adhesion, mechanical properties). A macrokinetic model of
the diffusion and precipitation at the interface will be developed to establish
quantitative understanding of how single layers form in IPP and the fundamental
limits and parameter tradeoffs, and a custom-built projector-based 3D printer
will be used to fabricate demonstration objects. Data on process and material
performance will be integrated into cost models to compare IPP to AM and
injection molding methods for polymer manufacturing and evaluate the economic
viability of IPP at industrial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.