* 2114506
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Stephen Kelety, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 229,000.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for Shipboard
Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) that is needed to carry out NSF-supported
scientific research. Working within the collaborative framework of the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed
equipment will be maintained by the SIO ship operations department for use by
NSF-supported scientists from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing
facilities. Equipment is requested for RV Sally Ride, a 238-foot, Navy-owned
vessel built in 2014. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, SIO provides
technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following SSSE:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) Replacement Foremast for R/V Sally Ride $229,000
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.