* 2114294
* Collaborative Research: CIF: FET: Small: Realizing Joint Detection Receivers for Quantum-enhanced Optical Communications using Photonic NISQ-era Quantum Processors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Kaushik Seshadreesan, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 12/31/2021
* USD 194,087.00

Optical laser communication will constitute a key component of future space-
based data communication systems including deep-space communications. It can
support significantly higher data rates compared to traditional radio-frequency
communication with lower size, weight and transmission power requirements. The
ultimate data rates, or in other words, the communication capacity of long-range
optical lasercom links, are governed by the laws of quantum physics. Novel
receivers based on quantum physics are required in order to attain these
ultimate data rates, which are fundamentally superior to the rates supported by
conventional optical receivers. However, a structured methodology for designing
optimal versions of such quantum receivers had remained unknown. A recently
proposed quantum decoding algorithm known as belief propagation with quantum
messages promises to be a near-optimal design methodology. The project will
investigate the use of this algorithm to design quantum receivers for a large
class of communication codes and optical modulation formats. The receiver
designs are known to be in principle realizable on photonic quantum hardware.
The proposed project will explore alternative implementations of the quantum
logic required to realize the receiver circuitry on the commercially-available
photonic quantum processor of Xanadu Quantum Technologies and determine the
resource-optimal implementation. The success of this project would enable up to
5x higher optical communication rates over NASA’s future deep-space optical
lasercom systems. Moreover, a successful realization of the receiver on Xanadu’s
photonic processor would amount to a demonstration of quantum advantage over
classical processing using a near-term noisy quantum processor in a practical
application, which is an important quest in quantum information processing
today. The proposed research will provide new content for a graduate course on
quantum-enhanced classical optical communications. The project will augment the
continued efforts of University of Arizona and University of Texas at Austin to
provide educational and research opportunities to students from under-
represented groups in the emerging field of quantum information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is aimed at designing
and implementing quantum joint detection receivers (JDRs) for quantum-enhanced
optical laser communication that involve pre-detection, collective, quantum-
domain processing of blocks of received optical pulses. The design part of the
project will utilize a quantum decoding algorithm, belief propagation with
quantum messages (BPQM), which for a binary phase shift keying-modulated
lasercom system based on an exemplary 5-bit tree code was recently shown to
attain the quantum limit of minimum block decoding error probability. The BPQM
algorithm will be investigated for low-density parity check codes and for
different optical modulation formats. Pertaining to implementation, the BPQM-
based JDR design for lasercom readily translates into a quantum circuit that is
executable on a near-term, non-error-corrected, photonic, noisy intermediate-
scale quantum (NISQ) processor capable of performing cat-basis quantum logic.
Several alternative approaches are available to realize the elementary gates of
cat-basis logic, among which the resource-optimal approach is unknown. In order
to identify the optimal approach, as part of the project, theoretical and
experimental noise models will be built for the basic building blocks of the
different approaches using the photonic quantum hardware of Xanadu Quantum
Technologies. The expected performance of the BPQM-based JDR for simple 3- and
5-bit tree code examples will be numerically simulated. A complete blueprint of
the optical quantum circuit of the BPQM-JDR in terms of the identified optimal
implementation of cat-basis logic for the 5-bit linear tree code will be
developed and realized over Xanadu’s photonic quantum processor. Universal
quantum-logic manipulation of modulated quantum light underlies a number of
other quantum-enhanced classical communications and sensing applications, e.g.,
entanglement-assisted classical radio-frequency communications and sensors such
as distributed clocks and long-baseline telescopes. NISQ-era photonic quantum
hardware can potentially already power some of these applications but require a
concerted quantum engineering effort to leverage their existing capabilities.
The proposed project will accelerate this process for strong societal and
economic impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.