* 2114225
* Acquisition of an ICP-OES and IC to Increase Hydrological and Geochemical Research and Education in the School of Geosciences at the University of Oklahoma
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Andrew Madden, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 177,632.00

This EAR-IF award will provide funds for the acquisition of an inductively
coupled plasma optical emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) and an ion chromatograph
(IC) to increase geochemical and hydrological research and education at the
University of Oklahoma. The instruments will enhance research capacity in the
School of Geosciences (SoG) by filling a critical analytical void and increase
access for faculty, students, and external researchers to aqueous metal and
anion/cation analyses. The ICP-OES and IC will support on-going research
focusing on dissolved organic matter – trace metal interactions in streams and
groundwater, acid mine drainage geochemistry and hydrology, land use impacts on
water quality, chemical weathering on Earth and Mars, as well as on brine
geochemistry. Critical research training of undergraduate and graduate students
will be accomplished by integrating the use of the instruments in courses and
research experiences. Funding for outreach activities focusing on environmental
chemistry and water quality education will involve watershed groups, citizen
scientists, and underrepresented minority URM populations and will incorporate
direct exposure to the instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oklahoma University
will use the funds provided by this award to purchase a Thermo Scientific iCap
Pro XP Duo ICP-OES and a Dionex Integrion High-Pressure Ion Chromatograph
(HPIC). The ICP-OES (with accompanying hydride system) will provide sensitive
elemental and trace metal analysis of: 1) Groundwater and surface waters; 2)
Brines and high total dissolved solids (TDS) aqueous samples; 3) Soil and
sediment leachates; and 4) Digested rocks. The simultaneous, dual view ICP-OES
(Thermo Scientific iCap Pro XP) has the optical sensitivity and resolution that
is ideal for the wide range of sample elemental composition and concentrations.
The HPIC system is ideal for analysis of major anions (i.e., Cl-, NO3-, SO42-)
and cations (i.e., Na+, Ca2+, NH4+) in natural waters and perchlorate ion
(ClO4-) in brine geochemistry. The high-pressure capability of the HPIC will
allow sensitive determination of ions with enhanced peak resolution in expected
complex aqueous matrices. The relative ease of use and robustness of ICP-OES and
IC is ideal for hands-on use by students, post-doctoral staff, faculty, and
outside users in support of research and education. New collaboration with
citizen science groups (Blue Thumb) and pre-college institutions will utilize
the instrument as part of continuing STEAM outreach initiatives by the SoG at
Oklahoma University. Collaborative environmental educational outreach with
tribal educational institutions such as the Jones Academy and Navajo Nation is
vital to increasing participation of Native Americans in the geosciences.
Outreach funding also includes a part-time graduate student mentor to provide
outreach support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.