* 2114178
* NSF Student Travel Grant for IEEE Global Communications Conference 2021 (Globecom'2021)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Besma Smida, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This grant funds travel expenses for undergraduate and graduate students from US
universities to attend the 2021 IEEE Global Communications (GLOBECOM)
conference. Attending such a high-caliber technical venue is extremely valuable
for students. Not only does this expose them to the state-of-the-art research
advances in the field of communications and networking, but also affords the
opportunity to interact with peers from institutions worldwide, meet with
leading researchers from both industry and academia, and take part in
discussions that may shape the future of the field, including technology,
standards, services, and future challenges in communication
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GLOBECOM attendance will be particularly
beneficial for the careers of graduating students, as the conference includes
industrial sponsors offering job opportunities, and allows students to showcase
their research and capabilities to potential employers. A recurring highlight of
the conference is the Young Professionals week that exposes student attendees to
professional opportunities, offers fireside chats with leaders from industry and
major research centers, and features a best student paper award context,
alongside tutorial sessions covering how best to approach research, development,
and industrial opportunities that seek to hone future
talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.