* 2114894
* University of Washington for R/V Thomas G. Thompson and R/V Rachel Carson Oceanographic Instrumentation 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2023
* USD 43,303.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington for Oceanographic
Instrumentation (OI) on R/V Thompson, a 274-foot general purpose, global class
research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal
research vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).
In 2020, Thompson, in a COVID-shortened season, completed 202 funded days with
131 (65%) of them for NSF. For 2021, the vessel is scheduled for 277 total days
with 224 (80%) days for NSF. Carson had 41 days in 2020 with 1 NSF day. For
2021, there are 71 days scheduled, 32 (45%) of which are for
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, UW provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following Oceanographic
Instrumentation:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network Time Protocol (NTP) servers (2)
$14,058 &lt;br/&gt;-80C Chest Freezer $8,795 &lt;br/&gt;Niskin A (Thompson and
Carson) $20,450 &lt;br/&gt;C-Nav 5000 Receiver $13,717 &lt;br/&gt; $57,020
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present
proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF
13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and
its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.