* 2114127
* BIOMECHANICAL CONSTRAINTS AND TRADE-OFFS BETWEEN SUGAR AND BLOOD FEEDING IN MOSQUITOES
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chloé Lahondère, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,031,547.00

Although mosquitoes are well known for blood-feeding, only a small number of
species actually feed on blood. In many species, both females and males feed
solely on sugar solutions with widely varying sugar concentrations. Such
mosquitoes do not participate in pathogen transmission to humans, but have
essential roles in the ecosystem as pollinators and as food for other animals.
In a small number of mosquito species, females have evolved the ability to feed
on the blood of animals including mammals and amphibians, whose blood varies in
composition and temperature. This project’s goal is to understand how mosquitoes
cope with the physical and biological challenges associated with ingesting
different types of fluids, by comparing and contrasting species that are sugar-
and/or blood-feeders. By taking a collaborative and multidisciplinary approach,
the research will elucidate mechanisms that enable these particular species to
feed on blood, a topic of great medical and economic importance, given that
mosquitoes can transmit pathogens responsible for diseases such as malaria and
dengue to humans during blood feeding. Overall, the results of this project are
expected to expand knowledge in the fields of biomechanics and disease vector
biology and to provide preliminary understanding of how blood feeding systems
evolved in insects. The project will provide research experiences for three
graduate students and several undergraduate students recruited from HBCUs or who
are participating in exiting summer research programs. The researchers will
continue efforts to engage K-12 students in learning about insects and to
disseminate results to the public both locally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disease-vector insects such as mosquitoes
acquire nutrients from the food they ingest and can, in the process, transmit
pathogens responsible for diseases that have tremendous epidemiological impacts
on human populations. Surprisingly little is known about the relationship
between form and function in the feeding systems of blood-sucking insects, as
most research effort has revolved around pathogen transmission. Far less work
has been done to understand the physiological and biomechanical characteristics
of blood feeding and the adaptations associated with the evolutionary transition
from nectar feeding to blood feeding in mosquitoes. In this context, the
objective of this proposal is to understand and elucidate the biomechanical
mechanisms and challenges associated with feeding on both blood and sugar
solutions, providing a new functional basis for understanding how blood feeding
evolved. In this project, the research team will test the hypothesis that
mosquitoes have developed sex- and species-specific mechanisms to deal with the
challenges inherent to ingesting fluids across the broad range of properties
exhibited by nectar and blood from different sources. A multidisciplinary,
convergent approach employing complementary experimental and computational
methods will be used to determine the biomechanical constraints and trade-offs
underlying differences in fluid ingestion in mosquitoes. Results will be
disseminated in print, via internet resources like YouTube, and in public
presentations. The researchers will develop educational resources for K-12
students and participate in existing programs that bring middle and high school
students from under-represented groups to the university to engage in hands-on
science activities and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.