* 2114143
* New Frontiers in Time Series Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Matteson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Big data are now prevalent in nearly every domain. While shrinkage and sparse
estimators are essential to mitigate the volume issues posed by big datasets,
innovative models are needed to address their variety and velocity demands.
Indeed, enhanced monitoring and measurement systems now provide data at high
enough resolutions that observations can often be considered intrinsically
continuous or functional. Massive environmental, biological, industrial, and
computational networks are being dynamically recorded such that their intricate
evolution might be succinctly monitored, studied, and maintained. Vast datasets
are generated every day, ranging from large-scale satellites and remote sensing
instruments, emergency systems, and energy infrastructure, to nanoscale
electromagnetic sensors, medical devices, and imaging devices. These systems
provide rich information about our human-natural world, and most is sequential,
or time-ordered and exhibit complex trends, transitions, and dependencies.
Standard methods in multivariate statistics are unsuitable and insufficiently
adaptable. The Principal Investigator (PI) will develop new methods and
computational tools to aid data-driven scientific discovery and industry
applications. The PI will also train and mentor graduate and undergraduate
student research, freely disseminate new software and methodology across
application areas, and foster collaboration between statistics and a wide range
of fields, including economics, ecology, physics, finance, space weather,
hydrology, agriculture, energy, environmental engineering, biophysics,
mathematics, electrical engineering, human development, and computer
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most time-indexed data exhibit heteroskedastic
noise, anomalies, change points, local and global trends, and both linear and
nonlinear dependence, and there is a striking shortage of analytical tools
suitable for modeling such complexity. Shrinkage, sparse, and adaptive
estimators are exceptions and have become vital tools. Global-local and
regularized estimation, via adaptive sparsity/smoothness-inducing
penalties/priors, is essential â€” it allows computationally tractable estimation
of complex models, with greater interpretability and reduced estimation
uncertainty. The PI will develop: (i) new methods and computational frameworks
for change-point detection with increased flexibility by allowing global and
segment-specific parameters; (ii) new theoretical and application-driven
investigations into less explored aspects of hidden Markov models; (iii)
extensions of dynamic shrinkage process for robust and adaptive estimation of
change-points in the presence of outliers, spillover effects and causal
inference on dependent network time series, and distributional trend filtering;
(iv) new methods for simultaneous modeling and inference of dynamic functional
data with complex features such as long range dependence and stochastic
volatility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.