* 2114738
* Collaborative Research: Creating a Mechanism for Youth to Document Out-Of-School-Time STEM Learning as a Means for Expanding Educational Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Katie Taylor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 08/31/2024
* USD 318,932.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create the specification for
a learner-controlled system to represent youth learning in Out-of-School-Time
(OST) settings, to improve access to future Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) learning opportunities. For learners to pursue a STEM
education, and STEM careers, they must be able to move through "gatekeeping"
mechanisms that filter and sort students based on factors such as prior
coursework and grades, teacher recommendations, and language proficiency
assessments. Even though abundant evidence shows that such measures fail to
capture all important aspects of STEM learning, they are traditionally relied
upon in secondary and post-secondary STEM education contexts as indicators of
preparation for future STEM learning. These systemic processes exclude certain
minoritized groups, including Black, Indigenous, and other people of color
(BIPOC), low income, immigrant and refugee youth, and youth learning English,
from high-quality secondary and post-secondary STEM learning experiences because
existing measures do not validate their prior knowledge and experiences. Yet,
minoritized youth often engage in OST STEM learning opportunities, where their
readiness for future learning opportunities is nurtured and valued. One
challenge is to reliably document this readiness in a usable format so youth can
access new STEM learning opportunities, especially in post-secondary contexts.
This project builds strategically upon earlier work focusing on the
democratization of STEM learning through vehicles such as digital micro-
credentials or badges, and upon digital portfolios. Missing from these earlier
efforts was integration of these platforms with an infrastructure that connected
youth learners to OST STEM learning organizations and to future STEM learning
opportunities. This Innovations in Development project brings together
minoritized youth and their families, OST providers, and admissions officials
from higher education institutions to explore the needed design features for OST
"transcripts," and user stories that describe how software systems can support
their creation and sharing. Grounded in the concept of mastery-based learning,
where learning is demonstrated via action, learners will control what is
included in the transcript so that they create their own narratives about their
learning experiences. Recognizing that documentation is not the key focus of
most STEM OST organizations, this project will provide direct support for
identifying and codifying learning goals or outcomes that learners and their
families find relevant and important within different STEM activities. This
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take a Design-Based
Implementation Research (DBIR) approach and proceed by convening representatives
from three main stakeholder groups (youth and their families, OST providers, and
admissions staff) to engage in a series of discovery and design activities.
Project partners, including the Mastery Transcript Consortium (MA), STEAMville
(IL), STUDIO (WA), and Wolverine Pathways (MI), will work together with the PIs
to design templates learners can use to characterize STEM learning from each
provider, aligned with different STEM learning foci (e.g., computer science,
computational thinking, cross-cutting concepts, science and engineering
practices, and mathematics). Data collected from these sessions will be used to
address the following research questions: (1) How and why do youth and families
from minoritized communities understand and choose to participate in STEM OST
learning opportunities?, (2) How do youth understand and interact with STEM OST
learning opportunities?, (3) How do OST providers characterize the STEM learning
goals in the activities they provide?, and (4) How do college admissions
personnel view the role of informal STEM learning as part of a holistic
admissions process? This work has the potential to further the understanding of
how OST learning can be documented and shared as a part of the larger ecosystem
of STEM learning trajectories. By deeply engaging the perspectives and voices of
minoritized youth and families, this project seeks to develop a valid and
trustworthy instrument that recognizes and serves their STEM learning, thus
broadening the participation of minoritized youth in STEM education and careers.
This work will also benefit OST providers, by translating the documentation of
youth STEM learning into forms that may help communicate the efficacy of their
programs in ways that further their missions, including communicating evidence
of effectiveness to both future participants and
funders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.