* 2114156
* FSML: Minding the Gap - Improving Year-Round Data Collection to Support Continued and Expanded Biological Research in the McMurdo Dry Valleys of Antarctica
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Gooseff, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 272,858.00

The United States Antarctic Program (USAP) supports field research (i.e.,
sampling, experimental studies, and networks of long-term monitoring stations)
in the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDVs) with five summer-only camps located throughout
Taylor Valley. The Climate and Stream Monitoring Networks were started more than
30 years ago to support individual science projects. In 1993, the McMurdo Long-
Term Ecological Research (MCM LTER) project was established and, with direct
support from the National Science Foundation (NSF), took over maintenance and
upkeep of these pre-existing monitoring networks. Today, much of the technology
that underpins this infrastructure, especially the dataloggers that make up the
backbone of these sensor networks, is outdated. Moreover, the MDVs are
inaccessible by researchers outside of the austral summer (and also sometimes as
a result of unforeseen complications like Covid-19), necessitating improvements
in remote acquisition infrastructure to overcome the gap in onsite presence. A
recent decadal strategic vision for NSF-supported research in Antarctica called
for more automated field measurements. New, robust chemical and biological
sensors have been developed to support expanded biological research in this
harsh environment â€“ technology that would enable researchers working in the MDVs
to better constrain the carbon cycle as well as metabolism (gross primary
productivity and ecosystem respiration) in streams, moats (edges of the
permanently ice-covered lakes that melt out each summer), and lakes. The project
will enhance fundamental biological research by: 1) upgrading data acquisition
infrastructure, 2) adding new sensor instrumentation, and 3) improving remote
data acquisition year-round, thereby building capacity to enhance biological
monitoring and discovery in the MDVs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
expand data acquisition infrastructure (dataloggers, telemetry) to overcome the
gap in onsite presence in the McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDVs) of east Antarctica.
This aim also directly responds to the recent decadal strategic vision for NSF
research in Antarctica, which recommends pursuit of opportunities for better
coordinating and strategically augmenting existing terrestrial observation
networks. New robust chemical/biological sensors are now able to support
expanded biological research in this harsh environment, enabling better
constraint of the carbon cycle and metabolism in streams, moats (edges of our
permanently ice-covered lakes that melt out each summer), and lakes.
Consequently, they will enhance fundamental biological research by upgrading
data acquisition infrastructure, adding new sensor instrumentation, and
improving remote data acquisition year-round, thereby building capacity to
enhance biological monitoring and discovery in the MDVs. The proposed
infrastructure will provide biologically-relevant data from this difficult to
reach area, to be used by others in research proposals and papers, conducting
primary research, and/or data synthesis efforts. High-frequency data will be
streamed in near real-time, and immediately visible to the public via
interactive web-based data visualization dashboards. All data will be freely
available via the Environmental Data Initiative (EDI) Repository as well as
Antarctic specific data repositories (USAP Data Center, Antarctic Master
Directory). Short educational virtual field trip outreach videos associated with
each of the four monitoring networks will be produced and made publicly
available through the OBFS Virtual Field project, the MCM LTER website, and
project-specific social media accounts (e.g., YouTube). Outreach videos, along
with real-time dashboards of biological, climatological, and hydrological data
from the MDVs, will also be shown on wall-mounted high-definition screens
(enabled by this project) in McMurdo Station and elsewhere. An REU student and a
number of graduate students will be mentored and trained over the course of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.