* 2114808
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Improving Cybersecurity Education for Adolescents with Autism Through Automated Augmented Self-Monitoring Applications
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Charles Hughes, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,987.00

Social media and online gaming sites are ubiquitous platforms that provide peer
interaction and social development for adolescents but also pose potential
threats to health and safety. For example, cyberbullying has been connected to
negative mental health outcomes for adolescents. Addressing cyberbullying and
cybersecurity issues in these spaces is therefore essential for healthy social
development. While cyberbullying is of concern for all adolescents, adolescents
with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) are especially vulnerable and are at a
higher risk of becoming victims of bullying and theft of personal data. This
research addresses these issues by creating and employing personalized virtual
companions, whose interactions with the adolescent are guided by artificial
intelligence (AI). The personalized virtual companion will guide adolescents
with ASD to improve their self-protection strategies and increase their
cybertechnology knowledge. The goal of the project is to help prepare these
individuals to become productive and satisfied members of a modern, inclusive,
and technology-savvy workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address
the problem of cyberbullying and cybersecurity for adolescents with ASD by
developing tools based on deep learning algorithms that employ multimodal data,
e.g., facial expression, body posture, breathing rate, skin temperature, heart
rate, heart rate variability, eye gaze, verbalization, and vocalization. Fusing
data from these diverse sources is expected to enable creation of a virtual
learning environment that is inhabited by autonomous agents, some of which have
bullying or privacy-invading tendencies, and one of which is a personalized
companion that seeks to help its human friend navigate the Internet. The AI
companion must adapt its interactions based on understanding the external
(verbal and nonverbal) behaviors and internal stress indicators (e.g.,
neurosensory) of its human counterpart. Development of an AI companion is
especially challenging when working with members of a vulnerable population
whose facial expressions and vocalizations do not always match those of
neurotypical adolescents. A current issue with this type of research is that
training datasets are populated by neurotypical subjects and thus are
potentially not representative of the population this project is intended to
serve, adolescents with ASD. The desired outcomes from the project are novel
deep learning algorithms to address the shortcomings of the state-of-the-art
multimodal Facial Expression Recognition algorithms currently designed for
neurotypical adolescents. The project may also aid self-regulation of ASD
adolescents when faced with cyberbullying and attempts to invade privacy as well
as other social situations. It should also lead to an understanding of how this
AI intervention strengthens the individual’s knowledge of technology and their
affinity for cybersecurity careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program, which funds
proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case specifically
cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity
Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research
Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic benefits of
cyber systems while ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.