* 2114583
* Developing a Vision for a 21st Century National Data Infrastructure for Federal Statistics and Social and Economic Research
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Brian Harris-Kojetin, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2024
* USD 661,136.00

This project will convene a series of workshops, beginning in fiscal year 2021,
to develop a vision for a new national data infrastructure for the social and
behavioral sciences. The existing data infrastructure relies heavily upon
statistics collected in surveys and censuses, yet the long-standing survey
paradigm is under threat with declining participation rates. There are, however,
many other sources of data that increasingly are available, including
administrative data from states and local governments, public and private
institutions, and businesses. Additional sources of data include 'big data' from
the internet, connected devices, and sensors. This project will conduct three
interrelated workshops on issues related to the development of a new national
data infrastructure. A short consensus report will be written at the conclusion
of each workshop. An improved data infrastructure is needed to address pressing
social problems. Data and statistics from the federal government and academic
researchers, including unemployment rates, crime rates, and people's perceptions
of their society, provide the foundation for policymakers, businesses, and
individuals to make informed decisions regarding the economy, society, and their
lives. An improved national data infrastructure would provide many societal
benefits, including improved decision making and more informed public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need for a new data infrastructure has been
widely acknowledged as national governments around the world recognize the
strategic importance of data. The barriers, challenges, and issues for a new
data infrastructure are complex and will require innovative approaches, methods,
and tools. It also will require the support and trust of multiple actors,
including the public, academia; federal, state, and local governments, and the
private sector. The workshops will address these issues by focusing on three
specific areas and questions. The first workshop will focus on delineating the
scope, components, and key characteristics of a 21st century data
infrastructure, including topics such as governance, the technical skills
needed, and data sharing. The second workshop will focus on identifying the
technology, tools, and capabilities needed for data access, sharing, use, and
analysis, while protecting privacy and confidentiality. The third workshop will
explore the implications of using multiple data sources for major survey
programs, including linking data to survey responses to make surveys less
burdensome and more efficient. Following each workshop, the organizing committee
will discuss the key themes and their conclusions, which will be summarized in a
targeted consensus report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.