* 2114275
* Superresolution lensfree microscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,12/31/2024
* Euan McLeod, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 12/31/2024
* USD 381,418.00

Title: Superresolution Lensfree Microscopy&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microscopy is
important for studying biological systems, natural materials, and human-made
devices. Optical microscopes that use visible light are traditionally incapable
of resolving objects smaller than one-half the wavelength of the light, which is
a size scale generally smaller than bacteria, but larger than viruses. Research
into superresolution microscopy enables visualization of even smaller objects,
which can be used to identify viruses in medical testing, learn how the inner
biological mechanisms of cells operate, quantify nanoscale pollutants in air and
water, or characterize synthesized nanomaterials to ensure that they are being
manufactured as desired. A specific type of optical microscopy, lensfree
microscopy, relies on computational algorithms to reconstruct microscopic images
from shadow patterns recorded on a camera sensor. It is more compact and cost-
effective than traditional microscopes and offers a larger field of view. The
objective of this project is to achieve superresolution with lensfree
microscopes to visualize ultra-small objects while maintaining the
aforementioned advantages of lensfree microscopy. In addition to graduate
students, undergraduates and high schoolers are involved in the project, and a
new teaching module is being created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resolution limit
in lensfree microscopy depends on a variety of factors, including signal-to-
noise ratio, coherence, and diffraction. Coherent lensfree microscopy has
previously achieved diffraction-limited resolution, while incoherent lensfree
microscopy (e.g., fluorescence imaging) has previously demonstrated resolution
that is several times worse than the diffraction limit. In this project,
superresolution lensfree microscopy is being achieved by positioning a
nanostructured mask within the evanescent field of an unknown object. This mask
can encode high resolution information (in a way that is later decodable) about
the object that would normally be lost due to diffraction. By systematically
sweeping geometric parameters of the mask, the research team is generating
knowledge of what range of resolution boost is possible. The impact of noise is
being quantified. The speed and resolution performance of different
reconstruction algorithms are being compared. Optical methods of superresolved
mask geometry estimation are being tested. This knowledge can inform theoretical
models that will then be used to guide parameter choices for future improvements
that can enable better resolution with compact and portable equipment and fast
computational reconstruction times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.