* 2114920
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Learning Platform and Education Curriculum for Artificial Intelligence-Driven Socially-Relevant Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Long Cheng, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 05/31/2024
* USD 146,000.00

With the rise of social media, cyberharassment has been identified as a critical
social-cybersecurity problem. Artificial intelligence (AI) has immense potential
to solve this problem by automating detection. Nevertheless, while AI can be a
useful tool in the fight against cyberharassment, it is vulnerable to
adversarial attacks. In addition, AI-driven cyberharrassment detection models
may have embedded social problems, such as fairness and ethics. To advance AI-
cybersecurity education, this project will develop curricular modules and hands-
on labs. These modules will be based on cutting-edge research on AI-driven
cyberharassment detection, related attacks against the AI models, and social
issues in AI models for cyberharassment detection. This project will benefit
both computer science (CS) and non-CS (e.g., social science) students due to the
highly interdisciplinary nature of AI-driven cyberharassment detection . The
pervasiveness and severity of cyberharassment in the era of social media makes
this project ideal for motivating and educating students about the mutual needs
and benefits of AI and social-cybersecurity. This project will attract students
with diverse backgrounds (specifically from underrepresented groups) into the
AI-cybersecurity field and increase general awareness of cybersecurity and AI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to transform recent research
outcomes in emerging social-cybersecurity into an educational format. This
project will develop hands-on labs that cover different dimensions of AI-driven
social-cybersecurity and demonstrate the interplay between AI and cybersecurity.
The hands-on labs will be integrated into a cloud-based open learning platform,
which contains 1) the project team’s homegrown and classic AI-driven
cyberharassment detection algorithms; 2) adversarial attacks against these AI
algorithms and defenses; and 3) social issues and bias mitigation in AI models.
The proposed learning platform will provide students with an in-depth
understanding of social-cybersecurity problems and AI techniques through their
own experimentation. The project team will develop course materials for both CS
and non-CS students and will also develop curriculum materials and organize
summer camps for high school students to increase their cybersecurity awareness
and interest in the related fields. The cloud-based open labs and learning
platform designed in this project will be easily accessed by faculty from other
universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.