* 2114822
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Multiscale Reduced-Order Modeling and Experimental Framework for Lithium-ion Batteries under Mechanical Abuse Conditions
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Xiang Zhang, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 11/30/2024
* USD 271,750.00

This grant will focus on developing an integrated computational modeling and
experimental framework for simulating lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) under
mechanical abuse conditions, such as impact loading. LIBs are the most used
power source for electric vehicles, which leads to an ever-increasing need to
improve the safety of LIBs so that they can be used in mechanical abuse
conditions. To improve the safety design and ultimately reliability of advanced
long life and high energy LIBs, a recent trend is to use numerical simulations
as an alternative to expensive and time-consuming real-world testing for LIB
response prediction under mechanical abuse conditions. However, due to the
multiscale nature of LIBs and the nonlinear response of LIB components, it is
computationally expensive to directly model the LIBs by accounting for the
complex microstructures and nonlinear responses of different LIB components. To
address this issue, the PIs plan to develop a multiscale modeling framework that
better balances accuracy and efficiency for LIB modeling. The characterization
and testing of LIB components at different loading conditions are also planned,
which will facilitate the model development and eventually validate the
computational framework. The research will also be complemented by establishing
a responsive and flexible educational and outreach program based on curriculum
development and summer research programs for undergraduate and high-school
students with an engineering focus, as well as K-12 and underrepresented
minority outreach through STEM education centers at both participating
institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop an
integrated multiscale reduced-order modeling and experimental framework for LIBs
under mechanical abuse conditions by integrating physics­-based constitutive
models for LIB components with a multiscale reduced order modeling technique. To
achieve this goal, the research encompasses the following three aims and plans:
1) Determine the constitutive models of battery components with full coverage of
low, intermediate, and high strain rates; 2) Develop a multiscale reduced-order
computational model to predict the response of LIB cells by advancing the
eigendeformation-based reduced ­order homogenization model (EHM); 3) Conduct
dynamic testing of battery cells to validate the developed multiscale models and
exercise the validated model for LIB design and safety evaluation. The
multiscale modeling framework will achieve reakthroughs in designing optimal LIB
systems, which will expand the conventional boundaries of LIB performance. This
project will allow the PIs to advance their current computational modeling and
experimental testing expertise for LIB modeling and design, which could
potentially accelerate the discovery, innovation, and certification of state-of-
the-art battery technologies, and establish their long-term career in modeling
and testing of complex material systems and
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.