* 2114218
* CNS Core: Small: Operating System Approaches for a Consolidated Rack Computer
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jakob Eriksson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,957.00

The objective of this project is to lay the foundations for a new type of
computer, termed a “rack computer”. Named for the racks commonly used to hold
computers in today's data centers, a rack computer consists of several
individual computers, co-located in a rack. Instead of large number of
individually managed computers, however, a rack computer appears to the user as
if it was a single computer with the combined resources of the individual
machines. Toward this goal, the PI will investigate new programming models,
communication mechanisms and operating system designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to existing techniques from the cloud-, cluster-
and super-computing worlds, a rack computer allows the same program to more
seamlessly scale from a basic laptop computer, to a full rack of powerful
servers. Because one rack can hold a substantial amount of computing power,
including as many as 10,000 CPU cores, and because rack computers offer
substantial efficiency gains over current techniques, a single rack computer may
be enough to host many services that today require complex engineering to bring
to Internet scale. This promises to substantially reduce both development and
deployment complexity, and thus costs, while at the same time improving energy
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.