* 2114395
* Polar Education Conference: Improving JEDI for students interested in Polar STEM Careers
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Seth Campbell, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 49,805.00

Although most environmental challenges disproportionately impact
underrepresented communities, few nation-wide environmental programs effectively
support or mentor students from these populations. This is particularly true of
programs that train students in polar and climate sciences. The geosciences have
long lacked diversity and are hampered by many barriers to entry for
underrepresented students. The field environment associated with polar and
climate research can be a barrier to students who have limited access to
required equipment, supplies, or pre-field training. Under-represented students
also often have limited exposure to related content in school and are
confronting intrinsic cultural concerns about a career in these fields. To
address these issues, the University of Maine will organize and support a
conference where participants will focus on 1) developing new strategies for
engaging under-represented students in polar sciences, both in the field and in
the classroom; 2) developing relationships and collaborations between high
school educators, informal educators who are part of the Upward Bound (UB)
program and professional polar scientists; and 3) establishing a dialogue
towards long-term engagement between educators and the Polar STEM community.
Conference attendees will also have an opportunity to interact with students in
the Juneau Icefield Research Program (JIRP) program. Positive undergraduate
experiences and outdoor interest are two factors that have been attributed to
attracting undergraduate students into geosciences, and a strong connection with
mentors as well as summer research experiences are dominant factors in
retention. Therefore, development of programs that provide opportunities for
long term mentoring from faculty and inspiring summer field or non-field
research experiences for students within target demographics is an important
goal. This conference focuses on developing these opportunities for students in
the Polar community by leveraging existing research and education resources.

This conference will support the development of new long-term collaborations
focused on supporting the engagement of under-represented students in Polar STEM
fields. The participants will strategize on how to improve polar STEM education
through field experiences and through the development of data-centric, problem-
based educational resources for the traditional classroom. These opportunities
will not only benefit the attendees, but also the students whom they teach.
Providing opportunities for students to learn about a career in Polar science is
the first step in increasing a more diverse workforce within the field. The
conference will be open to earth science educators and polar scientists from
across the nation and to UB faculty and educators in Alaska, Washington, Maine,
Florida and other UB programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.