* 2114771
* Collaborative Research: Timescales and drivers of floodplain disequilibrium at climatic transitions
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Isaac Larsen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 78,449.00

Rivers and floodplains significantly influence the landscapes and environments
through which they pass. These systems exhibit a range of forms and
characteristics (morphologies) controlled by a balance between the availability
of unconsolidated rock (sediment) and the river’s capacity to transport that
sediment. As climate exerts a major control on these variables, floodplain
morphologies are expected to undergo major changes as Earth’s climate warms.
Under a warming climate, sediment supply often declines relative to transport
capacity and narrowing floodplains are characterized by vertical cutting through
older deposits creating stair-stepped landscape features called river terraces.
The goal of this study is to deepen our understanding of how floodplains have
responded to different magnitudes and timescales of climatic changes in the past
to enhance our ability to predict the extent to which they will change in the
future. This goal will be achieved by determining the timing of river terrace
formation and comparing it to known climate shifts throughout Earth’s recent
geological past. The project also supports a summer workshop on landscape
evolution for middle school girls from historically underrepresented groups, the
development of an accessible undergraduate virtual field project on terrace
formation, and the facilitation of a community field workshop to share project
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific research questions include: (1) What
duration and intensity of climatic change is required to drive significant
changes to floodplain morphology? (2) How long does it take for floodplains to
establish new, stable morphologies after significant climate-driven changes? (3)
To what extent do non-climatic mechanisms counter or enhance climatic controls
on floodplain processes? These questions will be addressed by resolving the
timing of ~14,000 years of floodplain aggradation and degradation preserved in
river terraces in eastern Scotland and comparing them against the timing of
major and minor climatic transitions and glaciations. Eastern Scotland is an
ideal location to undertake this work because it is tectonically inactive, has
an excellent climate chronology, has undergone both continental ice sheet and
alpine glaciation, and contains river terrace successions. The terrace
chronology will be developed using radiocarbon, optically stimulated
luminescence, and cosmogenic nuclide exposure dating. A comparison of the timing
and duration of river morphology changes between field sites with the same
climatic and glacial history, but with different catchment properties, will be
undertaken to determine how non-climatic variables influence aggradation and
degradation cycles. The research will also address the role of prior glacial
erosion on influencing floodplain morphology and modern sediment
routing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.