* 2114542
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Timely Computing and Learning over Communication Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jing Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Due to the large volume of datasets and the stringent communication requirements
by modern applications, the exchange of data for learning and computing purposes
needs to be done in a timely manner. This project introduces the notion of age
of information (AoI), used to assess timeliness in networks, into the study of
federated learning (FL), with the aim of providing low-latency and
communication-efficient means for data exchange in large-scale FL systems. The
proposal focuses on designing novel client scheduling, information quantization
and client-server association methods to enable timely FL over wireless
communication networks. This research is expected to result in significant
broader impacts rendering large-scale deployment of real-time monitoring and
information sharing systems using FL. It can potentially impact various
applications, including collaborative autonomous driving, precision healthcare,
and others. The algorithms, analysis, and experimentation developed will advance
the state of the art in communication theory, networking, and machine learning,
and would naturally translate into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by
the PIs in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design and analyze efficient agent scheduling policies and communication schemes
that realize the notion of timely FL over communication networks imposing
various system level constraints. It includes three principal thrusts. The first
thrust focuses on developing various timely and low-latency agent scheduling
policies, inspired by the AoI metric, and analyzing their convergence
performances. To further improve the communication efficiency, the second thrust
investigates novel joint model compression and scheduling approaches to enhance
the communication efficiency over unreliable networks while maintaining
reasonable FL performance. To cope with the dynamically evolving communication
environment, the third thrust develops online learning based agent grouping and
model aggregation approaches to enable timely hierarchical FL, where multiple
servers are connected together through a hierarchical multihop network. Finally,
a thorough validation of the developed algorithms will be performed using real-
world datasets and a lab testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.