* 2114510
* NSF-BSF: Ecological Implications and Evolutionary Dynamics of a Nascent Sodalis-allied symbiont in a Parasitoid Wasp.
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Colin Dale, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2024
* USD 576,408.00

This NSF-BSF project is a collaboration between scientists at the University of
Utah, USA and the University of Haifa, Israel. It focuses on analyzing the
connection between parasitoid wasps and a symbiotic bacterium named Sodalis.
Many insects on our planet have evolved associations with Sodalis bacteria which
often produce nutrients or other benefits for their insect hosts, allowing them
to persist under conditions in which nutrient availability is sub-optimal. The
parasitoid wasp under study in this project has the most-recently derived
Sodalis symbiosis yet discovered in nature. It provides an unprecedented
opportunity to study the mechanistic and evolutionary bases of emerging
symbiotic relationships using techniques including laboratory insect
manipulation, bacterial genetic modification and genome sequencing. It will
yield important insight into a phenomenon known as degenerative evolution, in
which symbiotic bacteria (including many pathogens) undergo drastic gene loss in
response to confinement in a host. Notably, the genome of the Sodalis symbiont
in this project is undergoing proliferation of parasitic genetic elements called
insertion sequence elements, that replicate and insert themselves into bacterial
genes, causing extensive disruption and loss of gene functions. This
proliferation will be studied using experimental evolution and genome
sequencing. In addition, it will provide a mechanistic understanding of the
process of maternal symbiont transmission. Broader impacts will focus on the
education of middle and high school students in Utah and Haifa, who will learn
about the biology and bio-control potential of parasitoids and will engage in
the collection of parasitoids from their local environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects from many different families, encompassing myriad
lifestyles and habitats, maintain long-term associations with symbiotic bacteria
of the genus Sodalis. In some cases, these associations are ancient in origin
and the resulting Sodalis symbionts demonstrate extensive genome degeneration as
a consequence of the isolated and uniform symbiotic lifestyle. Genome
degeneration involves accumulation of mutations that inactivate and erode genes
evolving under relaxed selection. Inspection of the genomes of nascent symbionts
reveal that selfish insertion sequence (IS)-elements play an important role in
the process of degeneration. These IS-elements undergo proliferation in the
early-stages of host-association, presenting a potent mechanism for inactivation
of bacterial genes and yielding repetitive templates for deletogenic
recombination events. This project focuses on a nascent Sodalis symbiont that
lives in association with a parasitoid wasp, has been cultured in the laboratory
and is amenable to genetic manipulation. The mechanistic basis and evolutionary
consequences of IS-element proliferation will be studied in vitro and in vivo
using experimental evolution. Notably, some IS-elements in this Sodalis symbiont
have acquired bacterial genes that likely enable them to silence the
transposition of competing elements, facilitating IS-element “war games”. The
role of these genes in the proliferation process will be examined via genetic
manipulation of the symbionts. Genetic approaches will also be utilized to
identify the bacterial determinants of vertical symbiont transmission in this
system. Together, these activities will provide important new insight into the
early, deterministic stages of genome degeneration, enhancing our understanding
of the evolution of mutualistic and pathogenic
associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.