* 2114797
* DNA demethylation in maize endosperm gene regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Gent, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2024
* USD 936,153.00

In addition to embryos, seeds contain endosperm, which is similar to the
placenta in that it is a separate product of fertilization that provides
nutrition to the embryo. Endosperm is different from other plant organs not only
in terms of genetics, but also epigenetics. In particular, genes with identical
DNA sequences in endosperm produce different physical traits depending on
whether they were inherited maternally or paternally. The goal of this project
is to understand how DNA is modified in endosperm to cause genes to be regulated
in this way. Endosperm is the major source of calories for human consumption, so
understanding how genes are regulated in endosperm is important for agricultural
science. While the project will focus on maize (corn), one of the most important
food crops in the world, fundamental principles of endosperm gene regulation
discovered through this work will also apply to other plants. The project will
also include an outreach component to elementary school students and teachers to
encourage biology career paths and to educate on scientific
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants, DNA is demethylated by DNA
glycosylases. Endosperm is distinguished from other tissues by activity of
specific DNA glycosylases at thousands of genomic loci, as evidenced primarily
by work in the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana. This project will build on this
foundation, but with research on maize because of its experimental advantages
and the agricultural importance of its endosperm. The goals are to use RNA,
chromatin, and methylation sequencing methods in glycosylase mutant and wild-
type endosperm to determine what genomic features recruit glycosylases and how
their demethylation affects chromatin structure and transcription. In addition,
the data generated from these experiments will be used to design synthetic gene
expression modules for testing the resulting predictions and for controlling
gene expression in endosperm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms program in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems of the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.