* 2114164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impact of Thermo-erosion Permafrost Tunnels to Physical and Ecological Processes in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Knut Kielland, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 61,186.00

Climate warming is driving rapid permafrost degradation throughout the Arctic,
with cascading impacts across the ecosystem. This work centers on a particular
type of permafrost degradation, involving the formation of underground tunnels
that can persist across multiple years before either refreezing or collapsing.
The existence of these tunnels has been documented opportunistically, but they
are difficult to detect using traditional methods such as aerial photography, so
they remain understudied. Previous research in Arctic Alaska found that
wolverines use these tunnels for resting and reproductive dens during winter.
This study examines wolverinesâ€™ use of these structures by locating additional
tunnels to understand how these caves are used by wolverines and other Arctic
animals as well as how they impact local permafrost and snow conditions.
Although permafrost tunneling is recognized as an occasional precursor to the
development of thermo-erosion gullies, the extent to which tunneling per se
influences the physical and ecological processes of permafrost degradation
remains unaddressed. Tunnels that persist over winter could alter the impacts of
permafrost degradation in important ways, since overwinter tunnels likely change
the local thermal regime of the active layer and snowpack, in addition to
providing structural habitat for resting, denning, or hibernating wildlife.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how overwintering tunnels and
cave systems influence diverse ecological components of the Arctic system.
Specifically, the project team evaluates the hypotheses that wintertime caves
(1) provide structural and thermal protection for diverse species in the Arctic
mammal community, (2) alter wintertime temperature and moisture of the near-
surface ground (i.e., the cave roof), and (3) reduce the quality of overlying
snowpack as habitat for subnivean mammals by altering vapor flux through the
snowpack. The team investigates these hypotheses by (1) obtaining wintertime GPS
collar data, wildlife tracks, and photographs from motion-activated cameras at
caves, and comparing temperature and humidity in caves to other forms of
structural habitat, (2) measuring soil temperature, soil moisture, and physical
snow properties at caves and control sites, and (3) recording wintertime
activity of small mammals on overlying tundra and control sites through nest
surveys. This project advances our understanding of how permafrost degrades, and
the ecosystem-wide impacts associated with such degradation. The project
involves visits to Arctic communities to discuss findings, receive feedback from
community representatives, and strengthen relationships between researchers and
local land users. Additionally, researchers visit local schools and produce
educational material highlighting the importance of interdisciplinary Arctic
climate change research for helping understand the repercussions of the changes
local communities are seeing in their environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.