* 2114230
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Foregrounding Bystanders as Stakeholders in Smart Home Product Design
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Franziska Roesner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2025
* USD 319,077.00

The privacy choices that individuals make regarding their own devices often
affect the privacy of those around them. At the same time, those privacy choices
are constrained by the choices of the people who manufacture the devices. These
issues are becoming more urgent with the expansion of the Internet of Things
(IoT) into applications from smart-home devices to public surveillance. The
massive amounts of data collected and shared by IoT devices are raising profound
privacy concerns not only among primary users of IoT (those who purchase and
install the devices), but also secondary users (e.g. other members of their
households), and bystanders (e.g. visitors to or employees in a smart home, or
people passing by a self-driving car). A key goal of this project is to
understand the varying roles these parties have in decisions about data
collection, and what products could be doing to better meet their privacy
expectations. To that end, the second key goal is to work with designers and
developers of IoT devices to develop materials, methods, and models for building
products that enhance daily life without endangering social fabrics or norms.
Together, these understandings and methods will expand the impact of the work
widely in educational and product development contexts, and provide useful input
to technology policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project approaches this
research from multiple angles. First, using surveys and other empirical methods,
the research team will explore the IoT experiences, privacy expectations, and
concerns of groups of people for whom bystander concerns are likely to be
amplified, such as domestic employees (e.g. in-home care attendants), or
residents and guests of pre-equipped "smart" housing. Second, via interviews and
surveys, the research team will study smart home product teams to understand the
perspectives of the people who design and build IoT products, including how they
currently make decisions about the data use of non-primary users -- if they
consider it at all. Based on the findings, the researchers will develop a)
prototype interventions to provide non-primary users with relevant information
and/or better control over their privacy, and b) interventions to improve
product teams' decision-making about bystander privacy in the design process.
The research team will evaluate the interventions via in-home/in-office
experiments and cognitive walkthrough usability
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.