* 2114570
* Tackling microbial biodiversity to create ecological strategies relevant to soil carbon cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Edward Brzostek, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 756,318.00

Soil contains the second largest reservoir of carbon on earth. As climate change
continues, altered temperature and precipitation can affect soil microorganisms
and alter the cycling of carbon in soil, potentially mitigating or exacerbating
climate change. The ability of scientists to predict this feedback remains poor,
at least in part because the ecology and function of microorganisms in soil is
not well understood. Further, soil carbon is a mixture of everything from simple
sugars to complex plant and microbial debris. This research will determine which
microorganisms consume key types of soil carbon. The experimental work will
consider a range of soils from distinct regions, climates, and soil types to
provide broadly applicable knowledge. The project will test the hypothesis that
describing the populations of microorganisms that break down and consume
different constituents of soil carbon will improve soil carbon models. Accurate
predictions of ecosystem feedbacks to global change benefit society by allowing
decision makers to prepare for the future. Additional broader impacts of this
work include experiential learning opportunities for over one hundred high
school students in a rural and economically depressed region of West Virginia.
The project will contribute hands-on science learning activities to an early
college program and STEM academy to improve scientific literacy with at-risk,
economically disadvantaged, under-served youth in a county where fewer than 10%
of adults have bachelor’s degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A single gram of soil
contains thousands of microbial ‘species’, making soils among the most
biodiverse habitats on earth. Perhaps due to this biodiversity, the struggle to
connect composition with function in microbial communities persists. This
research will connect microbial identity and phylogeny to phenotypic traits by
quantifying taxon-specific rates of carbon assimilation and growth. The traits
of soil microbes will be leveraged to build ecological strategies that connect
them to soil carbon pools and facilitate ecosystem modeling. Specifically, the
project will test the hypothesis that soil heterotrophs can be grouped as
primary decomposers that assimilate complex plant debris, secondary decomposers
that assimilate microbial necromass, passive consumers that assimilate labile
dissolved substrates and predatory microbes that consume live microorganism.
Using phylogenetic tools, the researchers will determine whether these
ecological strategies are evolutionarily conserved, facilitating connections
between taxonomy and function. The empirical data will be used to refine and
parameterize a microbial-explicit decomposition model. This effort uses state-
of-the-art empirical tools, phylogenetics, and ecological theory to distill
microbial communities into a currency that models can directly use to enhance
our predictive understanding of soil carbon cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.