* 2114640
* Solution and Interfacial Properties of Catenated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Mesfin Tsige, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 06/30/2025
* USD 321,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Door chains, snow chains, anchor
cables, jewelry necklaces, and chain mail all consist of interconnected metal
rings. Because of their interlocked structure, these materials combine
flexibility with mechanical strength. Similarly interlocked structures,
consisting of two or more intertwined rings, can also be produced on a molecular
level by chemical synthesis, where each ring consists of only one single
molecule, known as polymer or macrocycle. In the past, the synthesis of these
so-called catenanes and polycatenanes has been limited to short chains and low
yields. Recent advances in synthesis, however, are pushing the limits of
polycatenane synthesis to new levels of complexity and reproducibility, opening
a door toward using polycatenanes in nano-scale applications such as molecular
motors, programmable electronic switches, and actuators. Because polycatenanes
represent a new type of polymer-based architecture, basic understanding of their
material properties remains limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research and education aimed at advancing the
fundamental understanding of how catenanes and polycatenanes behave in solution
and at interfaces. The principal investigator is using state-of-the-art computer
simulation methods and machine learning techniques to design and optimize models
for interlocked polymeric architectures and use them to elucidate the material
properties of polycatenanes in specific applications. This research extends the
current frontier of mesoscale and multiscale modeling as a method of informing
the design of nanoscale molecular assemblies. The project engages graduate
students, undergraduate students through the NSF-REU center at the School of
Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, and high school students from the
Akron, Ohio area. The principal investigator and the graduate students supported
by this grant will visit local schools that are serving large numbers of
minorities and will encourage this group of students to take science courses and
pursue careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF award supports theoretical and
computational research and education aimed at advancing the fundamental
understanding of polymer architectures known as catenanes and polycatenanes.
Catenanes, together with the more complex polycatenanes, represent mechanically
interlocked polymeric structures that are held together by mechanical bonds, not
by covalent bonds that usually determine the properties of polymers. The PI will
employ molecular simulation techniques based on a bead-spring coarse-grained
model to investigate and rationalize the material properties of catenanes in
solution and at interfaces. Specific projects target the translocation of
catenated polymers through narrow pores, the tension distribution in catenated
polymer brushes, and the development of machine learning-guided mesoscale models
for catenanes. This research provides groundwork for including catenanes into
the mesoscale and multiscale modeling of polymeric architectures and thus
extends the current frontier of simulating complex supramolecular assemblies.
The project involves graduate students as well as undergraduate students through
the NSF-REU center at the School of Polymer Science and Polymer Engineering, and
high school students from the Akron, Ohio area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.