* 2114974
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Cybersecurity Education in the Age of Artificial Intelligence: A Novel Proactive and Collaborative Learning Paradigm
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Tonglin Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,934.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) techniques, especially machine learning (ML), show
great promise for improving quality of life. However, recent research has
demonstrated that AI techniques can be manipulated, evaded, and misled. While
progress has been made to better understand the trustworthiness and security of
AI techniques, little has been done to translate this knowledge to education and
training. There is a critical need to foster a qualified cybersecurity workforce
that understands the usefulness, limitations, and best practices of AI
technologies in the cybersecurity domain. This project will address this
important issue by designing and implementing a virtual, proactive, and
collaborative learning paradigm that can engage learners with different
backgrounds. The approach will benefit a wide range of learners, especially
underrepresented students. It will also help the general public understand the
security implications of AI. This project has the ability to transform education
at the intersection of cybersecurity and AI/ML; shed light on explainable AI in
cybersecurity; and grow a cybersecurity workforce that possesses AI
competencies. Products, including the research findings and curriculum, will be
disseminated through a variety of mechanisms, such as workshops, peer-reviewed
conferences, and journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds research
and education capacity through the formation of a multidisciplinary team with
expertise in cybersecurity, AI, and statistics. The team will systematically
investigate two cohesive research and education goals. First, an immersive
learning environment will be developed to motivate students to explore AI/ML
development in the context of real-world cybersecurity scenarios by constructing
learning models with tangible objects. The proposed learning environment enables
an AI/ML mechanism that will provide personalized explanations on the AI/ML
outputs by considering the distinct background knowledge of the individual
learners. Second, the team will design a proactive education paradigm encourages
students to collaboratively identify new AI/ML-specific threats in the
cybersecurity domain and develop innovative and trustworthy AI/ML solutions. The
learning paradigm will ultimately enable effective retention and transfer of
multidisciplinary AI-cybersecurity knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) program to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the
fields of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC
program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic
Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the
growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security
and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.