* 2114266
* Compressive ultrahigh-speed imaging beyond trillions of frames per second using spatiotemporally encoded metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zhiwen Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2024
* USD 445,000.00

Capturing ultrafast phenomena in their actual time of occurrence plays a central
role in the discovery of new scientific principles and the development of new
technologies. For example, the abilities to monitor transient molecular states
using the pump-probe spectroscopy have provided new insight into chemical
reactions. The premise for a typical pump-probe method is that identical
phenomenon will be induced by identical pump pulses, affording the opportunity
to study it repeatedly. However, many ultrafast phenomena are either non-
repeatable or irreversible, and thus they cannot be imaged using the
conventional pump-probe techniques. Compact, affordable, and single-shot
ultrafast imaging technology beyond trillions of frames per second remains an
unmet need for the observation of non-periodic and irreversible transient
events. Merging an artificially engineered synthetic surface, called
metasurface, and the compressive sensing technology, the research aims to
develop a compact, metasurface-enabled, single-shot imaging system for capturing
the dynamic properties of ultrafast phenomena and uncovering the unknown or
hidden laws that govern such dynamics. The program will closely integrate
diverse research, teaching, and outreach activities together to enhance
photonics education infrastructures at the university and will form a unique
platform that will make broad impacts on human resource and education. The
proposed research will also generate opportunities at both the college and K-12
levels and the related results will be used for designing exhibitions for local
educational events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research
program is to integrate two cutting-edge technologies – the optical metasurface
and compressive sensing – together to develop a compact, cost-effective, single-
shot imaging system enabling ultrahigh-speed imaging beyond trillions of frames
per second. The system can be used for capturing the dynamic properties of
ultrafast phenomena and uncovering the unknown or hidden laws that govern such
dynamics. Empowered by the metasurface – a synthetic surface consisting of
subwavelength-sized elements (meta-atoms) that locally engineer the
electromagnetic response on the nanoscale – the ultrafast imaging system encodes
the incoming optical information using a metasurface-enabled “pixelized” encoder
both in space and in time. The encoded information is then captured by a normal
camera. By leveraging the compressive sensing algorithm and the high temporal
resolution of the metasurface encoder, a three-dimensional ultrafast movie
revealing information in (x, y, z, t) dimensions is computationally
reconstructed for an ultrafast non-periodic event, which is previously not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.