* 2114442
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Situational Awareness for Resilient Operation of Distribution Networks with Inverter-based distributed energy resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2023
* Mohammad Shadmand, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,997.00

With the increasing importance of clean, affordable, reliable, and resilient
electricity networks, large scale integration of distributed energy resources
(DERs), such as solar generations, and battery storages, has been considered and
implemented in distribution networks. With the proliferation of such resources,
coordinated control and management of distribution networks and the DER clusters
have become of upmost importance to achieve optimal, reliable, resilient, and
stable operation during normal mode and grid contingencies. This research will
advance the scientific foundations of grid management using inverter based DERs
and allow the new requirements of distribution networks by unlocking additional
grid services capabilities from residential, commercial or industrial customers.
The outcome of this project is expected to have substantial impacts on
reliability and resilience of our electricity network with large-scale
integration of renewable inverter based DERs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this collaborative proposal is to combine artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning with power systems and power electronics concepts to design
novel situational awareness and corrective action identification tools for
reliable, resilient operation of distribution networks with a high penetration
of inverter-based DERs. This project includes the following key aspects; 1)
Development of new methods to integrate multi-rate time-series data sets in
distribution networks with inverter-based DERs for network situational
assessment; 2) establishment of an enforced coherency-based aggregation for
clustering inverter-based DERs even if they were initially non-coherent; and 3)
development of a stability-based optimization framework for boundary
identification of islanded stable clusters of heterogeneous DERs, critical, and
flexible loads during grid contingencies. The intellectual significance of the
project includes: 1) development of a multi-rate, multi-sensor, probabilistic
graphical-model-based method for data fusion and distribution network
situational awareness with proliferated inverter-based DERs; 2) establishment of
a coherency-based aggregation and dynamic model development technique to enforce
coherency and enable effective clustering among DERs and to realize a true
aggregate model of DER clusters; and 3) development of a Lyapunov stability-
based optimization framework for boundary identification of autonomously
islanded clusters of heterogeneous DERs, critical and flexible loads in
distribution networks to enhance grid reliability and resilience during grid
contingencies. Successful completion of this project will have significant
impacts on grid reliability and resilience with large-scale integration of
inverter-based DERs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.