* 2114574
* Examination of Long Term Development of Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Melissa Murphy, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 145,164.00

Researchers are conducting archaeological analysis focused on understanding the
origins, emergence, persistence, and contraction of inequality in emerging
complex societies. Archaeology is uniquely suited for the study of these
dynamics due to the high-resolution material data and great time depth that the
archaeological record affords investigators. The researchers consider the
factors that contributed to inequality in the past with the aim of contributing
to understanding inequality in the present-day. The project also increases
access to leadership opportunities for individuals traditionally
underrepresented in archaeology. Two members of project leadership are women and
one is an underrepresented in science doctoral student. This research not only
trains graduate students in the field but will be integrated into undergraduate
courses including the “Origins of the State” where students will better
understand the linkages between complex societies, emergent inequalities, and
inequity, as well as the critical role played by archaeology in illuminating
these issues. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary and multinational
team will investigate inequality through the detailed, comparative excavation
and analysis of ancient households, storage features, and mortuary contexts
dating to multiple time periods. Large samples of households, storage features,
and burials will be excavated, and comparative statistical analysis (Gini
coefficients) will be applied to variables linked to inequality, such as, for
example, house size and complexity. The Gini coefficient is a numerical measure
of the unequal concentration of some measured variable within a community or
among communities in a society and is used by economists to measure inequality
in contemporary societies. These large archaeological datasets and their Gini
coefficients allows the team to empirically measure inequality through time.
This kind of large-scale statistical analysis provides an important case study
to the understanding of inequality worldwide from the human past. The
investigation challenges common impressions that once established, inequality is
unchanging and inevitable. Intensities of economic and social inequality are
instead highly situational and dynamically linked to broader social change,
leadership strategies, and interregional interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.