* 2114789
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Artificial Intelligence for Cybersecurity Education via a Machine Learning-Enabled Security Knowledge Graph
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Huan Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Cybersecurity education is exceptionally challenging because its learning
outcomes often comprise fragmented information that fails to provide learners
with adaptive guidance on how to connect and build on the concepts they have
learned. This project will develop an artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled
cybersecurity tool referred to as a knowledge graph (AISecKG) to address this
cybersecurity education challenge. Knowledge graphs, widely used by search
engines and social networks, integrate data and can store linked descriptions of
items such as objects, concepts, and events. This project applies a novel
learning approach for cybersecurity education by providing university students a
flexible learning plan that enhances their critical thinking and problem-solving
skills. This approach aims to help students understand the complex nature of
cyber-attacks and defense mechanisms, provide them with a holistic view and
better prepare them to address the complexities of real-world scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development and deployment of AISecKG are
interdisciplinary. First, the project employs machine learning (ML) and AI
approaches to build a new cybersecurity knowledge graph by measuring and setting
up similarities and dependencies among cybersecurity learning targets for both
study planning and learning-outcome assessment. Second, it incorporates a multi-
level assessment approach to design cybersecurity curricula, scaffold student
cognitive engagement, and improve student learning outcomes. AISecKG has two
primary design goals. First, it will guide instructors to develop a problem-
based learning curriculum based on their learning objectives. Second, it will
allow students to apply an adaptive learning strategy, incorporating hands-on
labs to assess their learning outcomes. To assess studentsâ€™ learning performance
quantitatively, AISecKG will (a) deploy an evidence-based model and learning
materials for problem-based cybersecurity education focusing on developing
teacher capacity and practice while using targeted materials and approaches; (b)
produce a productive teaching model for deep learning that promotes a culture of
scientific inquiry and design as well as a set of strategies to develop student
competency; and (c) provide evidence of student learning outcomes as a
pedagogical resource to support student cognitive engagement in learning tasks
interactively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special
initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster
new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.