* 2114638
* Improved Representation of Cloud-Aerosol Interactions in the Community Earth System Model: A New Sectional Cloud Model that Interacts with Modal and Sectional Aerosol Models
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Owen Toon, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 658,934.00

Clouds have a profound effect on the energy balance of the Earth, by reflecting
sunlight to space and blocking outgoing infrared radiation. Earth's climate is
thus sensitive to all the processes, collectively referred to as cloud
microphysics, that govern the formation and growth of cloud particles and their
removal through evaporation and precipitation. For example, as climate warms the
abundance of ice particles in clouds decreases in favor of liquid droplets,
which makes the clouds more reflective and thus has a counteracting effect on
the warming (a negative feedback). Liquid clouds also tend to last longer as
they are less effective in generating precipitation, which could further enhance
the negative feedback of the shift from ice particles to
droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensitivity of climate to cloud microphysics
poses a challenge for climate research, particularly as climate models must
represent the full global climate system while much of the microphysics takes
place over distances less than a millimeter. Global models use parameterizations
to represent the bulk effects of cloud microphysics but these parameterizations
are necessarily crude given the need to perform long and computationally
intensive simulations. One concern with microphysics parameterizations is that
they use nonphysical parameters to adjust the behavior of the clouds, and these
parameters have a direct effect on important climate system behaviors such as
the sensitivity of global temperature to greenhouse gas increases. A case in
point is autoconversion, a parametric representation of the processes through
which cloud particles interact to form precipitation. Autoconversion summarily
converts some portion of a cloud's frozen and liquid water into raindrops or
snowflakes according to externally imposed threshold criteria. The choice of
threshold values for autoconversion affects cloud lifetimes and thus affects the
top-of-atmosphere energy balance, thus giving the nonphysical thresholds an
outsized effect on the simulated climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed
here develops an alternative cloud microphysics model in which autoconversion
and other one-step approximations are replaced by a more detailed formulation in
which cloud particles are represented in terms of a size distribution, meaning
the model partitions droplets and ice particles into a set of size bins, also
referred to as sections of the size distribution, and keeps track of the
abundance of particles in each bin. Microphysics is then represented through
interactions between bins, for instance if small droplets grow bigger as water
vapor condenses on them they are transferred from a bin for small droplets to a
bin for larger ones. An advantage of the scheme is that the more explicit
representation of cloud microphsyics eliminates many of the nonphysical
parameters found in simpler schemes. The scheme is too computationally intensive
for use in century-scale climate simulations but is practical for decadal
simulations and can be used to inform development of simpler fast
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cloud microphysics model is based on CARMA,
the Community Aerosol and Radiation Model for Atmospheres, which uses a size bin
scheme to represent the chemistry and microphysics of aerosols. Here the bin
scheme is adapted to represent the microphysics of liquid cloud droplets and
cloud ice, with the ability to represent the transfer of water between droplet
bins and ice particle bins through freezing and thawing. The versions of CARMA
used to represent aerosols and clouds are referred to as CARMA-aerosol and
CARMA-cloud, respectively, and they are used together to represent the effects
of aerosols on cloud particles. This award continues development of CARMA under
previous support, most recently through AGS-1640903.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
developed, the model is used to address several issues in cloud physics and
climate dynamics. In particular the model is used to consider the effect of
cloud microphysics on climate change through simulations in which carbon dioxide
concentration is instantaneously doubled, a standard way to assess the
sensitivity of simulated climate to greenhouse gas increases. Motivation for the
simulations comes from the increased climate sensitivity found in the latest
generation of climate models contributing to the Climate Model Intercomparison
Project (CMIP), which has been ascribed to changes in cloud
microphysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance through its
effort to improve understanding of the role of cloud microphysics in climate
change. Cloud microphysics is a particular concern as clouds are frequently
called out as the greatest source of uncertainty in model projections of future
climate change used for decision support. The work also benefits the worldwide
community of researchers who use and develop CESM. The project has educational
value through the development of a stand-alone version of CARMA-cloud model
which is suitable for classroom use, and through the support and training of a
graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.