* 2114051
* Arctic Beaver Observation Network (A-BON): Tracking a new disturbance regime
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kenneth Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2026
* USD 990,223.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beavers are remarkable animals that
engineer the landscape by building dams and transforming linear streams into a
series of ponds. The impact of this engineering on lowland ecosystems is widely
recognized in temperate regions, but beavers are now moving from the forest into
arctic tundra regions, where their extent and impacts are unknown. In the
Arctic, perennially frozen ground – permafrost – stores vast amounts of carbon,
and the stability of permafrost is jeopardized when the landscape is inundated
due to beaver engineering and changes in hydrology. Furthermore, stream life in
the Arctic is limited by low temperatures, but deeper water associated with pond
building increases water temperature in winter. This in turn alters stream
ecology and may create refugia for new species moving into the Arctic, including
fish. Beaver expansion into new areas has been observed with concern by people
living in affected regions, particularly potential impacts to fish, water
quality, and boat access. This research will co-produce knowledge with local
people to understand concerns and observed impacts of beaver colonization.
Scientific fieldwork at beaver ponds will illuminate changes in hydrology and
permafrost. This understanding will be combined with satellite images of beaver
ponds across the entire Arctic to determine the extent of beaver engineering and
recent changes. This research is vital to our understanding of the current and
future arctic ecosystem; it will be shared widely through education and media,
including a Netflix series featuring beavers moving into
tundra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic Beaver Observation Network (A-BON) will
observe beaver engineering across circumarctic treeline and tundra environments
during the last half-century by mapping and tracking beaver ponds using
satellite imagery. Investigators will work closely with residents of three
Alaskan communities (Shungnak, Kotzebue, and Noatak) to document long-term,
experiential observations of beaver habitat and activity, particularly changes
wrought to the landscape and to fish. These observations will provide local to
regional insights clarifying the timing of beaver arrival and the impacts to
socio-ecological systems. Scientific fieldwork will characterize how beavers
alter physical attributes of the aquatic and terrestrial tundra environment,
from initial perturbation to ongoing landscape evolution. A-BON will coordinate
circumarctic efforts surrounding this issue, encouraging dialogue and data
sharing among local communities, scientists, and land managers. A-BON adds to
the NSF Arctic Observing Network portfolio a project with a strong remote
sensing component complemented by a strong local need, perspective and
collaboration. A-BON will provide a baseline circumarctic understanding of a new
disturbance regime. This co-production of knowledge will inform a multitude of
related studies on the ramifications of beaver colonization, from energy cycling
to fish, riparian vegetation, subsistence land-use practices and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.