* 2114471
* Lightning Studies Based on Measurements Spanning the Ranges from Radio Frequency to Optical (including Infrared and Ultraviolet) to Gamma-Rays
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Vladimir Rakov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,067,790.00

Lightning is a spectacular natural phenomenon but also a severe hazard to human
life and property. A number of fundamental questions on how lightning actually
works are still open and cannot be answered without the use of nontraditional
approaches and tools. Optical observations of lightning in an unprecedentedly
wide wavelength range using a unique array of high-speed framing cameras
operating, besides the traditional visible-range, also in the medium-to-far
infrared (IR) and near ultraviolet (UV) ranges will be performed to get a view
of lightning processes that has never been possible before. IR images will
provide a measure of temperature in different parts of the lightning channel and
UV images will make it possible to detect “cold” lightning processes (such as
corona streamer bursts) which play a fundamental role in determining lightning
behavior. Observations will be carried out at the Lightning Observatory in
Gainesville (LOG), Florida, in conjunction with recordings of corresponding
radio-frequency electromagnetic field and penetrating radiation (x-rays and
gamma-rays) signatures. The anticipated results will potentially impact an
unusually large number of areas/disciplines, including, besides the lightning
physics, (1) the global electric circuit, in which corona is one of the key
processes that keep the Earth negatively charged, (2) cloud electrification
(corona at ground may be a significant contributor to the formation of the lower
positive charge region), (3) high-energy atmospheric physics (corona streamer
bursts produce x- and gamma-rays), (4) lightning protection (corona-emitting
systems sometimes are claimed to control the lightning termination point), and
(5) thunderstorm warning (occurrence of corona is an indicator of thunderstorm
hazard).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at answering the following
new science questions: (1) What is the role of corona streamers in the various
phenomena associated with thunderstorms and lightning? (2) What can we learn
from direct comparison of high-speed recordings of lightning in the IR, visible,
and UV ranges? (3) What processes (besides the attachment process) create loops
in the lightning channel? (4) How fundamental are the differences between +CGs
and –CGs? Observations with the new UV camera will first target the streamer
zone of descending leader branches and that of upward unconnected leaders. Then,
the possibility of imaging the common streamer zone formed during the lightning
attachment process and the lightning channel corona sheath will be explored. IR
images will allow clear imaging of the evolution of the early stage of return-
stroke process, which is impossible in the visible range due to significant
light scattering. Also, IR images will be used to distinguish between parts of
the leader channel network that are at different stages of their heating and
cooling processes, while UV images will show essentially cold (and generally
undetectable in the visible range) streamer formations. Synergistic results will
be obtained from simultaneous observations in this unprecedentedly wide optical
wavelength range, which will be performed in conjunction with the corresponding
recordings of RF electromagnetic field signatures and energetic radiation.
Further, the recently observed mysterious loops in the lightning channel will be
examined and conditions under which +CGs exhibit features characteristic of –CGs
will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.