* 2114350
* Two-Dimensional Chiral Perovskites with Tunable Electronic Band Structure and Superior Charge Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Qiuming Yu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 302,242.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Chiral materials have non-superimposable
structures and mirror images. Chiral semiconductors have applications such as
generating and detecting polarized light and making 3D displays and imaging
devices. Hybrid organic-inorganic halide perovskites are a family of
semiconductors that contain inorganic frameworks incorporating organic
molecules. They can be developed into a new class of chiral semiconductors based
on two-dimensional (2D) hybrid organic-inorganic perovskites by incorporating
large organic molecules with a chiral center sandwiched between inorganic single
layers. While these 2D chiral perovskites are highly stable, they tend to have
weak chiral properties, high binding energy between holes (positive charge
carriers) and electrons (negative charge carriers), and low charge mobility,
especially out-of-plane charge mobility, which greatly hinders their
applications in generating and detecting polarized light. This project will
conduct systematic fundamental studies to reveal the structure-property
relationship of 2D chiral perovskites. The research team constructs novel 2D
chiral perovskite structures by incorporating chiral n-type (having more
electrons) and p-type (having more holes) semiconducting organic molecules and
rationally tuned compositions of inorganic single layers. The goal is to
fabricate 2D perovskites with strong chiral properties under light, tunable
electronic properties, and superior charge transport. The results from this
research will advance fundamental knowledge of chiral semiconducting materials.
Importantly, this project trains underrepresented minority graduate and
undergraduate researchers. The research team disseminates the knowledge gained
from this work by providing hands-on activities and demonstrations for young
students and their families through the annual event of Expanding Your Horizons
at Cornell campus and Ithaca Sciencenter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Strong chirality, tunable band structure, and fast charge
transport are essential for developing this new class of chiral semiconducting
materials based on chiral 2D perovskites for chiroptoelectronic applications.
This project designs and synthesizes chiral n- and p-type semiconducting organic
cations to replace conventional non-conducting organic cations to allow (1)
increasing the chirality by enhancing hydrogen bonding interactions and van der
Waals interactions between organic cations and inorganic sublattices; (2) tuning
band structure and energy alignment via varying the composition of inorganic
sublattice and chemical structures of n- and p-type semiconducting organic
cations; and (3) enhancing charge transport to allow charge transport across the
organic-inorganic interfaces to reduce exciton binding energy and increase out-
of-plane charge transport. Three research tasks are pursued. Task 1 involves the
synthesis of chiral n- and p-type semiconducting organic cations and the
investigation of their chiral and electronic properties. In Task 2, synthesized
novel n- and p-type chiral cations and selected composition of inorganic
sublattice are used to fabricate chiral 2D perovskites and their structural and
chiroptical properties are studied. Finally, in Task 3 the electronic and
chiroptoelectronic properties of chiral 2D perovskites are thoroughly
investigated. This research advances fundamental knowledge of chiral
semiconducting materials including chiral crystalline phases, chirality transfer
between organic and inorganic building blocks, chiroptical activity, electron
band structure, and circularly polarized photoluminescence and photocurrent.
Therefore, this research is expected to impact not only chiroptoelectronics but
also the fields of spintronics, ferroelectronics, and non-linear
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.