* 2114729
* ATD:  Understanding and Predicting User Mobility through Bayesian Models
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2020,08/31/2022
* Abel Rodriguez, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 186,642.00

The goal of this project is to develop novel mathematical and statistical tools
for the analysis of geospatial datasets associated with human mobility patterns.
The focus is on modeling and prediction of mobility using spatio-temporal data
from a moderate to large number of actors with the objective of identifying
either unusual behavioral patterns or abrupt changes in well-established
patterns (at either the population or individual level) that can serve as
leading indicators of critical events. The proposed models have implications for
the evaluation of sociological and anthropological theories, as well as for
defense and natural security applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
revolves around three subprojects. The first one focuses on the development of
variants of Mattern repulsive point process models for high-resolution geo-
referenced data that are able to capture well-known features of real-life
mobility data. The PI considers both population-level and individual-level
models that are highly interpretable and allow for the evolution of the process
over time and the identification of structural changes in the system. The second
subproject focuses on (possibly hidden) Markov models for association data in
which only coarse geo-spatial information is available (e.g., it might be known
that the individual is within range of a fixed point, such as an wireless access
point, but not their exact location). Again, the focus is on identifying changes
in individual- and population-level behavioral patterns and making short-term
predictions about future patterns. Finally, the third subproject focuses on the
problem of combining multiple sources of high- and low-resolution geo-spatial
data to improve the accuracy of algorithms. In all cases the emphasis is on
Bayesian models, which simplify uncertainty quantification and can be easily
incorporate into formal decision analytic frameworks.