* 2114203
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering complex phenotypes in bacteria aided by continuous genome shuffling and high throughput analytical technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Hung-Jen Wu, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

A defining trait of living systems is that they adapt and evolve. This trait can
be used in biotechnology to produce microbes with desired properties and
functions. However, adaptation of microbial systems can cause instability and
loss of performance. Maximizing the performance of microbial systems in
biotechnology rests on understanding the mechanisms of adaptation and evolution.
This is far from being a trivial task; it requires new knowledge and methods to
investigate the “gap” between an organism's genes (genotype) and characteristics
(phenotype). The research supported by this NSF award focuses on the development
of a knowledge base of cellular properties associated with desired complex
phenotypes. Such a base could be used to study the relationship between genotype
and the observed phenotype, to narrow the gap between these two properties of a
microbial system, and to enable microbial engineering for applications in
biotechnology as well as in biomedicine. The researchers will recruit high
school and undergraduate students, with a focus on underrepresented students, to
conduct research in the area of biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of this project is that there exist cellular properties that are
correlated with phenotypes-of-interest. The hypothesis is formed based on
preliminary data that show correlations between certain cellular properties and
microbial fitness in specific environments. The proposed objectives are: 1) to
develop and characterize a recombination-proficient genderless strain of E. coli
with increased recombination frequency, 2) to apply the genderless strain to
identify cellular properties associated with complex phenotypes, and 3) to
generate strains with tolerance to multiple environmental stressors. Results
from this work will shed light on how cellular properties identified correlate
with phenotypes (e.g. tolerance to stressors), genotype, and on the underlying
molecular mechanisms that connect the genotype to the phenotype. This knowledge
may be used to modify in a rational manner cellular properties to enhance
tolerance to industrially-relevant environmental stressors. The knowledge base
will provide an important resource for the biotechnology community to facilitate
rational strain engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.