* 2114251
* Identifying the Physical Drivers and Radar Signatures of Fire-Generated Tornadic Vortices
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Meghan Collins, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 520,317.00

Wildfires can generate their own severe weather, including tornados and
thunderstorms embedded in the wildfire plume. These fire-generated extremes
threaten fire-fighter and public safety yet are poorly understood and often
unpredicted. To fill this knowledge gap, the investigators propose to understand
fire-generated extreme weather by identifying the common factors contributing
fire-generated tornados and thunderstorms from weather radar and satellite data.
The project will also engage the public in wildfire science such as developing
middle-school in-class lessons focused on fire-generated weather and conducting
a citizen-science social-media campaign to collect photographs of the ash and
debris that “rain” down from wildfire plumes. The crowd-sourced data collected
by the public will help improve our understanding of wildfire plumes for better
documenting the size and shape of material lofted into the
sky.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is motivated by decades of success
in using radar and satellite observations to issue life-saving warnings for
convectional severe weather (e.g., severe thunderstorms). For fire-generated
tornadic vortices (FGTV) and pyrocumulonimbus (pyroCb) these same tools show
remarkable, yet incompletely realized potential. To fully realize this
potential, new physical and conceptual models are required for interpreting
radar and satellite observations of the wildfire environment. To develop these
models, the investigators will test a sequence of hypotheses designed to isolate
the common characteristics of radar and satellite observed fire and plume
processes linked to the FGTV development. These hypotheses are based on
preliminary observations demonstrating FGTV producing fires often exhibit: (1)
bent-over and bifurcating plumes with both embedded and shedding vortices, (2)
asymmetries in flow splitting and flow reversal around the fire that favor one
sense of vortex rotation (i.e., cyclonic vs. anticyclonic), and (3) pyroCb
initiation concurrent with vortex intensification. In isolating the common
attributes and observed signatures of FGTV fires, the research team aims to
produce conceptual models for FGTV formation. These conceptual models will
facilitate life-saving warnings and enhance decision support for wildfire
stakeholders, thereby providing an immediate societal benefit. Community
engagement and education as part of this proposal will include: (a) social-media
citizen-science campaign linking radar observations with photographic
documentation of size and shape of ash falling from wildfire plumes, (b) in-
classroom middle school learning experiences and curriculum coupled with an app-
based data collection module, (c) graduate student mentoring and curriculum
development, and (d) outreach to the public and wildfire stakeholders. The
citizen-science campaign is expected to reach 1000s of users annually, and the
in-classroom program upwards of 500 students per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.