* 2114740
* AccelNet-Design: iFireNet: An international network of networks for prediction and management of wildland fires
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Changes in temperature and rainfall patterns, increasingly complex wildland-
urban interfaces, and human-induced land-use changes have led to unprecedented,
enhanced wildfire activities across the world. This design project, iFireNet,
will connect clusters of expertise nationally and internationally to accelerate
interdisciplinary actionable research on wildfires among academia, agencies,
non-profit organizations and stakeholders. The drivers of wildfire behavior are
local in nature, yet there are predictive models and management practices that
can be applied in different geographic settings. iFireNet will act as a catalyst
to integrate the scientific expertise and unique facilities and resources from
the U.S., Australia, Canada, Netherlands, and the United Kingdom to address
knowledge gaps in the science, engineering, as well as management aspects of
wildfires. The international coordination of wildfire researchers will advance
capacities to predict and manage wildland fires, thereby minimizing damage to
life, nature, and property. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This network of networks will
bring an approach currently missing in the wildfire research community that is
needed to advance understanding of wildfire behavior, integrated fire risk
management, design of prescribed fires, canopy-to-landscape scale forest
disturbance, and fire-weather/climate coupling. iFireNet will create (1) synergy
among complementary experiments in different geographical settings, (2) a
standardized protocol to collect, interpret and share data from these
experiments, (3) the basis of model intercomparisons in the context of multi-
fidelity fire modeling, (4) a protocol for benchmarking wildfire simulations
across multiple scales, and (5) a unified training module that adapts the best
practices of local knowledge, yet can be translated in the international
setting. The iFireNet web portal will host state-of-the-art predictive models, a
comprehensive global database of protocols and standards for multiscale fire
experiments, a catalogue of equipment, infrastructure and models, and a
knowledge platform providing mentors, collaborators, training tools and
opportunities for students and practitioners. iFireNet will train the next
generation of wildland fire managers and scientists through the organization of
student exchange programs, summer schools, conference chapters and joint
mentoring of graduate and professional students. It is envisioned that the
diversity of expertise and cross-disciplinary collaborations across academic
researchers, federal agencies, non-profit organizations and industries of the
participating countries will help solve some of the long-standing questions in
the science of wildland fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research
through International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is
designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.