* 2114144
* EAGER: Unravel, mimic and control physiology via chiral-induced spin selectivity: a quantum approach
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Clarice Aiello, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 10/31/2023
* USD 304,257.00

This project aims to unveil and control the “chiral-induced spin selectivity”
(CISS) effect at the nanoscale. CISS is an unusual behavior first observed in
biological structures, and only later harnessed for technological applications.
It describes the fact that, at room temperature, electron transport through
molecules with chiral (or mirror) symmetry -- e.g., DNA -- favors particular
states of a quantum property called spin. Such a spin preference effectively
translates into more efficient electron transport through chiral molecules than
through achiral ones, and this property has justifiably attracted significant
interest. Enantiomers (chiral molecules that are mirror images of one another)
have opposite electron spin orientation preferences, which could inform drug
development; and any technology that relies on optimal charge transport – i.e.,
the entire electronics industry – could profit from harnessing and controlling
CISS-like effects. CISS might also have tremendous biological implications for
signaling, as proteins and most biomolecules are chiral. This research falls
within the emergent field of “quantum biology” that studies how the laws of
quantum mechanics might play a role in biological function. This work will
foment the creation of the first US-based virtual Quantum Biology Center. Such a
center will become a natural organizing structure for quantum biology
practitioners to interact, collaborate and disseminate their findings to the
broader public. The Center members will demystify and critique potentially
dubious claims of quantum effects in biology and place this field on firm
scientific ground in the public eye. The Center will also catalyze events such
as weekly online meetings on quantum biology, already being organized by the PI
for over a year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chiral-induced spin selectivity (CISS)
describes the fact that, at room temperature, charge transport through chiral
molecules favors a particular electronic spin orientation (or ‘spin
polarization’). Because of the CISS effect, enantiomers have opposite electron
spin orientation preferences. This observation might have tremendous biological
implications, as proteins and most biomolecules are chiral. An unambiguous
understanding of CISS at the nanoscale is still lacking. Here the investigators
propose to elucidate the mechanisms behind CISS in DNA at the nanoscale.
Currently, CISS is studied using chemistry techniques (ex.: electrochemistry,
I-V curves) relying on ensembles of chiral nanostructures interacting with
electron spins in “classical states”; this precludes, respectively, quantitative
measurements of total charge going through the chiral structures and of how
spins in “non-trivial quantum states” (e.g., spin superpositions) evolve when
transported through such chiral molecules. The proposed setup – a ESR-STM
working with a single chiral molecule that gets injected with electron spins in
“non-trivial quantum states” – will overcome the present experimental
limitations and thus enable a predictable, quantitative understanding of CISS
using the language and tools of quantum mechanics. The investigators will attach
DNA under different conditions (e.g., slightly different temperatures, a variety
of DNA lengths) to the tip of the ESR-STM and use magnetic resonance techniques
to prepare electrons in arbitrary spin states, which will then be injected into
the molecule. By characterizing how the electron coherences are transported
through the different nano-chiral potentials, it becomes possible to harness
quantum degrees of freedom to hijack and drive both physiology and biological
signal processing, and to mimic strategies developed and optimized by nature
over millions of years to transduce quantum information.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics
Cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in Biological
Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.