* 2114081
* Ab Initio Downfolding Approach to Exciton-Continuum
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Diana Qiu, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2024
* USD 374,579.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research,
education, and outreach activities focused on understanding excitations created
by the absorption of light in materials. Understanding these excitations is of
fundamental importance to a wide range of processes that rely on light
absorption, including light harvesting by solar cells, photosynthesis in plants,
and chemical reactions catalyzed by light. In all these processes, the
absorption of light creates excitons, which are excited states composed of a
negatively charged electron and a positively charged hole bound together by the
Coulomb interaction. It is possible to calculate the energy levels and character
of these excitons, and consequently, the energy and amount of light that can be
absorbed by a material, but currently, accurate calculations of this nature are
limited to systems with only tens of atoms and excitations over a small energy
range due to the computational cost of the calculation. This project aims to
develop, implement and apply new computational techniques that will allow for
the calculation of much larger systems containing up to thousands of atoms and
with energies spanning the electromagnetic spectrum from the infrared to x-ray
ranges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main idea is to divide the largescale system
into smaller subsystems. As long as excitons can be well-approximated as being
confined to a single subsystem, then each subsystem can be calculated
separately, which dramatically reduces the computational cost. The effect of
interactions between the subsystems is approximated by changing the strength of
interactions inside each subsystem, which in turn reveals how scattering between
subsystems can influence the exciton energies and lifetimes. This method will be
applied to study x-ray absorption spectra and molecules adsorbed on the surface
of bulk materials. This project will enhance understanding of excitons at higher
energy and faster timescales, and pave the way for the development of improved
devices for light harvesting and molecular sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the education of a graduate student. Additionally, this project
will integrate research, education, and mentoring with a scaffolded outreach
program designed to broaden the participation of groups that are historically
underrepresented in science and engineering. The PI will give public lectures,
develop a summer materials science workshop, and offer a yearly undergraduate
summer internship for students from the New Haven public school system. The
proposed outreach includes a rigorous data collection component that will allow
the impact of the program to be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research, education, and
outreach activities focused on understanding exciton dynamics and scattering
between subspaces in nanostructured and heterogeneous systems. Currently, ab
initio calculations of excitons within many-body perturbation theory (MBPT) are
limited by their considerable computational cost to static calculations on small
systems with tens of atoms and energy ranges of less than 10 eV, leaving many
systems of current physical interest, such as heterostructures, defects, and
complex nanostructures, beyond the reach of conventional calculations. This
project aims to develop, implement and apply an ab initio formalism within MBPT
that describes the dynamical interactions between excitons in different physical
subsystems, defined by energy scales or spatial localization. The objective is
to extend the current capabilities of these computational techniques to study
light-matter interactions in larger, more complex systems and over energy scales
of hundreds to thousands of eV. This project concurrently develops new
techniques to include dynamical and lifetime effects due to coupling between
physical subsystems in calculations of exciton spectra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed methods are based on an extension of the GW plus Bethe Salpeter
equation (GW-BSE) formalism. Instead of truncating the Hilbert space, as is done
in conventional calculations, the coupling of a physical subsystem to a larger
Hilbert space will be accounted for through a matrix downfolding approach that
includes the dynamics of the coupling. The developed methods will be applied to
the computation of spectra and lifetimes associated with excitons in x-ray
absorption spectroscopy of two-dimensional layered van der Waals materials,
oxides, and amorphous systems. The developed methods will also be applied to
study excitonic energy transfer across heterointerfaces between molecules and
two-dimensional materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project supports the
education of a graduate student. Additionally, this project will integrate
research, education, and mentoring with a scaffolded outreach program designed
to broaden the participation of groups that are historically underrepresented in
science and engineering. The PI will give public lectures, develop a summer
materials science workshop, and offer a yearly undergraduate summer internship
for students from the New Haven public school system. The proposed outreach
includes a rigorous data collection component that will allow the impact of the
program to be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.