* 2114236
* Collaborative Research: SPARC: Facilitating Research, Experimentation, and Education in Spatial Archaeometry
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jesse Casana, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 101,572.00

The Spatial Archaeometry Research Collaborations (SPARC) program promotes the
use of spatial analysis, 3D modeling, as well as satellite, aerial, and
terrestrial remote sensing in archaeological research projects. The things
archaeologists study—from artifacts to sites to landscapes—almost always have a
spatial component and spatial analysis is therefore central to contemporary
archaeological investigations. Today, the increasing availability and
sophistication of geospatial technologies is not merely generating new data but
is facilitating entirely novel means of engaging with the archaeological record
and exploring the human past. However, the high costs of instrumentation and
software, combined with the expertise they require, create hurdles for many
archaeologists who aim to deploy geospatial technologies in research projects.
SPARC 1) facilitates high-impact spatial archaeometric research, 2) advances
emerging methodologies towards greater community use, 3) promotes this new
knowledge across the discipline, and 4) promotes inclusion of junior and
underrepresented scholars and institutions in leadership roles and in its
training schema. Through its innovative approach to supporting collaborative
archaeological research, the SPARC program makes costly geospatial technologies
and specialized domain expertise available to researchers from a wide range of
backgrounds, including early career scholars and those at minority serving
institutions, enhancing diversity, equity, and inclusion within archaeological
research. The program also provides education and training opportunities for
students and professionals seeking to use geospatial techniques in their own
research, broadening the impact of the program far beyond individual supported
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPARC program supports archaeological
researchers seeking to integrate geospatial technologies and methods into their
investigations by facilitating collaborations with research faculty and staff
and the technological infrastructure from the University of Arkansas' Center for
Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST), Dartmouth College’s Spatial Archaeometry
Lab (SPARCL), and the University of Arkansas’ MicroCT Imaging Consortium for
Research and Outreach (MICRO). Researchers apply to the program through a
competitive, peer-reviewed process, and successful proposals receive support
from geospatial technologies experts in both field and lab settings, access to
specialized equipment and software, and intensive training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.