* 2114725
* Collaborative Research: Revisiting the homeorhetic mechanisms of lactation: The role of ceramide
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2025
* Joseph McFadden, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,021,609.00

This collaborative project investigates the role of ceramide lipids in
regulating glucose dynamics during lactation in sheep. Increasing the efficiency
of nutrient use in farm animals is a potential means to increase global food
security and reduce negative environmental impact. Increasing the efficiency to
produce nutrient-dense milk from sheep and cows with less nutrient waste is one
example. To achieve this goal, it is necessary to understand the mechanisms of
lactation in these animals. Reduced insulin-stimulated uptake of glucose by
maternal muscle and increased glucose utilization by the mammary gland are
physiological adjustments that occur after birth to support milk synthesis, but
it is not clear how these responses are coordinated. This project expands upon
evidence suggesting that ceramide may increase nutrient supply to the mammary
gland for milk synthesis. The effects of increasing and decreasing ceramide
levels will be quantified in ewes, and mechanisms of ceramideâ€™s effects on
muscle will be studied in muscle cell culture. Research will be integrated
within an education and outreach program focused on improving public
understanding of food animal production and the role of novel strategies (e.g.,
biotechnology) in increasing milk synthesis. Two students per year from the
State University of New York at Cortland will conduct research through the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program, and two Cornell graduate
students will contribute to the research. The REU and graduate students, along
with faculty, will learn how to communicate science to the public effectively
through a collaboration with the nearby Sciencenter museum. An exhibit for the
Sciencenter and the Great New York State Fair will be developed to teach the
public about sustainable animal agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental
homeorhetic mechanism that develops to support the onset of lactation is the
reduction of insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle, which spares glucose for
the mammary synthesis of milk, contributing to survival of the neonate. Classic
studies infer that maternal insulin resistance is mediated by pituitary
somatotropin (ST) and uncoupling of the somatotropic axis (i.e., reduced
insulin-like growth factor-1 secretion from liver). The researchers propose that
this traditional view of homeorhesis is incomplete, and have identified ceramide
as a potential mediator of ST action, glucose partitioning, and lactation. The
hypothesis that ceramide causes maternal insulin resistance to support milk
synthesis in mammals will be tested. Whole animal studies will establish whether
the inhibition of ceramide synthesis increases insulin sensitivity to decrease
milk production, and whether the induction of ceramide synthesis is a means to
decrease insulin sensitivity to sustain milk production. In addition, the
mechanisms of insulin antagonism that involve ceramide in myotubes will be
delineated. Experience utilizing lipidomics and studying insulin kinetics, as
well as a justified Ovis aries (sheep) model, will be leveraged to define the
homeorhetic role of ceramide during mammalian lactation. Results may lead to new
ways to increase milk production efficiency, which would benefit the associated
agricultural industries. Undergraduate and graduate students will participate in
the research project, and undergraduates in an animal science communications
course will generate podcasts targeted to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.