* 2114391
* AGEP-GRS: Conference: MPS AGEP-GRS Virtual PI and Student Convening
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Catherine Mader, American Physical Society
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 02/28/2022
* USD 94,983.00

This project will enable the scientific community to better understand the
impact of the MPS AGEP-GRS program, a supplement opportunity that has supported
hundreds of graduate students from underrepresented groups studying Astronomy,
Chemistry, Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences, and Physics. The virtual
convening in spring 2021 will be open to the programâ€™s community of awardees and
students. It will provide attendees with opportunities for professional and
personal development surrounding inclusive practices in graduate education. The
pre and post-meeting surveys and interactive sessions during the convening will
be used to develop a report summarizing the challenges facing researchers as
they work to support graduate students from diverse backgrounds. The surveys
will summarize the effects of the AGEP-GRS opportunities on the students
receiving these fellowships and resources and identify best practices to support
both of these groups. The outcomes of this effort will also inform disciplines
beyond those funded by MPS by providing a clear picture of the benefits and
barriers inherent in supporting students from marginalized
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring together critical
stakeholders participating in the MPS AGEP-GRS program, along with leading
researchers and organizations working to address systemic issues inhibiting
inclusion in graduate education. The convening will provide an opportunity to
investigate features of the MPS AGEP-GRS that positively impact success and
propagate these insights throughout the community through professional
development for attendees. The project team is well suited to convene a steering
committee, survey the community, develop a conference program, and execute the
convening, with support from expert external evaluators. The pre-convening
survey will identify challenges faced by current and alumni students and current
and past awardees. Workshops and discussions at the convening as well as post-
convening surveys will explore mechanisms for reducing these challenges. This
project will inform future generations of MPS AGEP-GRS grantees and students
through impactful feedback and reporting. It will investigate and report the
potential synergistic relationships between MPS AGEP-GRS faculty/students and
NSF INCLUDES Alliance: IGEN participants and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.