* 2114544
* Assembly of multivalent regulatory complexes in hippo signaling
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Afua Nyarko, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 06/30/2025
* USD 817,308.00

Many essential biological processes in humans and plants are controlled by
protein molecules. This project will uncover how protein molecules are organized
in order to control the growth of tissues. When two-thirds of a ratâ€™s liver is
removed, the remaining one-third will grow back to its normal size - How does
the liver know when to stop growing? This complex but well-coordinated process
starts with physical interactions between specific protein molecules. When these
interactions go awry, it can lead to various disease conditions. This research
will uncover the molecular processes that drive these physical interactions. The
project will also facilitate the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, especially underrepresented minorities, in cutting-edge research,
engage high school students in basic scientific research, and increase public
scientific literacy through programs at a local science
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein complexes that play a crucial role in the
homeostasis balance between cell growth and cell death are enriched in
disordered segments and typically assemble via multivalent interactions to form
dynamic ensembles. This project will test the idea that the valency of the core
scaffold protein in the complex influences the stability and equilibrium
distribution of the dynamic ensemble. Specifically, the research will use a
suite of molecular biophysics methods to elucidate the structure, dynamics, and
protein-protein interactions within select regulatory complexes. In
collaboration with an accomplished investigator in the field of theoretical
biophysics, the experimental molecular biophysics data will be integrated with
physical theories and computational simulations to extract microscopic
interacting parameters to build a more comprehensive understanding of the
regulatory complexes and provide a generalized framework for modeling dynamic
ensembles in protein interacting networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.