* 2114424
* Topochemical Design of Earth-abundant Materials for Renewable Energy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Emmanouil Kioupakis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 491,116.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Accelerated discovery, development and
deployment of highly efficient multifunctional sustainable materials is of
tremendous importance to meet the fast-growing global societal demand for
renewable energy sources. For instance, nearly all small or large electronic
devices, ranging from cell phones to pacemakers, we are currently using to
improve our daily living conditions are powered using materials that were
discovered serendipitously over several decades. Their development and
deployment into useful devices took an even longer time. This project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials
Research, recognizes this longstanding bottleneck, and develops a rational
approach to the rapid discovery of low-cost highly efficient copper
chalcogenide-based renewable energy materials. The primary goals are to (i)
theoretically predict new inorganic earth-abundant materials and their
functional properties related to clean energy applications, (ii) computationally
investigate possible favorable reaction paths for the synthesis of the predicted
phases, and (iii) synthesize and investigate the atomic structure and functional
properties of the predicted phases. Specifically, this project, focuses on the
discovery of new ternary and quaternary copper metal selenides, CuxMyNzSew, that
are based on low-cost Earth-abundant transition metals and/or heavy main group
metals M and N, for potential applications in solar or thermoelectric energy
conversion technologies. Additionally, the project enables a new level of
training for graduate, undergraduate and high school students, including
students from underrepresented groups, in predictive functional materials
science integrating theory/computation, synthesis, and characterization.
Products from this project will be made available to the broader community
through publications in scientific journals and online databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, leverages the concepts of phase-homology
and phase-analogy within the copper metal selenides (CMSe), CuxMyNzSew,
composition space for the design of new crystal structures that encompass key
structural features such as tetrahedral metal coordination, and edge-sharing
and/or corner-sharing between polyhedra, that are typically found in known
highly efficient energy materials. To accelerate the discovery of highly
efficient sustainable renewable energy materials, the project integrates the
structural design approach with (i) sustainable chemistry through selection of
Earth-abundant elements, (ii) prediction of phase stability and favorable
reaction paths, (iii) prediction of functional properties (optical, electronic,
and thermal), and (iv) validation of the predicted crystal structures and
functional properties through synthesis and characterization. The project also
investigates, for a given crystal structure type, the role of (i) chemical
composition and (ii) intrinsic defects on the observed functional properties of
the synthesized new phases through comparison to simulated and measured optical
and electronic properties. In addition to accelerating the discovery of
efficient and low-cost photovoltaic, thermoelectric, and optoelectronic
materials based on Earth-abundant elements, the feedback between theory and
experiment will enable the development of predictive tools for the prediction of
structural and functional properties of new phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.