* 2114717
* AccelNet-Implementation: Implementing a Deep Ocean Observing Strategy (iDOOS)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Lisa Levin, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,992,928.00

The deep ocean below 200 m is poorly known. This dynamic realm is a vast
repository for biodiversity, provides critical climate regulation, and houses a
wealth of hydrocarbon, mineral, and genetic resources. Observing the deep ocean
at a level required to inform sustainable development and management faces
significant technical and logistical challenges. To address these challenges,
the iDOOS project will implement a Deep-Ocean Observing Strategy (DOOS) that
brings together U.S. and international networks engaged in sustained deep-ocean
observing, mapping, exploration, modeling, research, and management to leverage
each other’s efforts, knowledge, and resources. This implementation project will
boost the DOOS community-driven initiative, working under the umbrella of the
Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS) and endorsed as a United Nations Ocean
Decade Action. By connecting deep-ocean observers across disciplines, expanding
the observing community to include non-traditional partners, and linking data
providers to users, iDOOS will enhance the GOOS deep-ocean capabilities and
target societal needs. Through engagement with policy makers, regulators, and
science coordinators, iDOOS will raise awareness and support for deep-ocean
science, and bring science into critical decisions regarding climate,
biodiversity and sustainability. iDOOS will foster a community of future leaders
informed in deep-ocean observing, modeling, and data science at a global level
who are adept at communicating to regulators and policy makers as well as fellow
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iDOOS addresses three main themes: (1)
requirement setting for deep ocean observing; (2) promoting the coordination and
implementation of integrated observing to address Sustainable Development Goals
and societal needs; and (3) translating knowledge and data to allow science-
based decision-making, regulation and governance of the global deep ocean. These
themes will be integrated and applied via the framework of regional
demonstration projects. iDOOS will work with the GOOS disciplinary expert panels
to refine Essential Ocean Variables in terms of deep ocean requirements, and
with network partners to maximize their implementation and use. In addition, the
project has two cross-cutting activities. A focus on data/informatics will
contribute best practices and standards to the requirement-setting theme,
support activities across the working groups, and offer tailored training to
early-career researchers. The project aims to enable findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) deep-sea data and a data-enabled, deep-sea
workforce. A key element of iDOOS is the mentorship and training of the next
generation. iDOOS will assemble a network of Deep Ocean Early career Researchers
(DOERs) drawing from collaborating networks, the broader deep-ocean observing
community, as well as from developing countries and indigenous communities.
Through the theme working groups, the project will conduct training activities
and meetings to substantially improve justice, equity, diversity, inclusion, and
belonging among the participating networks and more broadly within deep-ocean
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research through International
Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is designed to accelerate
the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next generation of U.S.
researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The AccelNet program
supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and complementary
networks abroad that will leverage research and educational resources to tackle
grand scientific challenges that require significant coordinated international
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.