* 2114006
* Collaborative Research: WINTRE-MIX:  Winter Precipitation Type Research Multi-scale Experiment
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey French, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 507,753.00

During near-freezing weather conditions, a diversity of surface precipitation
types are possible, including: rain, drizzle, freezing rain, freezing drizzle,
wet snow, ice pellets, and snow. Such near freezing precipitation affects wide
swaths of the United States and Canada, impacting aviation, road transportation,
power generation and distribution, winter recreation, ecology, and hydrology.
This award is for a field experiment, named the Winter Precipitation Type
Research Multi-scale Experiment (WINTRE-MIX) with the overarching goal of
improving understanding of how a variety of processes influence the variability
and predictability of the type and amount of precipitation that falls during
winter weather events. The project has direct societal impact through the
potential for improved forecasting of these events. Additionally, the project
will have significant student involvement, public outreach events, and citizen
science participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WINTRE-MIX campaign will be
conducted in southern Quebec, Canada and northern NY and VT in the United
States. The Canadian National Research Council Convair-580 research aircraft and
the University of Illinois mobile radars will be deployed along with a host of
surface-based instrumentation in February and March of 2022 to make observations
that can be used to determine the thermodynamic, dynamic, and microphysical
processes that interact to determine near-freezing precipitation type. More
specifically, the project has three overarching scientific questions that will
be addressed using observations, analysis, and modeling: 1) How do mesoscale
dynamics modulate near-freezing precipitation, 2) How do microscale processes
modulate near-freezing precipitation, and 3) How do multi-scale processes
combine to determine the predictability of near-freezing
precipitation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.