* 2114832
* Fundamental Insights into Multi-element Grain Boundary Segregation in Nanocrystalline Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Fadi Abdeljawad, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 269,888.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities aimed at gaining fundamental insights into the
segregation of multiple elemental species to grain boundaries, and how it
affects grain growth in nanocrystalline metallic alloys. Nearly all functional
and structural materials are polycrystalline systems; they are composed of
differently oriented crystalline grains that are joined at internal interfaces,
termed grain boundaries. The grain size and distribution in a metal greatly
influences many engineering properties, including mechanical, thermal, and
electrical. For example, the mechanical strength of a metal increases rapidly
with decreasing grain size. However, due to their small grain size and high
density of grain boundaries, nanocrystalline materials are usually structurally
unstable. As a result, they undergo rapid grain growth, which limits their use
in many technological applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
PI will investigate the segregation of multiple types of elemental species to
grain boundaries and its role in grain growth in multi-component alloys. The
research involves theoretical development and numerical implementation of
mathematical models that will be used to simulate the dynamics of grain boundary
segregation and grain growth kinetics. A primary focus of this project will be
on metallic alloys composed of three different types of elements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lying at the intersection of materials science and applied
mathematics, this project will impact numerous areas of materials physics,
chemical thermodynamics, and nanotechnology. Further, this project will provide
an avenue to train future-generation of engineers and scientists with the skill
set necessary for careers in knowledge-intensive industries in South Carolina,
which is an emerging technology and manufacturing hub. The PI will design an
“Atomic Legos” outreach activity to engage K-12 students in materials science
and help them learn about crystals and metals. This project leverages Clemson’s
“Creative Inquiry” program in order to involve undergraduate students,
particularly women and underrepresented groups, in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the development of a mesoscale theoretical and computational modeling
framework aimed at advancing our fundamental understanding of the segregation of
multiple types of elemental species to grain boundaries and its role in grain
growth and thermal stability of nanocrystalline metallic alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their nanoscale grain size, nanocrystalline
materials exhibit a unique combination and properties and functionalities.
However, rampant grain growth during materials processing or under service
conditions is considered one of the main hurdles to the large-scale use of
nanocrystalline metals in many engineering technologies. In this project, the PI
aims to elucidate key multi-element grain boundary segregation mechanisms that
control grain boundary migration and grain growth in metallic alloys. Specific
goals of this project include: (1) Development of a theoretical and
computational phase field model of multi-element grain boundary segregation in
multi-component alloys that accounts for bulk and interface thermodynamics and
is able to simulate the microstructural evolution over diffusive scales; (2)
Perform theoretical analysis and computational studies to quantify the
thermodynamic and kinetic effects of multi-element grain boundary segregation on
the thermal stability of nanocrystalline alloys; (3) Quantify the role of the
grain boundary network effect in solute partitioning and distribution within
grain microstructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lying at the intersection of
materials science and applied mathematics, this project will impact numerous
areas of materials physics, chemical thermodynamics, and nanotechnology.
Further, this project will provide an avenue to train future-generation of
engineers and scientists with the skill set necessary for careers in knowledge-
intensive industries in South Carolina, which is an emerging technology and
manufacturing hub. The PI will design an “Atomic Legos” outreach activity to
engage K-12 students in materials science and help them learn about crystals and
metals. This project leverages Clemson’s “Creative Inquiry” program in order to
involve undergraduate students, particularly women and underrepresented groups,
in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.