* 2114791
* FW-HTF-P/Collaborative Research: Exploring Tools to Help Workers and Organizations Adapt to AI-enabled Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Erik Brynjolfsson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 12/31/2021
* USD 77,198.00

This project will promote exploration of scalable tools to aid workers and
organizations adapt to artificially-intelligent robots. In a sharp departure
from current robotic systems that have to be programmed for a single
manipulation task in a very tightly constrained set of conditions, venture-
funded firms are designing and beginning to test qualitatively new robotic
technologies that promise to flexibly automate entire classes of embodied tasks
in widely divergent conditions. In this likely future, robots will adapt as
readily to new repetitive manual tasks as a modern microprocessor adapts to new
computational tasks. Such "learning" robots would clearly have profound
implications for workers and organizations, but previous research on automation
offers only limited guidance on how they will adapt. The researchers have
recently begun a nationwide, four-year field study that will identify edge cases
in which organizations and low-skill workers achieve unlikely yet systematic
success, given the introduction of this disruptive technology. This will allow
deriving design constraints for potential solutions from grounded theory,
centering on the hard-won, demonstrably successful innovations of a suitably-
diverse pool of informants. While existing research stands to unveil the
mechanisms behind rare, in vivo learning successes to the world, this FW-HTF-P
(Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier - Planning) award will assemble
a world-class team of researchers who are committed to trying to expand and
capitalize upon these mechanisms via new tools. This research has high-impact
potential for organizations, lower-skilled workers and policy makers on how to
expand and enrich work involving increasingly intelligent systems in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With AI in robotics as the technology, humans
collaborating with robots as the workers, and organizations employing both the
robots and the workers as the context of work, the team of researchers will
specifically contact and convene a group of top experts in diverse technical
domains including social media, massive open online courseware, crowdsourced
knowledge repositories, peer assessment and coaching, user experience design and
platforms for on-demand labor, crowdsourcing and innovation challenge execution.
Beyond these technical disciplines, the researchers will invite policymakers and
technologists, as the pathways to local success will likely be deeply
intertwined with legal and commercialization processes. The researchers will
begin by sharing very preliminary findings, research questions and objectives
from the current study with a select group of such researchers who may have
interest in a potential collaboration. The researchers will then extend formal
invitations to a workshop to no more than ten potential collaborators. This
workshop will be one day in length and will be described as an opportunity to
explore and decide upon potential collaborative opportunities related to helping
workers and organizations adapt more productively to general-purpose robots. The
researchers will explore potentially new organizational theories that take
perspectives such as: (a) accounting for success as a learning problem in which
robots, workers and organizations learn from each other; (b) the character of
learning infrastructures evident in various practices for adapting to learning
machines acting as co-workers; (c) how the organization of such learning
practices impacts skill changes, role transformations, as well as workers and
organizations. The researchers will then solicit participants' input and
commitment for tools to scale the successes inherent in the findings and select
the tool likely to have the greatest benefit for the most Americans. The
researchers will then jointly craft an FW-HTF-R (Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier - Research) proposal with interested collaborators that
reflects a rigorous test of this tool in real-world settings. The ultimate goal
of this project is to develop the necessary research personnel, research
infrastructure, and foundational work to expand the opportunities for studying
future technology, future workers, and future work at the level of a FW-HTF full
research proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.