* 2114713
* I-Corps:  Highly-Accurate Chemical Simulations for the Energy Storage Industry
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Ludwik Adamowicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
design and processes in industries such as energy storage, battery technology,
quantum computing, memory storage, and pharmaceuticals, as well as military
defense, through simulation. Simulating chemical processes with computer
software is vital for improved designs and processes in industries ranging from
energy storage to pharmaceuticals. The accurate verification, refinement, and
prediction of states of matter is particularly advantageous for improving the
design and manufacturing of new and renewable materials. Using quantum
information in highly accurate simulations will disrupt these industries and
become the new standard in chemical computational
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to solve out-of-reach
energy and chemistry problems with highly-accurate simulations. Simulating
chemical processes with computer software is vital for improved designs and
processes in industries ranging from energy storage to pharmaceuticals. Highly-
accurate simulations have been uniquely limited in the prediction of states due
to the extensively adopted and utilized Born-Oppenheimer approximation (BOA) of
the 1920s. The core of the innovation does not assume the historically necessary
BOA and exploits the effectiveness and predictive power of all-particle
correlation by using explicitly correlated Gaussian functions in conjunction
with the well-known Rayleigh-Ritz variational theorem to describe chemical
phenomena. The proposed technology leverages specialized basis functions that
include non-zero angular momentum state functions through the use of spherical
harmonics, including complex parameters. The proposed QLEANâ„¢ (Quantum Learned
Electrons and Nuclei) simulation method provides a scaling solution that
uniquely reduces the exponential growth rate dependence on the number (n) of
identical particles, also known as the factorial dependence, to a factor of
n-squared, making quantum based simulations possible. The I-Corps program will
enable the team to discover the market interest in this simulations
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.