* 2114562
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the interplay between form and function: the force-velocity trade-off in the spider predatory strike.
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jeffrey Shultz, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2024
* USD 314,640.00

Spiders are important predators of insects and other small animals, and the
group has nearly 50,000 described species. They are one of the most diverse and
numerous groups of animals and occupy a wide variety of habitats; spiders also
play an essential role in controlling pest populations. While great advances
have been made in understanding how spiders use silk and venom to capture prey,
very little is known about the main feeding structures of spiders, the
chelicerae. These in some respects function like jaws of vertebrates since they
are used to grasp and process prey. This research focuses on how the chelicerae
are used during the predatory strike, when the spider grasps the prey and
injects it with venom, and how the shape, speed and strength of chelicerae vary
in different groups of spiders. The researchers will compare the anatomy and
movements of chelicerae in a wide variety of spiders to better understand the
evolution of feeding in the group. This work will also examine details of the
super-fast predatory strike, found in certain types of spiders, and determine
how it evolved. In addition to revealing the function and evolution of spider
chelicerae, the project introduces spider biology to the next generation of
scientists, with outreach to several groups ranging from high-school students to
postdoctoral scholars. Results from this research will also be used to engage
and educate the public, including school-aged children, through hands-on lessons
that will be displayed at the National Museum of Natural History and used in a
summer day camp at the University of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research focuses on the comparative functional morphology of spider chelicerae,
and tests the hypothesis that a fundamental biomechanical principle, the force-
velocity trade-off, explains the diversification of their morphology and
predatory strike dynamics. It is widely assumed that lever-based skeletomuscular
systems are optimized to produce either high forces or high velocities, but not
both simultaneously. Predictions of the force-velocity hypothesis will be tested
using a broad sample of species from across the spider tree of life, including
the “trap-jaw” spiders, some of which have predatory strikes that are the
fastest movements known among arachnids. Structural details of the exoskeleton
and musculature will be quantified through analysis of Computed Tomography scans
and histological sections, and functional performance variables such as strike
velocity will be measured through analysis of high-speed videos. A molecular
phylogeny will be generated and used to provide the historical framework for
examining the evolution of morphology and strike performance. Phylogenetically-
informed statistical analyses will be used to determine whether the correlations
between form and function anticipated by the force-velocity trade-off are
consistent with the biomechanical diversity observed in spiders. The results
will offer insights into the evolution of form and function in skeletomuscular
systems and provide a rich source of new information on spider biology. This
award is co-funded by two programs in the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
the Systematics and Biodiversity Science Program in the Division of
Environmental Biology, and the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program
in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.