* 2114021
* Processes Influencing Stabilization in the Formation of States
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Nawa Sugiyama, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,718.00

One factor critical to stable and enduring formation of states is the
recognition and legitimation of their sovereignty by entities outside their
formal territorial frontiers. This project considers the social processes that
select the subgroup of individuals who perpetuate the state’s authority beyond
its political boundaries. In order to understand the origins of states and
empires, it is best to examine a metropolitan center with a dynamic and
regionally interconnected landscape. Excavations at a civic-administrative
complex at the heart of the one of the largest and most influential cities of
its time examine key conjunctures where state authority was amassed,
materialized, and embodied through ritualized acts. As a project situated in the
ceremonial center of a major heritage site , the project builds national and
international partnerships between academics, students, and the wider public to
support a model of archaeological stewardship. The project contributes to the
development of the scientific workforce and broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in science through the inclusion and training of a
widely diverse pool of 45 graduate and undergraduate students representing 14
institutions. Additionally, the project enhances public scientific literacy and
understanding of the scientific method through the dissemination of project
outcomes on a trilingual website. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to
excavate an elite administrative complex asking whether there is evidence to
suggest that it was the center of a complex, regional ritual economy that
naturalized and perpetuated state authority, and what role foreign entities
played in the development of state authority. This major metropolitan center's
sociopolitical, ideological, and economic sustenance reverberated throughout the
region, including strong political and military oversight over locations far
away. Three field seasons and laboratory analysis will target activity areas of
known foreign presence to pinpoint the stewards and practices instrumental to
the naturalization and perpetuation of the state authority. Analytical
techniques include laboratory analysis of non-local ceramics and mural fragments
(to construct their social life based on source locality of raw resources,
production technologies, iconographic elements, social identity of the
producers, and their manner of exchange, use, and termination), radiocarbon
dating, osteological/botanical analysis and isotope analysis of ecofacts (human
animal, and other paleobotanical remains); and osteological and chemical
analysis to reconstruct the movements of goods and people through the ritual
economy. The project's contribution of new primary excavation data provides
critical additional information in the long debate of whether the site was
primarily a dominant or cooperative force in the creation of a pan-regional
network. This research not only shapes scientific understanding of urban central
administrative domestic politics and regional influence, but also fundamentally
informs theories about the economic, political, and social development of
neighboring and distant polities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.