* 2114403
* Experimental determination of the partitioning of Zn, Pb, and Cu between brine and dolomite at temperatures and pressures of sediment-hosted base metal ore deposit formation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Hector Lamadrid, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2024
* USD 321,017.00

Many of the world’s most important ore deposits of the metals, lead (Pb), zinc
(Zn), and copper (Cu), including those in the U.S., were deposited from hot
groundwater (i.e. hydrothermal fluids) in porous sedimentary rocks. Some typical
characteristics of these fluids are now well known from previous research, such
as their temperature and the concentrations of the most abundant dissolved
elements. However, the concentrations of many less abundant elements in the
fluids like Pb, Zn, and Cu are not well known for most deposits. Knowledge of
these metal concentrations is important because it helps to answer fundamental
questions about the origin of the deposits, such as whether anomalously metal-
rich fluids were needed to form the deposits, how much time was needed to form
the deposits, and what chemical reactions caused the metals to dissolve into and
eventually precipitate from the fluids. Further, sound knowledge of how ore
deposits form is essential for successful mineral exploration and assessing the
U.S. domestic resource base. Because most Pb, Zn, and Cu deposits formed in the
distant geologic past, the fluids that are present at the ore deposits now are
no longer the same fluids that formed the deposits. However, some of the
minerals that these ancient fluids precipitated provide a record of some of the
properties of the ancient fluids, including their metal concentrations. For
example, the mineral, dolomite, which is a common constituent of many Pb, Zn,
and Cu deposits, tends to incorporate trace amounts of these metals into its
crystal structure. In general, the higher the concentrations of these metals in
the fluid, the higher the concentrations of these metals in the dolomite. If
this proportionality factor, called a partition coefficient, can be quantified
for each metal, then the concentration of each metal in the ancient fluid can be
calculated based on its measured present concentration in the dolomite. The
purpose of the proposed research is to determine the partition coefficients for
Pb, Zn, and Cu for water and dolomite over a range of typical ore-forming
temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research would be carried out
over three years, with the first year focused on Zn, the second year focused on
Pb, and the third year focused on Cu. Experiments for each metal would be
conducted at 125°, 150°, and 200° C for durations of 10, 20, and 40 days at
metal concentrations of 50, 100, and 1000 ppm, a pressure of 10 MPa, and a pH of
5.5. The experimental fluid would have a major element composition typical of
ore-forming sedimentary hydrothermal fluids. The precipitation of dolomite in
the experiments would be confirmed by X-ray diffraction (XRD). The composition
of the dolomite crystals would be determined by laser ablation-inductively
coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS). The elemental composition of the
experimental fluid at the end of each experiment would be measured using
inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The expected
results of the study are a suite of temperature-dependent partition coefficients
that could be used to determine the Zn, Pb, and Cu concentrations of
hydrothermal fluids based on the concentrations of these metals in dolomite that
the fluid precipitated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.