* 2114103
* Super-resolution focusing of terahertz plasmonic surface waves
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Weili Zhang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 346,290.00

Terahertz waves remain one of the most underdeveloped branches of the
electromagnetic spectrum. Numerous properties of terahertz radiation promise
essential applications in remote sensing, imag-ing, spectroscopy, and
healthcare. This project aims to innovate control and focusing of plasmonic
terahertz surface waves propagating through time-domain near-field platforms.
The investigator and team are addressing technical issues that can significantly
increase the intensity of plasmonic terahertz surface waves. The innovations
obtained from this research represent a technological breakthrough which meets
the needs of applications in fundamental scientific research and terahertz
commercialization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates plasmonic
surface wave focusing in the terahertz regime and develops advanced plasmonic
meta-devices. Specifically, this research is delivering the following
innovations: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Demonstrating terahertz plasmonic surface wave
focusing with flexible control of focusing location and intensity, as well as
features such as single-focus and dual-focus.&lt;br/&gt;(2) Demonstrating super-
resolution focusing of plasmonic surface waves in the terahertz regime with an
ultimate goal of significantly enhancing the peak intensity of plasmonic surface
waves to-ward nonlinear terahertz optics and nonlinear plasmonics.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) Developing novel plasmonic meta-devices with versatile
functionalities, enabling a powerful tool to manipulate the launching and
focusing of terahertz surface waves at will. The fabrication procedure, fast
prototyping, and experimental validation process in this project offer proof-of-
concept prototypes of plasmonic meta-devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.