* 2114084
* Molecular mechanism of touch sensitivity in the Schnauzenorgan of the Elephant Nose Fish
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Sviatoslav Bagriantsev, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 950,000.00

This research focuses on the sense of touch – a fundamental physiological
capacity present in all animals, including humans, which endows them with the
ability to sense the physical world through the skin. The sense of touch is
essential for navigation in the environment, for handling tools, manipulating
objects, detecting the texture of food, for sensing a mother’s caring touch or
the bite of a predator. Even though the sense of touch is important for every
aspect of an animal’s existence, it remains one of the least well understood
senses. Indeed, we know very little about how touch is detected, and how this
ability changes in different species during evolution. This project aims to fill
the gap in our knowledge about the sense of touch by studying Elephant Nose Fish
(Gnathonemus petersii). G. petersii is a tactile specialist animal who uses its
flexible chin appendage, called the Schnauzenorgan, in a manner similar to a
finger in order to find food in the bed of murky rivers. The fascinating ability
of G. petersii to find food by touch rather than through vision or smell lends a
unique opportunity to study this sense from the perspective of a tactile
champion. This project will obtain mechanistic insights into the process of
touch detection by sensory neurons of the peripheral nervous system of
vertebrates. To achieve broader impact, results from this research will be
disseminated through an extracurricular outreach program. By combining in-person
lectures and experiments with online classes, this outreach program will
disseminate scientific knowledge in the area of physiology among students of
different ages, with an emphasis on the ethnic and socioeconomic groups
traditionally underrepresented among scientists. The scientific and outreach
components of this project will provide fundamental training for graduate
students to foster their development as researchers and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how G. petersii
achieves mechanosensory specialization at cellular and molecular levels. The
Schnauzenorgan of G. petersii is innervated by myelinated trigeminal touch
receptors, which terminate in the skin as bare nerve endings, without forming a
complex with corpuscular structures. The goal of this project is to perform
functional and histological investigation of the novel type of mechanoreceptors
from the Schnauzenorgan of G. petersii, and identify the molecular mechanism of
its touch sensitivity. The project will test whether the trigeminal ganglia of
G. petersii contains an expanded population of mechanoreceptors, investigate
whether mechanoreceptors innervating the Schnauzenorgan of G. petersii have
augmented ability to sense touch, and reveal molecules that convert touch into
excitation. To achieve this, the project will utilize a multidisciplinary
approach, combining electrophysiology, histology and bioinformatics. Results
from this proposal will be essential for understanding molecular evolution of
mechanosensitivity in vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.