* 2114197
* Collaborative Research: A Whole-Community Effort to Understand Biases and Uncertainties in Using Emerging Big Data for Mobility Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Qi Wang, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 176,912.00

This NSF grant will quantify the biases and uncertainties associated with human
mobility patterns when they are derived from big mobile data such as cell phone
data, mobile app data and social media data. Information on human mobility
patterns, or where and how Americans live, work and go about their daily
activities, is the basis of hundreds of billions' investment for the nation's
transportation infrastructures. These investment decisions have a direct impact
on Americans’ upward social mobility, health, and well-being. The project is
motivated by two factors: first, big mobile data increasingly replaces
traditional household survey data in mobility analysis; and second, big mobile
data is fundamentally unrepresentative (and biased) and a direct application of
the results derived from such data can have substantial negative impacts on
Americans’ health, prosperity and welfare. Novel education and outreach
activities organically integrated with the research, including a collaboration
with the Boston Museum of Science for a digital exhibit on mobility tales around
the world, and a mini-track competition with MetroLab on “future mobility and
justice for students around the world.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
quantifying the biases and uncertainties associated with mobility patterns, this
grant will also identify the extent those biases and uncertainties are affected
by a number of factors, e.g., data characteristics, the modeling techniques
used, and geographical differences. More specifically, the project comprises
three research thrusts. Thrust 1 engages stakeholders and the research community
to develop a solicitation calling for mobility labs around the world to submit
critical mobility metrics, using their own data and methods. Thrust 2 involves
the development of two novel methodologies: a coupled Bootstrap computational
framework to quantify biases and uncertainties associated with derived mobility
metrics and a rule-based learning framework to handle sparsity issues that
likely arise during the analysis stage. Thrust 3 involves all participating labs
for results summarization and dissemination. The project will unite multiple
disciplines from transportation engineering to systems engineering,
computer/information science, and social science in a concerted effort for
better understanding the uncertainties and biases in mobility analysis when big
mobile data is used. The results from the project will also provide practical
insights for practitioners in using big mobile data for mobility
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.