* 2114411
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Detecting Accounts Involved in Influence Campaigns on Social Media
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jeremy Blackburn, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 220,000.00

The growing popularity of online social networks has opened the door to false
information being disseminated by malicious actors. Hostile nation states are
orchestrating disinformation campaigns in the United States with the goal of
influencing public discourse or pushing talking points that favor a particular
country’s agenda. These campaigns are typically carried out with the help of
fake social media accounts known as trolls, which pose as fictitious personas.
These trolls interact with each other and with unsuspecting social network users
with the goal of polarizing discussion and furthering false narratives. Despite
the serious threat that disinformation poses to our society, social networks are
struggling to keep up with the threat, resorting to reactive measures that
remove malicious accounts after the fact. The goal of this project is to develop
techniques able to automatically identify troll accounts on social networks so
that they can be more swiftly removed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this
project, the investigators are collecting information about the troll accounts
identified by Twitter and Reddit as belonging to several foreign countries’
disinformation campaigns. These data are used to train machine learning
algorithms able to automatically identify other troll accounts on Twitter and
Reddit. The project follows two parallel research tasks. In the first task, the
research team aims to train supervised learning algorithms to learn the typical
behavior of known troll accounts, with the goal of identifying more accounts
that behave similarly and are therefore part of the same disinformation
campaign. Preliminary results show that troll accounts exhibit peculiar
interaction patterns that are uncommon in real accounts. In the second task, the
researchers will work towards identifying traits that are typical of troll
accounts regardless of the campaign that they belong to, and use transfer
learning techniques to identify emerging disinformation campaigns. Students are
involved at all stages of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.