* 2114312
* Collaborative Research: OP: Transition Metal Alloys: Emergent Properties for Near-Infrared Hot-Carrier Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jason Baxter, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 140,000.00

Modern electronics are based on charge transport by electrons and holes in
semiconductors. The behavior of carriers with excess energy, called “hot”
carriers, is of particular interest. Hot-carrier materials have a broad range of
applications including hydrogen production, local heating for nanotherapeutics,
and photodetectors. Hot-carrier photodetectors show great promise due to their
tunability and ultrafast response. Unfortunately, the low efficiencies of hot
carrier materials have made them impractical for use in devices. The PIs have
recently discovered that alloys of noble metals and transition metals have the
potential to efficiently generate long-lived hot carriers, a breakthrough in the
field. This project will investigate transition metal alloys and their ability
to generate and efficiently transport above-equilibrium “hot” electrons and
holes in an optoelectronic devices. The proposed work is expected to provide
transformational advances in the efficiency of near-infrared hot-carrier
photodetectors. Education and outreach for this project will teach students
through research activities and will expose people of diverse ages and
backgrounds to the concepts of alloying, metal-optics, and optoelectronics. The
research team will involve graduate and undergraduate students to perform this
research in the team's laboratories and partner with local middle and high
schools to involve 6th through 12th-grade students in hands-on scientific work.
High school students from local Baton Rouge high schools will participate in
annual summer in-lab residency programs and middle-school students in the
Philadelphia area will participate in a solar race by building, testing, and
racing shoebox-sized solar powered cars. This project is jointly funded by the
Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) and Metals and Metallic Nanostructures
(MMN) programs of the Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hot-
carrier generation in metals is a promising route to convert photons into
electrical charges for near-infrared (NIR) optoelectronic devices. Hot-carrier
optoelectronic devices offer below-bandgap charge generation, ultrafast response
times, and spectral and polarization control. These features are expected to
result in transformative advances in optoelectronics. However, current hot-
carrier devices exhibit low efficiencies due to poor carrier generation and
collection rates. Photoexcited metals can generate hot carriers via interband,
intraband, and plasmon-assisted Landau damping. While noble metals have been
extensively explored for generating hot carriers via interband transitions, NIR
photons do not have enough energy to overcome their interband energy threshold.
Intraband- and plasmon-driven hot-carrier generation can occur at these lower
excitation energies, but only if additional momentum is provided. The research
team hypothesizes that band hybridization in transition metal alloys will result
in emergent properties and new pathways for NIR hot-carrier generation. The team
recently reported that, when photoexcited at 1550 nm, an Au50Pd50 alloy having
NIR accessible interband transitions exhibited 20-fold more 0.8 eV hot holes
than pure Au and 3-times longer lifetime than pure Pd. The team will build on
this exciting result by pursuing the following specific aims: 1). Use first-
principles simulations to determine candidate transition metal alloys that excel
at hot-carrier generation in the NIR, 2). Deposit alloy films via thermal co-
evaporation and use resonant synchrotron-based photoemission to verify the
predicted electronic properties, 3). Determine the effect alloying has on
carrier lifetime using transient absorption spectroscopy and 4). Fabricate
below-bandgap photoconductors using alloy absorbers and characterize their
electrical response. The research team is well suited to pursue these aims with
expertise in alloy theory, photoemission, metal film growth, device fabrication,
and ultrafast spectroscopy. Transition metal alloys offer an exciting palette
for synthesizing new hot-carrier materials, and the team is well-positioned to
investigate their structure-function relationship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.