* 2114652
* Accomplishment Based Renewal: The Architecture and Tectonics of the Ultraslow Spreading SW Indian and Gakkel Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Murray, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 996,805.00

This project will photograph, describe, and curate a large collection of oceanic
crustal rocks from two ultraslow spreading ridges – the Gakkel Ridge (GR) in the
Arctic Ocean and the Southwest Indian Ridge (SWIR) in the oceans that surround
southern Africa. These ridges represent two distinctly different ultraslow
spreading centers with the SWIR having a large number of fracture zones and hot
spot activity while the GR has no transform faults and no evidence of hotspots.
The rock collection will be integrated with previously collected geophysical
data (magnetics, gravity, multibeam maps and seismic data) and newly acquired
electron microprobe data from a subset of representative samples to estimate
chemical compositions of the crust and mantle rocks. Together these will be used
to estimate the thickness and architecture of the ocean crust and assess the
amount of interaction they have with seawater and the underlying mantle. This
work provides future researchers with on-line access to the entire collection of
slow-spreading crustal rocks collected over the past 50 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a three year research program with several
important goals. First, it will provide a photo-archive of thousands of seafloor
crustal samples previously collected and housed at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute. As part of this archival, it will allow researchers to synthesize
descriptive data with archives of geophysical, magnetic, and geochemical data
available in this region. New chemical compositional data will be added through
electron microprobe analysis on a subset of representative crustal rocks from
two ultraslow spreading ridges – the SW Indian Ridge (SWIR) and the Gakkel
Ridge. This study will also integrate petrological and geochemical data with the
extensive collection of multibeam maps of the SWIR and existing seismic,
magnetics, and gravity data, and the uniquely comprehensive rock sampling
performed along the ridge axis and rift mountains. The goal is to test the
hypothesis that spreading centers along the Ridge are not supported by deep
mantle plumes, but by the depleted residues of hydrous mantle melting beneath
ancient island arcs and back arc basins related to the closure of the Mozambique
Ocean in the Neoproterozoic. It further attempts to determine the origin of the
associated hotspots, and how they are interacting with the SWIR as evidenced by
the geochemistry and petrology of the modern ridge, and the off-axis bathymetry
and magnetics across the seafloor to the hotspots and their conjugate positions.
In addition, a parallel synthesis of the ultraslow spreading Gakkel Ridge will
be completed providing the first detailed analysis of the geology of the ridge
based on the 190 successful dredge and rock core stations along the 1,000 km
stretch mapped along it during the AMORE Expedition. At present analysis of the
AMORE data, including the bathymetry, has been largely limited to the isotopic,
major and trace element geochemistry of the lavas, and peridotites. This ridge
is a near perfect contrast to the Ultraslow SWIR. The Gakkel Ridge has no
transform faults (the SWIR has many) thus providing a unique opportunity to
examine the causes and extent of geochemical variability and magmatic
segmentation in their absence, and what features are due to ultraslow spreading
and which to transforms. Finally, the funding will allow the researcher to
finish a detailed manuscript comparing the dike-gabbro transitions at fast, slow
and ultraslow-spreading ridges, providing direct evidence for a shallow melt
lens at the dike-gabbro transition at the former, and its general absence at the
latter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.