* 2114464
* A Framework for Semi-Autonomous In-Hand Telemanipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xiaoli Zhang, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 473,371.00

This award supports research to develop and test a control framework for stable
in-hand telemanipulation, using a physic-informed machine learning approach that
can adapt the telerobotic controller to physiological limitations of individual
users. In daily life, in-hand manipulation is needed to complete seemingly
simple tasks such as adjusting the orientation of a power adaptor for plugging
in to an outlet, as well as to complete complex skilled tasks such as
manipulating a scalpel during a surgical procedure. The long-term objective of
the line of research initiated with this project is to enable dexterous in-hand
manipulation in tele-operation scenarios in which the robot can understand how
to track real-time changes in human finger motions and use that information to
actively ensure the stability of an in-hand object while it is being
manipulated. This project promotes the progress of science and advances the
national health, prosperity, and welfare by developing and testing novel methods
implementing stable shared human and machine control of hand-held objects in
tele-operation scenarios, such as tele-surgery, healthcare assistive robotics,
and remote search and rescue. The project will also support outreach activities
through an existing K-12 program at the Colorado School of Mines, at a local
community college, and at STEM camp for girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to solve challenges associated with in-hand telemanipulation through the
development and testing of a control framework that utilizes physic-informed
hierarchical machine learning approaches to adapt the telerobot to the
physiological limitations of the individual users. There are three research
objectives: 1) to use physics-informed metrics to guide the robot control policy
to generate stable grasp configurations; 2) to optimize interpretation of
signals derived from the human hand motion tracking system using a hierarchical
learning model; and 3) to personalize shared control of the manipulation task
between the human and the robot through active machine learning guided by the
user's corrective adjustments in real-time. The project team will use a
commercially available robotic hand system with the semi-autonomous framework to
conduct human-subject-involved evaluation. Subjects will perform tele-
manipulation tasks of increasing complexity, ranging from the relative
simplicity of a jar opening task to a more complex case requiring in-hand
changes of tool position and orientation. The work promises to advance the
science and engineering of human-robot cooperation through a novel semi-
autonomous control framework that can support complex in-hand object
manipulation for teleoperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.