* 2114241
* Collaborative Research: Audio for Inclusion: Uncovering Marginalized Student Narratives to Provide Insight to Faculty on the Known Unknowns of Inclusion
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephen Secules, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 07/31/2024
* USD 320,642.00

This project will bring the experiences of diverse engineering students directly
to faculty through edited audio interviews. Undergraduate engineering education
is a critical juncture in the diversification of the engineering workforce.
However, engineering educational culture can marginalize many groups. Faculty
are key change agents in this culture, and their empathy and understanding for
diverse students are critical for enabling and promoting inclusive education.
However, faculty may not be aware of diverse student perspectives, and even
well-intentioned faculty may fall short of creating inclusive classroom
environments. More resources are needed to help develop faculty empathy and
understanding for a broad range of student populations in engineering education.
Qualitative research presents a promising tool for centering the voices and
experiences of students, but researchers’ typical long form journal publications
for disseminating qualitative research are not an accessible and compelling
medium. To increase collective impact, more accessible, innovative, and timely
dissemination strategies are needed. Podcasts and YouTube clips can be used to
disseminate research findings with more immediacy and personalization than
written text. This study will feature these audio formats as media to share
diverse student experiences with faculty and to facilitate a broader impact on
pedagogy and culture. Faculty who listen to the audio will have the potential to
gain reflective awareness of student experiences that provoke the creation of
more inclusive classrooms. This novel dissemination approach will be sustained
through the creation of a widely distributed podcast called Audio for Inclusion,
hosted by the PIs. This podcast will include the final versions of edited audio
files generated in this study and will be located on the ASEE Diversity
Committee’s web and YouTube pages, and incorporated into
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct a nationwide
recruitment of students with salient minoritized identities via email
distributed through relevant organizations, campus support centers, and snowball
recruitment. Twenty (20) students will be interviewed twice throughout the
duration of the study using a semi-structured protocol that focuses on their
experiences in engineering education. Interviews will be transcribed, de-
identified, edited for conciseness, and re-recorded by student actors. Recorded
interviews will be disseminated using a survey distributed to 100 faculty
members who represent a range of familiarity with diversity and inclusion
topics. This survey will prompt faculty participants to listen to embedded
student narratives and provide feedback using Likert-type and open-ended
response questions. Survey results will be used to observe the impact of the
audio resources on faculty views of diversity, equity, and inclusion in
engineering. This project will be informed by existing theoretical frameworks
such as intersectionality, figured worlds, narrative, and critical theorizing.
Findings from this work will contribute to the knowledge base on broadening
participation in engineering in three ways: (1) by providing insights into the
experiences of students belonging to minoritized identity groups; (2) by
developing an accessible resource for improving faculty knowledge of and
strategies for promoting the inclusion of students’ undisclosed identities and
experiences in engineering education; 3) by establishing a novel research
approach to broaden participation in engineering; (4) by employing innovative
dissemination techniques that expand the impact of student participant voices;
and (5) by contributing to evidence-based foundations for the future development
of faculty-centered support structures related to expanding concepts of
diversity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.