* 2114406
* Long Term Agrarian Responses to Environmental Stress
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Patricia Fall, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 189,763.00

This project addresses basic social and environmental questions regarding the
development of agrarian societies, and the social and physical landscapes they
engendered and in which modern societies continue to live. Interdisciplinary
studies featuring collaboration between archaeologists, geographers and earth
scientists are particularly well-suited to apply deep time perspectives to
elucidate long-term environmental changes, and assess how past societies
responded to environmental stress, with attendant implications for modern
societies. In particular, illumination of the possible trajectories and
potential impacts of past environmental change holds major implications for
understanding how and why urban civilizations rose and collapsed. Accordingly,
this research illuminates the often-precarious relationships between agrarian
societies, both past and modern, and their ecological settings. The project’s
principal researchers include nine early career scholars, four of whom are
women, including two of Hispanic descent. Project outreach to popular and
university audiences in the US and beyond will foster a sense of cultural
stewardship, an appreciation of deep human heritage, and an awareness of the
varied responses to environmental change implemented by past agrarian societies.
Project data will be accessioned into the University of California’s Digital
Library (CDL) Merritt repository, where it will be managed by Open Context, and
available for broad audiences to investigate the interactions of environmental
change and agrarian responses. This project will contribute a new comparative
approach for the study of ancient social flux while offering opportunities for
student engagement in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will contribute to the growing discussion of environmental dynamics at the heart
of past social change with timely pertinence for human responses to
environmental change in the modern world. The researchers will elucidate multi-
millenial trajectories of environmental change and varied paths of human
response during a period of pronounced societal upheaval. Coordinated analyses
of stable isotopes from archaeological crop seeds, and animal bones and teeth
will be used to estimate ancient rainfall and temperatures through time.
Changing profiles of cultivated crops and herded animals will portray shifting
human responses to environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.