* 2114100
* Mobility-As-A-Service for Resilience Delivery in Power Grids: Stochastic Programming Advancements under Decision-Dependent Uncertainties
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Payman Dehghanian, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 415,000.00

Power grids are constantly subject to extreme emergencies that may leave
communities without electricity and are critical threats to health and public
safety. This NSF project aims to offer a new decision-making paradigm to deploy
mobile power sources (e.g., mobile energy storage systems, mobile emergency
generators, electric vehicles, and electric buses) for enhancing the resilience
of communities and critical infrastructures when facing extreme events. The
project will bring transformative change to how uncertainties are managed when
making allocation and dispatch decisions of mobile power resources (pre-
positioning, routing, and scheduling) before and during disasters. This will be
achieved by accounting for uncertainties that cannot be resolved simply with the
passage of time, but whose resolution depends on whether or not the decision to
deploy these flexible resources is actually made, i.e., decision-dependent
uncertainty. The intellectual merits of the project include devising new
mathematical optimization models and expedient methods to solve the proposed
problems promoting mobility-as-a-service for resilience in power grids. The
broader impacts of the project include organizing an interdisciplinary seminar
series on Advanced Stochastic Programming for Power Systems, undergraduate
female/minority student involvement in the project research, dissemination of
the project findings through publications, and research showcase to K-12
students in the Washington metropolitan area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Going beyond
the traditional service restoration problems with exogenous uncertainties, this
project disrupts the current practice by developing new risk-neutral and risk-
averse stochastic optimization problems and reformulations for service
restoration that incorporate decision-dependent uncertainty (DDU). Due to the
difficulty to solve such modelsâ€”that typically take the form of stochastic
mixed-integer nonlinear (polynomial) programming (MINLP) problems, the proposed
research also focuses on the development of computationally efficient methods to
solve DDU-embedded optimization models on mobility-as-a-service for resilience.
The proposed models will account for the coordination of mobile power sources
with a variety of heterogeneous flexible resources in power distribution grids,
network reconfiguration practices, repair crews, and transportation system
constraints and schedules. The completion of this plan requires an
interdisciplinary approach combining key methodologies from the mathematical
programming and power systems engineering disciplines, thereby enabling
convergence of multiple research areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.