* 2114201
* Small-scale Ejections in the Sun’s Photosphere through Chromosphere and Corona
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeongwoo Lee, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 357,172.00

This project studies small-scale ejections in the Sun’s atmosphere, from
photosphere through chromosphere to corona, that can have significant influence
on the structure and dynamics of the solar corona and solar wind. The goal is to
advance our understanding of compelling questions in solar physics, including
the interrelationship among various small jet-like phenomena, their linkage to
the variable magnetic field of the Sun, and their energy and mass contributions
to coronal heating and acceleration of solar wind. The researchers will use
high-resolution observations of the Sun from the Goode Solar Telescope (GST) in
California and space-based observatories. Data analysis tools improved and/or
developed by this project will be made publicly available and will help with
science planning and analysis of other ground-based solar observations,
especially using the NSF-funded Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope. Research
results will be incorporated into advanced courses offered by the New Jersey
Institute of Technology, which serves a significant number of students from
groups underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-scale jet-like
ejections in the solar atmosphere, including chromospheric type II spicules,
macrospicules, mini-filament eruptions, and transition region and coronal jets,
come in different spatial and temporal scales and magnitude. These events may be
associated with small-scale magnetic reconnection, responsible for providing the
upward flux of energy and momentum and plausibly driving the small transients in
the solar wind. A statistical study of high-resolution
photospheric/chromospheric observations from GST combined with multiwavelength
spectroscopic observations from the space-based Interface Region Imaging
Spectrograph, Solar Dynamics Observatory, and Hinode missions will be performed
to derive the key characteristics, including sizes, lifetimes, occurrence rates,
velocity, and mass and energy outputs of these small-scale ejections.
Observational analysis, using inversion analysis of the differential emission
measure and spectroscopic Doppler motion, will advance our understanding of the
interrelationship among small-scale ejections in the chromosphere, transition
region and corona and their role in the coronal heating and mass loading, and
provide physical constraints to jet models. Additionally, the results will shed
light on how the associated photospheric magnetic fields evolve prior to
ejections and how the physical properties differ between the jet-like ejection
events in and outside of coronal holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.