* 2114833
* Intramembrane Proteolysis in Regulation of the Rice Receptor Kinase XA21
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Wen-Yuan Song, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2025
* USD 945,996.00

Defense against bacterial disease is a costly undertaking by plants.
Overamplification or dysregulation of the immune system often causes deleterious
effects. Therefore, tight control of immune sensors and restriction of the
immune response to pathogen-infected tissues are thought to be crucial for
survival of the host plant. The rice cell-surface immune sensor XA21confers
resistance to water-deficit stress and immunity against bacterial leaf blight
disease caused by Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae (Xoo). This project will study
the regulation of XA21 by a protein capable of cleaving XA21 in the cell
membrane. The knowledge gained will not only contribute to agricultural
applications but will also create training opportunities for a postdoctoral
scholar, graduate and undergraduate students, precollege students and a total of
24 educators from Title I high schools (containing minority and
socioeconomically challenged student populations of 40% or greater). By engaging
in this project, the participants will learn cutting-edge scientific ideas and
methods and contribute to the discovery of knowledge that may have broad
implications. The participating teachers will gain interest in and understanding
of general and advanced molecular techniques. As a result, this knowledge and
interest will ultimately be shared with high school students in their classrooms
during the span of this project. The exposure of younger researchers and
students to the crop rice and its diseases will help citizens better understand
agriculture and food security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intramembrane proteolysis
is an evolutionarily conserved cellular mechanism that mediates cleavage of
transmembrane proteins within the lipid bilayers. However, very little is known
about this important regulatory process in plants, largely due to lack of known
biological substrates of the widespread intramembrane proteases. The
intramembrane protease Limiting XA21 to Leaf 1 (LXL1) is capable of cleaving
XA21 in planta. This project aims to verify XA21 as a biological substrate of
LXL1 in rice, to pinpoint the LXL1 cleavage site in XA21 using liquid
chromatography mass spectrometry and to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the
developmental defects observed in lxl1 mutants containing XA21 using dye tracer
and anatomical assays. Also using these lxl1 lines, the studies will determine
the roles and early molecular events of LXL1-mediated cleavage of XA21 in
dehydration responses. Finally, the project will characterize XA21 rice mutants
that are insensitive to LXL1 cleavage. This project will significantly advance
our understanding of the biology of intramembrane proteolysis in higher
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.