* 2114111
* Responsiveness of sex determination to thermal cues and maternal estrogens as potential modifiers
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2026
* Rachel Bowden, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 763,915.00

Most organisms respond to environmental temperatures, and these responses are
typically studied by comparing individuals held at one temperature to
individuals held at a different temperature. This approach misses two important
points: 1) temperatures in nature are often variable and exposure to a given
temperature can be transient, and 2) it does a poor job quantifying variation in
how long it takes individuals to respond to temperature. This project focuses on
understanding why some individuals respond to a short exposure to a given
temperature, while others do not. Studies will be conducted using the red-eared
slider turtle (Trachemys scripta), where incubation temperatures affect sex
determination, which provides a clear signal (i.e., formation of a testis or
ovary) of how individuals responded to temperature. Specifically, cool
incubation temperatures induce testis development and warm incubation
temperatures induce ovary development. It is also established that higher levels
of estrogens in the egg increase the likelihood that the embryos will develop
ovaries. Under natural conditions, embryos routinely experience both testis and
ovary inducing temperatures, so studies are aimed at deciphering how long of an
exposure to warmer temperatures is necessary to induce ovary development and
whether elevated estrogen levels reduce the exposure requirement. Advancing our
understanding of how temperature affects sex determination will assist efforts
to mitigate the effect of climate change on thermally sensitive species. The
project will train a postdoctoral researcher, graduate and undergraduate
students, and will engage pre-college students in STEM-related activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent studies have demonstrated that temperature-
dependent sex determination involves epigenetic regulation of critical
transcription factors that determine sex. In the red-eared slider turtle
(Trachemys scripta), the histone demethylase Kdm6b removes repressive histones
marks from the promoter of Dmrt1, which is a conserved regulator of testis
development. For this species, testis development is induced at cool incubation
temperatures (below 29˚C). This proposal examines how sex determination occurs
under ecologically relevant conditions where incubation temperatures fluctuate
between those that induce either testis production or ovary production. Projects
will focus on the temporal aspect of the response to temperatures since it is
established that exposure to specific incubation temperatures is transient in
nature and individual embryos vary in whether their gonadal fate is influenced
by brief exposures (e.g., heatwaves). Additionally, projects will investigate
whether maternal estrogens affect the duration of exposure necessary to induce
ovarian development. By characterizing how the expression of genes involved in
gonadal differentiation respond to transient exposure to incubation temperature
and how estrogens my influence that response, studies will begin to disentangle
how molecular responses to warm and cool temperature may vary independently.
Understanding how an organism responds to thermal variation will strengthen our
understanding of how environmental temperatures regulate biological processes
such as sex determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.