* 2114933
* I-Corps: Multimedia Augmented Reality Vocabulary Instruction
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Sara Smith, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an Augmented Reality (AR) software solution that delivers
dynamic, interactive, learner-specific vocabulary instruction using evidence-
based best practices for learning. The proposed technology is an accessible,
modular solution that is suitable for young children and adult learners,
regardless of literacy. There are 5 million US children designated as English
Language Learners, 1.5 billion English as a Second Language students worldwide,
and over 300 million current users of digital language learning tools. The
proposed technology specifically addresses the needs of these customer segments
by increasing motivation and learning outcomes using AR and artificial
intelligence (AI), providing availability in multiple language combinations, and
providing access for children and adults from different economic backgrounds.
The proposed system of language learning has the potential to narrow
historically pervasive achievement inequities for children from linguistically
diverse backgrounds in the US by delivering interactive, differentiated,
academic vocabulary instruction with first language support to English Language
Learners. The tool may provide a research-based, technology-enhanced solution
for supporting language learning worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a language learning software solution
with Augmented Reality (AR) for immersive, interactive learning and Artificial
Intelligence (AI) for adaptive, deep learning. The proposed technology provides
a novel language learning solution that does not require teacher supervision,
can align with curricula, is suitable for users who cannot read, and offers
content in many languages. The proposed technology is designed to incorporate
cognitive AI with vision recognition for text as well as speech and speaker
recognition. The AR platform also may provide new AI training models for
language acquisition with a focus on primary school aged children learning
English. In addition, speech and speaker recognition capacities may allow
further refinement of models for language learner speech. The goal is a
technology-enhanced language acquisition solution with learner-specific
differentiated instruction, dynamic adaptive libraries, and first language
specified materials. Based on findings from proof of principle, user acceptance,
and alpha prototype research, the core technology is user friendly and effective
for children as young as four years old. Further, this technology may increase
scientific understanding of emerging bilingualism and language
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.