* 2114793
* Collaborative Research: LTREB: Predicting the success of montane species  in an era of climatic upheaval
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 461,386.00

The history of life on Earth has many periods of mass extinction, when many
species cease to exist. These periods are usually studied through use of
fossils. Although fossils have revealed a lot about extinction, they’ve been
unable to solve the basic riddle of why some species go extinct and others seem
unaffected. Humans are now witnessing a mass extinction event, which provides
ecologists an opportunity to study in real time how species differ in their
responses to climate change and other stressors. Some may go extinct within our
lifetimes; others won’t. This project builds on one of North America's longest-
running studies of insect populations by continuing data collection at five
sites in the Sierra Nevada Mountains of Northern California. Encompassing more
than 150 species of butterflies, the project will explore habitat use by both
butterflies and caterpillars to better understand climate impacts on insect
populations. Of particular interest is the role of extreme droughts, which are
affecting the western United States with increasing frequency. Results from the
project will inform our understanding of ongoing insect and pollinator declines.
Scientists will engage the public through a novel forecasting website and by
involvement of local school groups in activities, including the creation of
larger-than-life biological models of common species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project extends nearly five decades of observations in a dynamic system that has
played an important role in our understanding of insects in the Anthropocene.
Previous work with this long-term data has suggested that the impacts of climate
change (particularly warming and drying trends) might be as important as the
effects of habitat loss and degradation through pesticide accumulation and other
processes. In this project, researchers investigate the role of montane
environments as refugia during periods of climatic upheaval. In addition to
continuing core data collection (biweekly presence/absence surveys), new
information will be gathered on trophic networks and the response of insect
populations to shifting climatic conditions mediated through plant resources
(nectar sources in particular). Multiple types of observational data will be
integrated into a statistical modeling framework that emphasizes forecasting
with climatic uncertainty, and which will be validated on an annual basis
through real-time forecasts updated within and among field seasons. Outcomes
from this project will include inter-disciplinary tools for prediction with
heterogeneous data sources, as well as advances on ecological theories of
animals interacting with topographic complexity while responding to novel
climatic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.