* 2114295
* Methodology for Reconstructing Prior River Flow
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eman Ghoneim, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 203,874.00

For millennia, the Nile River has played a fundamental role in the rapid growth
and expansion of civilization. The intimate connection with this extensive river
system has strongly influenced where the Egyptians constructed their cities,
necropoleis and temples, in addition to also shaping the landscapes in which
they lived, worked, died, and were buried. However, to date, there is still
great uncertainty regarding the exact direction that the Nile has migrated in
Egypt and whether the Nile had a single course or multiple branches that were
simultaneously active in the past. While many efforts to reconstruct the ancient
Nile drainage system have been conducted in previous years, they have been
primarily confined to small study areas. This has led to the mapping of
fragmented sections of the ancient river, however, the position and dynamic
nature of the entire river channel system remains undiscovered. Such a poor
understanding of the Nile history not only inhibits ability to accurately map
archaeological sites, but also to understand their significance within the wider
landscape. This project will help initiate a new medium for long-term national
and international collaboration between scientists from different backgrounds
and raise the profile of American research teams in the international
archeological sphere, geospatial and environmental sciences. This research will
also offer an opportunity for scientific engagement and cultural enrichment for
college students based in the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consist in a three-year study with international colleagues to leverage the use
of interdisciplinary approaches, including multisensor remote sensing together
with geographical information system (GIS) modeling, historical, archeological,
geomorphological, and geophysical field surveys, to reconstruct a complete map
of the Nile River and many of its now defunct branches. The mapping of this
ancient water system will facilitate the detection of previously undocumented
sites and develop the geochronological framework for the area under
investigation. Discovering the ancient Nile and having a more refined idea of
where settlements were possibly located in relation to it can drastically
improve our cultural heritage conservation measures and raise awareness of these
sites for modern development planning. From a societal perspective, such
research is important because of the wide presence of ancient sites in the
proximity of unmapped paleo-river systems – both in the USA and globally – and
the large human population near these sites that could affect their preservation
or annihilation. The broader impacts of this project lie in the successful
demonstration of the adopted methodological framework in the Nile Valley, which
will allow for similar applications around other river basins worldwide and
could be beneficial in protecting sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.