* 2115496
* A New Well-being Metric in the Era of the Digital Economy
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Erik Brynjolfsson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2023
* USD 401,292.00

This project will advance economic measurement of well-being in the era of the
digital economy. To assess changes in living standards, and by extension the
effects of policies that might affect living standards, it is necessary to
properly measure the welfare gains from all goods and services. Many traditional
goods and services are now being replaced by digital goods. In addition, new
applications of digital technologies are transforming the production process,
allowing the nature, variety, and quality of traditional goods to be frequently
changed. However, the welfare effects of these changes are difficult or even
impossible to appropriately capture in existing official statistics. This
project will develop a new well-being metric for the digital era based on
changes in consumer surplus. The research will overcome several weaknesses in
existing official statistics by focusing directly on consumer surplus, rather
than production. The approach also will consider a much broader set of goods and
services, including those with zero-price. The research may serve as a template
for Federal statistical agencies to generate more reliable official statistics.
Statistical indicators are important not only in assessing and affecting the
functioning of the economic market, but also in designing and evaluating
policies aimed at the development of society. The results of this research will
enable policymakers, economists, statisticians, and technologists to better
understand the main sources of welfare gains in the economy, including digital
goods and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome the problems of
existing well-being metrics to capture the value of goods in the digital
economy, this project will measure changes in consumer surplus as a general
measure of well-being. The investigators will elicit the consumers' willingness
to accept (WTA) valuations in exchange for losing access to various goods using
massive choice online experiments. For instance, each consumer will be asked to
answer whether she would be willing to refrain from having access to Facebook
for a month in exchange for a monetary payoff. The amount of money offered will
vary across consumers, making it possible to estimate the demand curve and total
consumer surplus. Each WTA question will be accompanied by a Bayesian-Truth-
Serum (BTS) question, which asks a consumer to predict what percentage of
consumers would have made the same choice. This BTS question helps make the
survey incentive compatible because it is optimal to respond truthfully to each
WTA question. With this approach, the investigators will estimate the consumer
surplus from each of approximately 143 categories of goods and services
including 17 categories of free digital goods. By aggregating the consumer
surplus from all categories and assessing changes over time, they will provide a
new well-being metric called Gross Domestic Product-B (GDP-B). While not
intended to replace traditional national accounts, GDP-B and statistics based on
it will provide a better picture of well-being in the digital
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.