* 2115169
* SRS RN: Transforming Rural-Urban Systems: Trajectories for Sustainability in the Intermountain West
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Karletta Chief, University of New Mexico
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2026
* USD 14,999,681.00

Catastrophic wildfires, dwindling water supplies, and rapid urban population
growth are some of the most pressing challenges of the Intermountain West (IMW).
However, the current services and resources available to urban and rural systems
(URS) in the IMW leave communities ill-equipped to face these issues. The
Transforming Rural-Urban Systems: Trajectories for Sustainability in the
Intermountain West Research Network (TRUSTS-RN) is a transdisciplinary research
effort representing diverse communities, sectors, disciplines, and backgrounds
aimed at improving regional sustainability. Using a convergent research and
education plan, the Network focuses on how headwaters and headwater dependent
systems, regional food-energy-water systems, and innovative institutions and
approaches to governance can be integrated to help direct URS along trajectories
that result in a sustainable future for humans and the environment. Network
research projects and educational activities are designed to co- produce
knowledge with regional partners and utilize a novel framework for Guided
Transformation (GT) that incorporates diverse perspectives, includes Indigenous
and place-based knowledge, and values community and environmental well-being.
Over the course of five years, the Network aims to: (1) improve understanding of
inter-linked URS system feedbacks, processes and actors; (2) create a diverse
and engaged network of IMW partners to advance understanding of community needs
and explore sustainable solutions; (3) train a new cohort of scientists and
leaders with expertise in convergent, complex systems thinking; and (4) record
and share the processes for developing sustainable URS through a GT
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Network uses a convergent research approach
to explore how a GT framework can be employed to build synergistic system
connectivity across urban-rural gradients to promote sustainable cities,
landscapes, and livelihoods across the IMW. The TRUSTS-RNâ€™s diverse academic
disciplines and non- academic partnerships will embrace and integrate western
and Indigenous cultural knowledge and use a system-of-systems research approach
to advance the theory and applied knowledge of the dynamics, resilience, and
transformational opportunities of URS. In so doing, the Network will increase
traditional and western knowledge of regional sustainability with cultural open-
mindedness and scientific granularity, while identifying and addressing real-
world ecosystem issues and community challenges. Through broad cross-
disciplinary integration, the Network targets creation of impact through
fundamental and use-inspired science projects, advancing sustainability science
through regional-scale implementation of projects in the IMW. The Network
intends to advance GT theories for collaboratively and equitably transforming
URS structures and processes towards sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also co-funded by the
HSI Program which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.