* 2115587
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Provably Secure, Usable, and Performant Enclaves in Multicore Processors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Professor Arvind, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2024
* USD 816,000.00

In cloud computing and other popular modes of computer usage today, one physical
computer is shared by different applications contributed by users who do not
trust each other. The resources of the shared computer must be divided securely
across the users; mistakes allow one user to learn another's secrets or
influence another applicationsâ€™ execution. A promising approach to address the
challenge of protecting applications from one another is enclaves, best known
through Intel's SGX architecture available since 2015, but SGX allows secrets to
be leaked while applications execute. This project develops enclaves with strong
protections, focusing on usability, performance, and assurance. First, enclaves
have still been used relatively rarely in production, and the project therefore
studies new interfaces that streamline the sharing of hardware resources.
Second, to motivate adoption by the community, the developed enclaves encompass
hardware optimizations so as not to affect runtime performance of applications.
Third, the project develops techniques for mathematical proofs of hardware
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned approaches in software API design for
enclaves include limited I/O channel interfaces (e.g., enforcing fixed or
otherwise relatively predictable schedules) and new flexible means of allocating
resources like cache lines across enclaves. New enclave-to-enclave communication
primitives are realized through modifications to memory-management hardware.
These mechanisms are being proved secure to the highest standards of
mathematical rigor, through machine-checking of proofs with the Coq theorem
prover. The technique is to prove that specific enclave systems cycle-accurately
simulate groups of separate computers (one per enclave) connected by a basic
network, and to prove such results modularly, via nonobvious decomposition of
proof obligations into localized security conditions for different components
(e.g., processor vs. memory system). This research produces usable enclave
systems that the investigators make available to the public as images for
Amazon's F1 cloud-FPGA system, facilitating easy bring-up for security
evaluation or extending the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.