* 2115588
* EAGER: Magnetoelectric Biosensor for Rapid Point-of-Care COVID-19 diagnostics
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Dmitri Litvinov, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2023
* USD 131,245.00

A key component of effective pandemic management is efficient infection
surveillance and contact tracing. Testing for COVID-19, caused by the
coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, has been primarily limited to symptomatic patients who
seek medical care. However, this approach misses infections in individuals with
mild or no symptoms, who are, in fact, highly contagious. While the availability
of diagnostic tests using state-of-the-art instrumentation has been rapidly
scaled up in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, it remains woefully inadequate
for effective disease surveillance and contact tracing. There remains an urgent
critical need for ultrasensitive, simple, and rapid diagnostic assays at the
point-of-care to enable wide-scale population testing and screening. The ongoing
lack of quickly scalable and deployable diagnostic tools for effective wide-
scale COVID-19 surveillance is a significant handicap in COVID-19 pandemic
management. Such ultrasensitive diagnostic tools are likely to persist into the
foreseeable future due to continuously emerging infectious diseases. The success
of these tools can make a significant impact at the point-of-care for diagnostic
and quantitation of cancer biomarkers and other infectious diseases as well as
for the surveillance of environmental hazards and contaminants. This project
will be closely integrated with the existing programs at the University of
Houston to enhance the recruitment of women and underrepresented minorities into
the fields of science and engineering. This research will enable a number of
undergraduate Capstone Design projects. The knowledge gained over the course of
this project will be disseminated through the Nano Engineering Minor option and
graduate courses offered by the PIs in the Cullen College of
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER aims to demonstrate the feasibility
of an inexpensive, compact, and ultrasensitive magneto electric biosensor
platform designed for quantitative detection of the SARS-CoV-2 virus
nucleoprotein in patient samples. The proposed biosensor is based on magnetic
reporter nanoparticles detection in a test line of a lateral flow assay (similar
to the technology used in a pregnancy test) using magnetoelectric resonant
sensors. Magnetoelectric sensors utilize strain-mediated energy transfer between
magnetostrictive and piezoelectric sensor components. These sensors enable the
efficient conversion of exceedingly weak external magnetic fields produced by
magnetic nanoparticles into electrical signals. The technology is expected to be
far more sensitive than current state-of-the-art antigen-detection diagnostics.
The achievable sensitivity is also likely to be exceeding the sensitivity of the
state-of-the-art tools currently available only at centralized laboratories. The
new biosensors will leverage inexpensive and highly scalable manufacturing
approaches routinely employed to fabricate micro-electromechanical systems. The
biosensor will be comprised of disposable magnetoelectric lateral flow assay
cartridges and a simple electronic readout built using low-cost off-the-shelf
electronic components. The technology is ideal for sensitively detecting and
quantifying the SARS-CoV-2 virus nucleoprotein in nasopharyngeal swabs or saliva
samples. It has the potential to become an invaluable tool in pandemic
management. Successful demonstration of the technology will establish an
analytical and diagnostic platform widely useful in biomedical science and
clinical diagnostics. This platform technology will be readily extendable to
other types of infectious diseases, detection of cancer biomarkers, and
food/environmental contaminants monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.