* 2115669
* Using Media and Texting to Foster STEM Learning in Low-Income and Latinx Families
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sandra Sheppard, WNET
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,459,610.00

Cyberchase: Mobile Adventures in STEM is designed to advance the STEM learning
of children ages 6-8 and engage low-income families in informal STEM
interactions. Based on a successful NSF-funded pilot, the project combines the
appeal of the PBS KIDS series Cyberchase and the potential of mobile texting to
deliver informal learning. WNET and Education Development Center will produce:
three Cyberchase videos that blend math and environmental content; a bilingual
family engagement campaign in 15 communities across the U.S. that combines this
media with weekly text-based engagement; and research into use and impact of the
model among low-income Latinx families. Mobile Adventures addresses the need to
better engage underserved families in informal science practices that are
foundational for future STEM learning. While the materials target low-income
communities broadly, research will focus on low-income Latinx families with
children ages 6-8, an age group overlooked in previous research on educational
uses of texting. A needs assessment and formative testing will ensure that the
project design meets the needs and interests of diverse Latinx and other
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of Mobile Adventures is to build
knowledge about how innovative, culturally responsive tools can help Latinx and
low-income families engage in fun STEM learning at home. A three-tiered research
study will address the question: how and to what extent does a mobile text-and-
media approach to delivering informal STEM learning materials foster joint media
engagement between children and parents, building new repertoires for learning
together? The study will combine analysis of observation in homes and community
settings, backend data, and pre/post surveys. Research will deepen understanding
of effective family engagement models that make media a central component, the
potential of text messaging as a stimulus to parent/child STEM learning, and
maximal design of media and community engagement to serve low-income Latinx
families. Findings will be disseminated through national conferences and
journals. The Cyberchase videos, distributed free on broadcast and digital
platforms, will build the STEM literacy of millions of diverse children, while
the family engagement campaign will involve a projected 3,750 families in 15
locations. Evaluation will assess how well the project has met its
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance
new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.