* 2115943
* Increasing Resilience of Survivor-Centered Social Systems: Adapting to COVID Related Constraints in Access to Services and Built Environment Use Patterns
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Horney, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 557,647.00

Domestic violence is a widespread and complex problem affecting 12 million
victims each year in the US. Following disasters and emergencies, the risk of
domestic violence increases due a complex set of factors including economic
stress, changes in community dynamics, and lack of access to regular community-
based supports. Greater exposure to a disaster’s impacts and severity is
associated with higher rates of domestic violence. This has been consistent
across hurricanes, wildfires, earthquakes, oil spills, pandemics like the 2009
H1N1 Novel Influenza A, and outbreaks like Ebola. Not surprisingly, rates of
domestic violence have increased during the COVID-19 pandemic. However,
COVID-19’s impacts are unique because stay-at-home orders and other measures
implemented to control the spread of disease also isolated victims with their
abusers. Help-seeking options are diminished as social distancing reduced
capacity of domestic violence shelters and fear of contracting COVID-19
discouraged victims from seeking medical care and other services. Disruptions to
socio-technical systems and constraints on built environment use patterns have
made it difficult to provide sound and effective services, limited
transportation options, and constrained access to housing, shelters, childcare
facilities, and other services. This research project explores how agencies and
organizations addressing domestic violence have attempted to adapt to the
pandemic and the necessary constraints to services, infrastructure systems, and
built environment use patterns. The findings will provide key data for advancing
the health and welfare of millions potentially vulnerable to domestic violence
during pandemics and in the aftermath of disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
non-disaster settings, agencies that provide support for domestic violence
victims draw on empowerment theories to deliver survivor-centered services
utilizing critical infrastructure systems and built environments to support
victims. However, disruptions resulting from disasters generally, and from
COVID-19 specifically, have challenged providers’ ability to maintain the
provision of empowerment-centered services. This is significant because the
prevalence of disruptions to survivor-centered domestic violence services and
built environments during the COVID-19 pandemic may be associated with both
reductions in survivor access to resources and to higher rates of domestic
violence, compared to services and environments that were not disrupted. The
objective of this study is to test empowerment models in the context of
disasters generally, and to extend these models to capture adaptations to the
built environment use patterns where services are provided to vulnerable
populations after a disaster. Extending empowerment models to the domain of
disasters will improve domestic violence systems’ function in disaster settings
and will serve as a prototype to improve the effectiveness of other social
systems that are part of the social context of the empowerment models. This
research will provide critical evidence to support changes in both research and
practice that extend the empowerment models to the domain of disasters and the
realm of built environments. More generally, this study is an important
contribution to our understanding of the strengths and limitations of
theoretical models to the post-disaster provision of services within the context
of changes to populations, sociology-technical systems, and built environment
use patterns during and after disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.