* 2115429
* A Model of Generalized Ingroup Recognition Advantage
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Arthur Calanchini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 431,338.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People often have worse
recognition memory for individuals who are not (versus are) in their racial
group. This well-known cross-race effect can lead to racial disparities. As one
example, in the US criminal justice system nearly a third of wrongful
convictions that later are overturned were based on errors made in cross-race
identification. The cross-race effect would seem to be specific to faces: A
glance at a face quickly reveals information about race, gender, age, and other
social categories. Yet many objects beyond a face, or even beyond a person, may
signal group membership and cause a recognition bias. This research investigates
the possibility that the ingroup recognition advantage exemplified by the cross-
race effect is a general recognition bias. This research has the potential to
transform our theoretical understanding of social influences on perception and
cognition, including the basic psychological mechanisms that contribute to
racial disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon research in
social psychology, developmental psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and vision
science to develop a comprehensive model of ingroup recognition and examine its
social impact. The project is organized around three sets of experiments, all
using a basic paradigm in which participants complete a learning task followed
by a recognition task. The first set of experiments aims to differentiate two
causes of an ingroup recognition advantage: People may better recognize
information relevant to their own group because (1) they have more lifetime
experiences with their group and thus have perceptual expertise, and/or (2) they
are more interested and motivated to attend to their own group. Each cause can
be tested with experiments in which participants form new groups and are exposed
to objects with which they have no prior experience but are related to their
group or another group. A second set of experiments examines whether an ingroup
recognition advantage occurs to the same extent for different groups to which
one belongs, and a third set examines how the generalized ingroup recognition
advantage can lead to stereotypic judgments of others. Under conditions of tight
experimental control, this research tests a novel model that accounts for: (1)
the mechanisms and boundary conditions of ingroup recognition; (2) the
qualitative nature of the cognitive processes underlying the generalized ingroup
recognition advantage; and (3) the implications of the generalized ingroup
recognition advantage. The interdisciplinary and integrative nature of this
research has implications that are relevant to social psychologists,
policymakers, legal scholars, law enforcement, and the general public, and it
can inform interventions to reduce stereotyped judgments. The project also
provides specialized training to students at a minority-serving institution
(MSI) that ranks highly in terms of diversity, social mobility, and graduation
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.