* 2115474
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Shipboard Scientific Equipment (SSSE) - 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Ethan Roth, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 24,972.00

Project Summary &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF)
operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261-foot, global class ice-capable oceanographic
research vessel owned by the NSF as part of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF)
fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose platform for multidisciplinary
research missions from polar to temperate latitudes. UAF requests funds to
purchase and install Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment that would enhance
the vessel's capability in support of NSF-sponsored research to be undertaken on
Sikuliaq in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2020, during the pandemic-
shortened season, Sikuliaq completed 134 days 124 (93%) of which were for NSF.
In 2021, the vessel is scheduled to sail 220 days with 124 (56%) days of the
schedule for NSF. With this proposal, UAF provides technical descriptions and
rationale for the acquisition of the following Shipboard Scientific Support
Equipment. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) Electro-Optical Slip Ring Assembly $24,972
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.