* 2115718
* Collaborative Research: Establishing a Network and Framework for Informal STEM Education for Youth in Native Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2027
* Juan Chavez, BLUE MARBLE SPACE
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 03/31/2027
* USD 232,751.00

Centering Native Traditional Knowledge within informal STEM education programs
is critical for learning for Native youth. In co-created, place-based learning
experiences for Native youth, interweaving cultural traditions, arts, language,
and community partnerships is vital for authentic, meaningful learning.
Standardized STEM curricula and Western-based pedagogies within the mainstream
and formal education systems do not reflect the nature of Native STEM knowledge,
nor do they make deep connections to it. The absence of this knowledge base can
reinforce a deficit-based STEM identity, which can directly impact Native
youths’ participation and engagement in STEM. Reframing STEM education for
Native youth to prioritize the vitality of community and sustainability requires
active consideration of what counts as science learning and who serves as
holders and conduits of STEM knowledge. As highly regarded holders of
traditional and western STEM knowledge, Native educators and cultural
practitioners are critical for facilitating Native youths’ curiosity and
engagement with STEM. This Innovations in Development project is Native-led and
centers Native knowledge, voice, and contributions in STEM through a culturally
based, dual-learning approach that emphasizes traditional and western STEM
knowledge. Through this lens, a network of over a dozen tribal nations across 20
U.S. states will be established to support and facilitate the learning of
Traditional and Western STEM knowledge in a culturally sustaining manner. The
network will build on existing programs and develop a set of unique,
interconnected, and synchronized placed-based informal STEM programs for Native
youth reflecting the distinctive cultural aspects of Native American and Alaska
Native Tribes. The network will also involve a Natives-In-STEM Role Models
innovation, in which Native STEM professionals will provide inspiration to
Native youth through conversations about their journeys in STEM within cultural
contexts. In addition, the network will cultivate a professional network of STEM
educators, practitioners, and tribal leaders. Network efforts and the formative
evaluation will culminate in the development and dissemination of a community-
based, co-created Framework for Informal STEM Education with Native
Communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Together with Elders and other contributors of
each community, local leads within the STEM for Youth in Native Communities
(SYNC) Network team will identify and guide the STEM content topics, as well as
co-create and implement the program within their sovereign lands with their
youth. The content, practitioners, and programming in each community will be
distinct, but the community-based, dual learning contextual framework will be
consistent. Each community includes several partner organizations poised to
contribute to the programming efforts, including tribal government departments,
tribal and public K-12 schools, tribal colleges, museums and cultural centers,
non-profits, local non-tribal government support agencies, colleges and
universities, and various grassroots organizations. Programmatic designs will
vary and may include field excursions, summer and after school STEM experiences,
and workshops. In addition, the Natives-In-STEM innovation will be implemented
across the programs, providing youth with access to Native STEM professionals
and career pathways across the country. To understand the impacts of SYNC’s
efforts, an external evaluator will explore a broad range of questions through
formative and summative evaluations. The evaluation questions seek to explore:
(a) the extent to which the culturally based, dual learning methods implemented
in SYNC informal STEM programs affect Native youths’ self-efficacy in STEM and
(b) how the components of SYNC’s overall theoretical context and network (e.g.,
partnerships, community contributors such as Elders, STEM practitioners and
professionals) impact community attitudes and behaviors regarding youth STEM
learning. Data and knowledge gained from these programs will inform the primary
deliverable, a Framework for Native Informal STEM Education, which aims to
support the informal STEM education community as it expands and deepens its
service to Native youth and communities. Future enhanced professional
development opportunities for teachers and educators to learn more about the
findings and practices highlighted in the Framework are envisioned to maximize
its strategic impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations and Development
Project is a five year endeavor and supported by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments, multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. The project is also co-funded by NSF Inclusion across
the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to
enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity,
inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.