* 2115621
* Building on Latinx families' strengths to model and promote informal science learning through a culturally responsive telenovela series
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jessica Young, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,996,309.00

Families play a vital role in supporting children’s informal science learning.
Yet multiple studies have shown that Latinx families, particularly in
neighborhoods with a high poverty rate, face many barriers to accessing informal
science experiences and environments. Telenovelas, a type of television serial
drama watched by Spanish-speaking audiences around the world, may provide an
entryway to reaching these families. Prior research has shown that telenovelas
can be an effective means of changing adults’ behavior, with potential cascading
impacts on children. Education Development Center, Literacy Partners, and
Univision will use a culturally responsive approach to broaden participation of
Latinx families in informal science learning using La Fuerza de Creer, a popular
Spanish-language telenovela that reaches 7 million U.S. viewers. The five-
episode telenovela series will model positive informal science interactions
between caregivers and their children and provide positive role models of Latinx
scientists. The project team will then use the telenovela as the foundation for
a five-session workshop series for caregivers to further explore how to engage
in these informal science learning opportunities with their children. The La
Fuerza-STEM project will build on families’ strengths and interests and tap
their power—la fuerza—to engage children in exploring science. This research
will examine the relationship between the telenovela/workshops and caregivers’
practices and attitudes towards science. La Fuerza-STEM seeks to expand informal
science learning using a culturally grounded strategy to engage an under-served
population that is historically under-represented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an iterative research and design
process that is guided by the input of both parent and scientific advisory
boards. Front-end formative research with approximately 30 Latinx caregivers
from under-resourced communities will explore their informal science practices.
These experiences will then inform script development for the telenovela. A pre-
post comparison group study with 200 caregivers will investigate how caregivers’
attitudes toward science might change as a result of viewing the telenovela. The
project will then build a 5-session workshop series around the telenovela and
these research findings. Finally, 300 caregivers will participate in a
randomized controlled trial to examine the efficacy of the La Fuerza-STEM
workshops on changing caregivers’ informal science attitudes and practices.
Throughout, the project will address the overarching research question, How can
a culturally relevant telenovela be used to improve Latinx caregivers’ science
self-efficacy, career awareness, and informal science practices? Project
findings and products will be publicly disseminated through publications,
conference presentations, and local partner organizations, with an eye toward
open access and data sharing. The project will generate knowledge about the
effectiveness of embedding informal science content in a culturally-grounded
medium—the telenovela—in improving caregivers’ confidence and competence to
engage in informal science learning experiences with their children. With an
anticipated audience of 7 million, the potential impact of the telenovela on
caregivers’ informal science attitudes and practices is enormous. By
implementing workshops with local organizations, the project aims to be self-
sustaining, building the capacity of community partners to provide families with
services targeting informal science knowledge and skills long after the grant
has ended.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.