* 2115067
* Investigation of phonon scattering in superlattices for design of efficient multiple quantum-well hot carrier solar cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Jivtesh Garg, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2024
* USD 107,148.00

The hot carrier solar cell is a type of solar energy converter that captures the
excess thermal energy of photo-generated electrons and holes in a semiconductor
to produce electric power. Hot carrier solar cells hold the promise of yielding
significantly higher efficiency beyond traditional limits. A promising material
system for achieving high efficiency hot carrier solar cells involves multiple
quantum wells, comprised of semiconductor materials arranged in alternating
layers known as superlattices, to effectively diminish energy loss from hot
electrons. Energy loss from electrons occurs by dissipation of energy to high
energy lattice vibrations, which further dissipate to low energy lattice
vibrations by scattering. Decoupling the high energy from low energy lattice
vibrations by minimizing scattering can ultimately enhance the solar cell
efficiency. In the proposed research, the project team will tackle this
challenge and design high-efficiency hot carrier solar cells through engineering
the superlattice composition and by straining the semiconductor crystal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A dominant phonon scattering mechanism in semiconductors
is the Klemens channel, which involves decay of an optical phonon into two
acoustic phonons. By modifying superlattice composition, the energy gap in the
phonon dispersion can be modified providing avenues to suppress Klemens like
channels in phonon scattering. This can enable longer phonon lifetimes,
resulting in non-equilibrium phonon populations, thus facilitating hot phonon
bottleneck in the thermalization of electrons. Strain can similarly modify
phonon dispersion, again allowing for the possibility to diminish phonon
scattering. The role of superlattice composition and strain will be studied in
two superlattice systems - InAs/AlSb and AlAs/GaAs. Analysis will be performed
through a first-principles approach by using harmonic and anharmonic force
interactions derived from density-functional theory along with a solution of the
phonon Boltzmann transport equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.