* 2115249
* University of Miami’s Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science: Research Vessel FG. Walton Smith SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Miguel McKinney, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 06/30/2022
* USD 93,807.00

A request is made to fund new instrumentation for the R/V Walton Smith, a 96,’
general purpose regional vessel operated and owned by the University of Miami’s
Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Sciences (RSMAS) as part of the US
Academic Fleet. These vessels are scheduled by the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). R/V Walton Smith conducts a substantial
portion of her operations in the near shore waters of South Florida and the Gulf
of Mexico, providing scientific information relevant to major environmental
initiatives. R/V Walton Smith completed 35 days in the pandemic-shortened 2020
season. In 2021, the vessel is scheduled to sail 105 days with 33% (35 days) of
the schedule for NSF. With this proposal, Miami provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following Oceanographic
Instrumentation: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applanix POS MV
OceanMaster&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.