* 2115072
* Collaborative Research: Influences of Amplified Arctic Warming on Extreme Weather in Midlatitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Judah Cohen, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 10/31/2024
* USD 299,817.00

Recent scientific studies have begun to disentangle the complex relationship
between Arctic warming and the increased frequency of extreme weather events.
Several mechanisms for this linkage have been hypothesized, and recent studies
reveal that different mechanisms can vary by season and region. This research
advances our knowledge of trends in past and future extreme weather events
during winter and summer over northern hemisphere continents, and the role of
rapid Arctic warming in contributing to changes in the frequency and persistence
of those events. The realism of climate models in capturing these relationships
are assessed, and results aid in improving model simulations. Increased
frequency of extreme weather is already directly affecting millions, if not
billions, of people across the globe. The results from this research project are
valuable to planners, business leaders, and decision-makers in preparing for
future increases in extreme weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
builds upon previous work related to Arctic variability and statistical
associations with extreme winter weather events in which observational datasets
were used to establish a link between episodes of Arctic warm anomalies and
severe winter weather at locations in eastern North America. The research team
expands this methodology to, 1) gridded data sets from reanalysis and climate
model simulations, allowing exploration of relationships across all northern
hemisphere midlatitude areas, 2) both winter and summer seasons, and 3)
historical and future projections. The study will greatly expand our knowledge
of statistical associations between amplified Arctic warming (AAW) to extreme
summer and winter weather conditions that will inform ongoing studies of linkage
mechanisms. This research specifically answers questions related to validation,
variability, past and future evolution, attribution, realism of historical model
simulations, and persistence. A better understanding and more accurate
prediction of changes in the frequency, location, and severity of weather
extremes are urgently needed by decision-makers at all levels of society.
Results from this study inform and enhance various modes of outreach, provide
valuable and actionable information to decision-makers, and create new data sets
of extreme weather indices that can be incorporated into studies by other
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.