* 2115167
* CICI:SIVD:Context-Aware Vulnerability Detection in Configurable Scientific Computing Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sneha Kasera, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,834.00

Computational infrastructures have increasingly become the enabling factor for
scientific discovery, in critical application domains including seismic imaging,
air quality monitoring, epidemiology, drug discovery and nuclear engineering.
The security of these infrastructures is thus of crucial importance, as the
vulnerabilities in their unique software stacks can cause significant damage to
economy, environment, public health, and national security. This project aims to
safeguard scientific computing infrastructures via automatically identifying
hidden software vulnerabilities in a timely manner. Particularly, the goal of
this project is to address the challenging problem of configuration-related
security bugs in highly customizable high-performance computing environments.
Detecting such vulnerabilities is a hard problem. The stateof- the-art general
vulnerability analyzers are unable to capture the specific runtime contexts of
multiple interdependent software elements in specialized scientific computing
environments. To bridge this gap, this project connects advanced bug-finding
techniques to dedicated high-performance computing settings. In addition, it
also seeks to leverage the unique characteristics of scientific computing
environments to facilitate vulnerability discovery. Hence, this research
provides a comprehensive understanding of the software security problems in
real-world scientific computing systems, and builds robust solutions to secure
these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project develops novel
deployment-specific vulnerability detection techniques, that can (a) discover
seemingly well-formed, yet inconsistent configuration values within scientific
computing contexts, (b) detect cross-component vulnerabilities caused by the
settings of interconnected computing software, and (c) take full advantage of
the de facto workflow of high-performance computing systems to reduce the
complexity of finding bugs. This research consists of three tasks: (1) it
investigates the deployment contexts in real-world high-performance computing
systems and develops both offline and online tools to automatically collect
contextual information; (2) it applies extracted contexts to detecting
misconfiguration and configuration-triggered code vulnerabilities at both
deployment time and incrementally at runtime; (3) it tests the novel technique
in real-world testbeds and scientific computing environments to evaluate its
accuracy, efficiency and effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.