* 2115108
* I-Corps: Leveraging the computational power of a quantum annealer to optimize the methods and technologies in the logistics and supply-chain industry
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Vesselin Gueorguiev, Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology to increase efficiency and reduce the costs incurred
in decision-making that involves multiple variables along with several possible
combinations of such variables. This technology leverages the power of a Quantum
Computer (QC) for a faster and more efficient computational potential, which
helps businesses in rapid decision making. This proposed technology may be
applied to several industry segments such as finance, logistics and supply
chain, and drug discovery. In particular, logistics and supply chain companies
may benefit significantly from this technology by making faster and more
efficient decisions on route to optimization, warehouse management, inventory
management, and last-mile delivery. This may allow companies to reduce fuel
emissions, spend less on energy, and improve customer service. Companies also
may save on resource management and reduced errors in judgment, where a small
fraction of cost savings result in large savings. Commercializing this
technology may have an economic benefit as well as a positive impact from an
environmental perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a set of algorithms to solve complex distribution problems.
Based on a COVID-19 vaccine distribution model, the solution targets advising
and monitoring a safe reopening process by suggesting measures to be implemented
by businesses within cities and counties. The algorithms will also suggest
effective supply distributions patterns to optimize impact on limited resource
and to develop and enhance mitigation procedures and supply delivery processes
for potential large-scale disasters. This proposed technology has the potential
to help address critical elements relevant to emergency and disaster mitigation
as well as better and more efficient distributions of goods. The goal is to
develop a full-fledged software product to be used by a variety of
businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.