* 2115129
* Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution/ RV Atlantis/ SSSE/ CY 2021 - CY 2023
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Timothy Twomey, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2023
* USD 143,821.00

A request is made to fund Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE) on R/V
Atlantis, a 274’ general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a 238’
multidisciplinary vessel. Both are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic
Research Fleet (ARF) which is scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic
Laboratory System (UNOLS). Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-
art instrumentation and support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The
vessels work in all the world’s oceans supporting science funded primarily by
U.S government agencies. R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching
and servicing Alvin, the human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of
the National Deep Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2020,
R/V Atlantis completed 74 days at sea in a season shortened dramatically by the
COVID pandemic. NSF funded projects accounted for 95% of the total sailing
schedule (70 days). In 2021, Atlantis is scheduled for 146 days with NSF
accounting for 100 of those or 68%. R/V Armstrong sailed 178 total days in 2020
and 66 of these, 37%, were for NSF. Additionally, 61 days (34%) were for NSF-
OOI. The vessel is scheduled for 217 days in 2021, 9% of which (19 days) are for
NSF and 37% (81 days) are for NSF OOI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal,
WHOI provides technical descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the
following SSSE:&lt;br/&gt;1) Laboratory Infrastructure (Benches, Seating,
Cabinets, etc.) $149,261&lt;br/&gt;2) ALVIN LARS Gimbal Frame
$88,874&lt;br/&gt;3) KVM System $54,908&lt;br/&gt;4) IP Video Matrix System
$110,430&lt;br/&gt;5) (2) -20ºC Cospolich Laboratory Refrigerator-Freezers
$13,609&lt;br/&gt;6) (3) General Use Laboratory Computers $16,194&lt;br/&gt;7)
Graco Husky Pump for Underway Seawater System $11,992&lt;br/&gt;8) (2) Lithium
Battery Containment Units $8,792&lt;br/&gt; $454,060&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.