* 2115625
* Imaging and manipulating inter-particle interactions in van der Waals materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Milan Delor, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2025
* USD 656,195.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Electronic and photonic technologies, from
modern lasers to computers and solar cells, rely on the efficient transport and
conversion of energetic particles such as electrons, excitons (neutral pairs of
negative and positive charges), phonons (heat carriers), and photons (light). In
almost all materials, these energetic particles co-exist and interact with one
another. Unintentional inter-particle interactions are highly detrimental to
modern device operation: for example, electron–phonon interactions are the
primary efficiency loss mechanism in computer chips and solar panels.
Nevertheless, if these interactions can be tailored and beneficially exploited,
they can unlock massive efficiency improvements and new functionality in next-
generation electronic, photonic and information technologies. In this project,
the PI and his group are developing a new ultra-sensitive optical microscope to
directly image and manipulate inter-particle interactions in a wide range of
materials. The research focuses on two-dimensional semiconductors wherein
particle interactions are dramatically enhanced. The goal of the project is to
image electron–exciton and exciton–phonon interactions in emerging electronic
materials, and to manipulate these interactions using light. This research
should lead to new approaches for realizing multi-functional electronic and
photonic platforms that can be rapidly reconfigured and that boast extraordinary
energy transport properties. Broader goals include facilitating wide adoption of
the team’s new imaging approach by academic and industrial laboratories
interested in developing materials with tailored energy transport properties by
publishing extensive instrument blueprints, as well as posting an outreach video
displaying a graduate student performing a full experimental cycle on the
microscope to demystify the scientific process on state-of-the-art
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Many-body
interactions between electrons, excitons and phonons in semiconductors can
suppress or enhance energy transport by orders of magnitude, and trigger exotic
phases like superconductivity. These effects can be particularly strong in low-
dimensional van der Waals semiconductors, where reduced volumes, quantum
confinement and dielectric confinement all promote strong inter-particle
interactions. Although they are known to play a crucial functional role, these
interactions occur on extremely short time- and length-scales, making them
notoriously difficult to study. The PI and his group are developing
ultrasensitive, ultrafast optical scattering microscopes that uniquely track
multiple photoexcited energetic particles and their interactions in real space
on nanometer scales. This project involves the generalization of ultrasensitive
scattering microscopy to reach single-particle sensitivity in a variety of
materials over a broad range of temperatures. Using this unique tool, the
research team focuses on imaging and manipulating electron–exciton interactions
in transition metal dichalcogenides semiconductors and exciton–phonon
interactions in superatomic assemblies. In both cases, the project seeks to
create multi-functional material platforms that can be reconfigured by
perturbing inter-particle interactions through fine-tuning of thermal and
dielectric environments, or using external stimuli such as ultrafast light
pulses. Through a much-refined understanding of many-body interactions in van
der Waals materials, the team seeks to establish new forms of active control
over long-range energy transport and conversion in classes of materials that
will be key building blocks of next-generation electronic, photonic and
information technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.