* 2115268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Corporate Contributions to Childhood Public Health Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Rebecca Lester, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 22,710.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malnutrition and other stressors
have been shown to hinder childhood growth and development. In turn, stunted
growth is associated with reduced brain development, diminished learning
capacity, poor school performance, and declines in long-term career outcomes. In
settings characterized by compromised growth and development, corporations may
philanthropically contribute resources to assist populations of impacted
children. This doctoral dissertation project examines the motivations and
practices of private corporations as they insert themselves into domains of
public health. In addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection
and analysis, the findings of this research enhances understandings of the
effects of privatizing health interventions in disadvantaged communities. In
partnership with key stakeholders, this research also generates proposals for
how to improve or reconsider these interventions as strategies for addressing
broader development priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines how
corporate philanthropic programs generate and operationalize knowledge about
childhood stunting through community-based interventions, how such knowledge-
making sits in dialogue with larger social tensions around identities and
development, and how these interventions impact their targeted beneficiaries.
The project has multiple objectives. First, the investigators examine variation
in the ways that childhood stunting is conceptualized simultaneously as a
biological and social problem. Second, the project shows how aspects of identity
and heritage are represented in discourse about childhood growth and
development. In addition, the practices of corporate philanthropists are
examined, specifically the ways they frame the social problems to align with the
motivations for interventions. Finally, the investigation examines how private
investments in public health interventions affect the growth and development of
children. To answer these questions the investigation relies on interviews and
direct observations of corporate executives, public health officials, corporate
philanthropy administrators and fieldworkers, and targeted beneficiaries of
these efforts. In addition, the investigation includes archival research to
assess the contexts in which philanthropic efforts impact public health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.