* 2115971
* Intercultural Science Communication Research and Training to Broaden Participation Among Historically Minoritized Science Practitioners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sunshine Menezes, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2026
* USD 739,492.00

Among scientists, science communication is an increasingly important area of
practice, scholarship, and research, especially with early career scientists.
The growing interest in combating widespread disinformation and inaccurate
public perception of science has increased demand for training in science
communication; however, there is a significant gap in both research and training
for scientists from diverse racial and ethnic cultural backgrounds. The project
will address this knowledge and research gap by applying intercultural
communication theory to the design, development, and testing of a new curriculum
that will provide evidence-based methods to make science communication trainings
inclusive and intersectional. The curriculum will be designed and evaluated to
build capacity among science communication trainers and practitioners. Sixty
pre-tenure environmental science faculty of diverse racial and ethnic
backgrounds will be trained in strategic science communication skills using
cultural perspectives and academic goals in science communication. The project
will gather research data in collaboration with the national SciComm Trainers
Network. In addition to advancing science communication research, training, and
practice, the project will implement a novel, peer-reviewed podcast for broader
impact. The project Fellows will be prepared to engage in a wide range of
science communication activities throughout their careers and lead related
efforts at their home institutions. Following a final workshop to develop
culturally responsive guidance for science communication trainers, the project
team will share findings to the field to inform future practice and societal
impacts from advancing culturally relevant science communication in training
programs. This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches
to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative
research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d)
engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address two significant gaps
in science communication and intercultural communication research. First,
despite the recognition that more research about race and ethnicity is needed in
science communication, few studies have been conducted. Second, while findings
on intercultural communication research are consistent across fields, such as
health communication and business communication, the research has yet to examine
how well-established theories in this area of study apply to the unique norms
and processes of science. Investigators will test a novel theoretical framework
grounded in two intercultural communication theories: identity negotiation
theory and communication accommodation theory. The project will test the extent
to which the professional norms and processes of STEM and academia relate to
cultural norms and communication styles of underrepresented racial and ethnic
minority scientists, and how these factors influence their science communication
efforts. The project will use a mixed methods approach including in-depth
interviews and surveys. The results of the study will be used to develop and
adapt culturally tailored science communication training for 60 pre-tenure
environmental science faculty from underrepresented groups. The results of the
project will provide evidence to make science communication training and
practice more inclusive and effective. The collaboration with the national
SciComm Trainers Network will ensure broad dissemination and professional
application of project findings. The project will increase representation of
racial and ethnic minority scientists as science communicators, including in
environmental news coverage; provide a new peer-reviewed podcast series for
public audiences that will introduce listeners to environmental research through
a culturally responsive lens; provide tested methods for designing inclusive and
effective science communication training curricula; and will inform faculty
efforts to incorporate science communication activities as part of career
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.