* 2115712
* Community Collaboration as a Culturally-Relevant Approach to Climate Change Programming and Mitigation
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Roslynn McCann, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Communities with the highest risk of climate change impacts may also be least
able to respond and adapt to climate change, which highlights a specific need
for inclusive Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
strategies. This Pilot and Feasibility project builds on the success of US
Cooperative Extension Service programs that empower volunteers to conduct
outreach in their own communities. It focuses on climate change, and seeks to
co-design an informal STEM climate science curriculum, called Climate Stewards,
in collaboration with community members from groups often underrepresented in
STEM, including indigenous and Latinx communities, as well as rural women. The
project is designed to strengthen community awareness as well as prioritize
community voices in climate change conversations. The knowledge and skills
obtained by Climate Stewards and their communities will allow for more
involvement in decisions related to climate adaptation and mitigation in their
communities and beyond. After establishing a proof of concept, the project seeks
to expand this work to more rural and urban communities, other communities of
color, and additional socioeconomically disadvantaged communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grounded in the theory of diffusion of innovation as a
means for volunteers to communicate information to members of a social system,
this project seeks co-create a retooled Climate Stewards curriculum using
inclusive and adaptive strategies. Community collaboration and involvement
through new and existing partnerships, focus groups, and meetings will determine
what each community needs. During the program design phase, community members
can share their concerns regarding climate change as well as the unique
characteristics and cultural perspectives that should be addressed. The
collaboration between extension and education leverage resources that are
important for developing a robust implementation and evaluation process. This
project is expected to have a significant influence on local and national
programs that are looking to incorporate climate change topics into their
programming and/or broaden their reach to underrepresented communities. The
hypotheses tested in this project describe how inclusion-based approaches may
influence competencies in STEM topics and their impact on communities,
specifically willingness to take action. Hypothesis 1: STEM competencies in
climate issues increase with interactive and peer learning approaches.
Hypothesis 2: Community participation in the co-creation of knowledge about
climate change, by integrating their values and objectives into the climate
change education program, increases people's motivation to become engaged in
climate change adaptation and mitigation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Pilot and Feasibility project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the public
of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.