* 2115542
* Research Synthesis of Effective Inclusion Practices for Neurodiverse K-12 Learners in Informal STEM Learning Contexts
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Kelly Roberts, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 06/30/2024
* USD 234,796.00

Informal STEM learning environments, programs, and policies can be designed to
support and promote neurodiversity through inclusive practices. This project
will explore the benefits of informal STEM learning for K-12 neurodiverse
learners through a systematic review and meta-analysis of extant literature and
research grounded in the theory of social model of ability. This framework is an
asset-based approach and aims to promote social, cognitive, and physical
inclusion, leading to positive outcomes. Using various quantitative and
qualitative methodologies, this project endeavors to collect and synthesize the
evidence for supporting and enhancing accessibility and inclusiveness in
informal STEM learning for K-12 neurodiverse learners. It will explore key
features of informal STEM learning and effective, evidence-based strategies to
effectively engage children and youth with neurological conditions such as
autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
dyslexia, and dyspraxia, in informal STEM learning environments. The findings of
this complex synthesis will provide a timely contribution to deeper
understanding of supports for neurodiversity while also highlighting areas that
inform further research, shifts in practice, and policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systematic review will occur over a two-year period.
It will focus on identifying program elements that promote inclusion of children
and youth with neurodevelopmental disabilities in informal STEM learning
contexts. Specifically, the review will explore two overarching research
questions and several sub-research questions: RQ1. What program elements
(teaching and learning variables) in informal STEM learning settings facilitate
inclusion of K-12 neurodiverse STEM learners? Sub-RQ1a: What are the overlapping
and discrete characteristics of the program elements that facilitate social,
cognitive, and physical inclusion? Sub-RQ1b: In what ways do the program
elements that facilitate inclusion vary by informal STEM learning setting? RQ2:
What program elements (teaching and learning variables) in informal STEM
learning settings are correlated with benefits for K-12 neurodiverse STEM
learners? Sub-RQ2a: What are the overlapping and discrete characteristics of the
program elements that correlate with increased STEM identity, self- efficacy,
interest in STEM, or STEM learning? Sub-RQ2b: In what ways do the program
elements that correlate with positive results for students vary by informal STEM
learning setting? The research synthesis will consider several different types
of studies, including research and evaluation; experimental and quasi-
experimental designs; quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods; and
implementation studies. The research team will (a) review all analyses and
organize findings to illustrate patterns, factors, and relationships, (b)
identify key distinctions and nuances derived from the contexts represented in
the literature, and (c) revisit and confirm the strength of evidence for making
overall assertions of what works, why, and with whom. The findings will be
disseminated in practice briefs, journal articles, the AISL resource center, as
well as presentations and materials for researchers, practitioners, and informal
STEM leaders. Ultimately, this work will result in a comprehensive synthesis of
effective informal STEM learning practices for neurodiverse K-12 learners and
identify opportunities for further research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This literature review and meta-analysis
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.