* 2115868
* A Systematic Review of STEM Learning and Social-Emotional Development in Out of School Time
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Gil Noam, McLean Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 247,571.00

Research suggests that when both science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) education and social-emotional development (SED) are
supported in afterschool, summer, and other informal settings, young people can
better develop skills for the future such as leadership, decision-making, and
relationship-building so they could have successful careers/participation in
STEM. However, researchers and practitioners working in the out-of-school time
(OST) sector often do so without connections across these fields. The appeal for
more integration of STEM and SED in OST program delivery and data collection has
remained abstract and aspirational. This Literature Review and Synthesis project
is the next step needed to move the OST field toward the intentional, explicit,
and evidence-based integration of STEM and SED in research and practice. The
project will create shared understanding necessary to improve program content,
staff training, and evaluation. This synthesis will support future research on
unified STEM+SED that can lead to more effective, equitable, and developmentally
appropriate programming. Improved programming will contribute to talent
development, address STEM workforce needs, and promote socioeconomic mobility to
benefit children, youth, educators, and society. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will systematically examine what domains and skills at the interface of STEM+SED
are most researched among K-12 youth in informal STEM learning environments,
compared to formal STEM educational environments. The team will further explore
how gender, race, and other intersectional forms of equity can be added to the
STEM+SED equation. The project team will search and appraise empirical and gray
literature (2001-2020) to identify the most commonly researched domains and
skills at the interface of STEM+SED in informal environments serving K-12 youth.
The review and synthesis process will include four steps: search, appraisal,
synthesis, and analysis. The search will begin with STEM+SED skills in four
foundational domains (agency, belonging, engagement, and reflection) identified
previously with experts from the fields of STEM and SED. The search will include
all existing, eligible references from formal K-12 settings to contrast commonly
studied domains and skills (e.g., perseverance, self-regulation, teamwork,
complex problem-solving, self-awareness) in formal versus informal learning
environments. The study approach will then compare these domains and skills by
the demographics variables noted above. Following the creation of a strong
catalog of evidence, information will be synthesized using three “pillars” for
building coherence in STEM+SED integration: phenomenon (the knowing),
implementation (the doing) and assessment (the result). These pillars will be
used to organize and critically analyze the literature. Building conceptual
coherence through a systematic review and synthesis of literature from the
fields of STEM and SED will lead to greater understanding of STEM+SED in OST
practice, highlight the most important content and skills to learn in informal
environments, and identify when and how youth should learn specific content and
skills at the interface of STEM+SED. Applying coherence to the integration of
STEM+SED ensures that the principles and practices are layered carefully, in
ways that avoid superficial checklists or duplication of effort and build
meaningfully upon young people’s knowledge and skills. The long-term goal is to
broker connections and alignment of STEM+SED across schools and OST programs.
Recommendations and a roadmap to guide equitable, effective STEM+SED research,
practice, and policy will result from this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.