* 2115198
* 2021 Oceanographic Instrumentation R/V Atlantic Explorer
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 04/30/2023
* USD 11,536.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on R/V Atlantic
Explorer, a 168â€™ general purpose research vessel owned and operated by Bermuda
Institute of Ocean Science (BIOS) as part of the United States Academic Research
Fleet (ARF). BIOS is a U.S. 501 (c) 3 and 509 (a) not-for-profit research and
educational institution incorporated in the state of New York, and
geographically located on the Island of Bermuda. The mission of the ship is to
support funded science research throughout the Central Atlantic but specifically
work in support of the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series (BATS) program. RV Atlantic
Explorer had 130 days funded, in the pandemic-shortened season in 2020, all of
which were for NSF. In 2021, the vessel is scheduled to sail 206 days with 183
(89%) of them funded by NSF. With this proposal, BIOS provides technical
descriptions and rationale for the acquisition of the following Instrumentation:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Trimble ABX-Two $10,362 &lt;br/&gt;MilliQ &amp; Elix
$17,222 &lt;br/&gt; $5,495 &lt;br/&gt;(2) VHF Antennas $2,500 &lt;br/&gt;Spare
computer x 2 $2,062 &lt;br/&gt;KVM Switch, keyboard, mouse $1,238
&lt;br/&gt;CCTV $4,350 &lt;br/&gt;Foul weather gear $1,500 &lt;br/&gt;Media for
lounge $1,200 &lt;br/&gt; $45,929&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review
Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.