* 2115124
* SRS RN: Shared destinies: Hydro-social infrastructures for community involvement and sustainability in fragmented border regions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Josiah Heyman, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Border agglomerations face distinctive sustainability challenges. This
Sustainable Regional Systems planning grant is focused on water issues affecting
three major zones along the U.S.-Mexico border that involve the San
Diego/Tijuana, El Paso/Ciudad Juárez, and lower Rio Grande/Bajo Bravo Valley
agglomerations. The project aims to map research resources, community partners,
and the social infrastructure of these zones, and the participants will work
collaboratively with border stakeholders to identify and prioritize water-
related sustainability issues. Researchers from the University of Texas at El
Paso, the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, and the University of
California, San Diego will collaborate on two binational, bilingual workshops in
each site to engage community partners and to delineate water issues, barriers,
and assets. The team also will conduct a survey to offer a broader and more
quantitative perspective on water issues, barriers, and assets. Finally, the
researchers will pursue a systematic collection and analysis of existing data,
literature, reports, etc. on water in these settings. Through these activities,
the research team will co-generate knowledge with civil society and government
across a border region defined by complex relations, inequalities, cultural and
linguistic differences, and political
division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainability challenges intensify at linkage
sites, such as international borders, where differentiated people, goods,
values, and rules come together for exchange and intermediation. Urban-rural
agglomerations at borders constitute a populous, rapidly growing cohort of
distinctive regional units. The U.S.-Mexico border, the most populated seam
between regions of differing wealth in the world, has amongst the largest, most
dynamically growing, and most stressed agglomerations. This planning project
will contribute to the field of sustainability by delineating three critical
border dynamics including the mutual socio-environmental linkage of populations
that are divided markedly by prosperity and capacities, the transboundary
cooperation in sharing and management of common resources, and the coordination
across divisions of government, culture, language, and data. In particular, the
key scientific and public concept of “commons” will be challenged and further
developed at border sites that represent populations divided by prosperity and
other capacities that are inherently linked. Overall, this research work will
build towards a fully co-produced research project on sustainable regional
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.