* 2115773
* Applying a complex systems perspective to investigate the relationship between choreography and agent-based modeling as tools for scientific sense-making
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aditi Wagh, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 665,724.00

Science is a process of inquiry that involves question asking, experimentation,
and exploration. However, for youth, it is often presented as settled, a fixed
collection of facts, principles, and theories that can seem sterile and
unimaginative. This project is designed to combat that idea. This Research in
Service to Practice project brings scientists, middle school youth and
choreographers together to explore unsettled scientific phenomena from a complex
systems perspective using choreography and agent-based modeling (ABM), to engage
all participants in cutting edge scientific inquiry. Given the ubiquity of
complex systems, being able to adopt a complex systems perspective is critical
to understanding the world and our relationship to it. However, research has
shown that this can be a challenge, specifically for youth. While most complex
systems research has not focused on the role of the body, recent studies have
shown the promise and potential of embodiment as its own form of reasoning about
complex systems. Thus, this project will create exploratory science spaces
foregrounding embodiment in the process of scientific discovery. The program has
two phases: (1) a 20-hour training workshop where scientists and choreographers
engage in interdisciplinary collaborative design work, and (2) a 60-hour summer
program where the researcher-practitioner partnership involving scientists,
choreographers and youth engages in agent- based &amp; embodied choreographic
scientific modeling. The summer program takes place in community-based centers
in Gainesville, FL and Boston, MA broadening perceptions of what science
research looks like and can be. Each site will host 20 youth, two local
scientists, and a local choreographer. Participants will engage in embodied
collaborative inquiry, brainstorming and modeling to create choreographic
representations and culminate in a public event for the community. The project
aims to understand the experiences of and shifts in youth and scientists as they
engage in these activities and to understand how to design such a model for
informal learning. The project will also help scientists apply a complex systems
lens to their own work and settled perspectives. This project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program which seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a design-
based research (DBR) approach, the project will develop and expand embodied and
agent-based learning theories, while also piloting, analyzing, and refining
collaborative models for science learning in informal spaces. The research
questions are: 1. How does engaging in the process of creating embodied and
agent-based models of complex systems contribute to new ways of understanding
science, de-settle ideas about the process of how science gets “made”, and
impact understanding of the role of the body in making science? and 2. How can
arrangements of bodies and modeling tools work together to support understanding
of complex systems? The research and design are informed by three main
theoretical principles: (a) science is “dance of agency”, a process of inquiry
that through iterative dialogic interaction with tools, technology, and humans,
produces understandings that more and more closely explain natural phenomena;
(b) embodied-interactionist theories of learning allow us to understand
representational sense-making by looking closely at the processes by which
representations are made, not just at representational end- products; and (c)
creative embodiment and agent based modeling are valuable tools for sense-making
around complex science ideas and emergent phenomena. Two cycles of design,
implementation, and analysis across two different informal learning sites will
be conducted. Data will be collected at both sites, resulting in four
implementation and data collection periods. Each round of implementation will be
staggered so that reflections and lessons from an implementation can inform the
next design iteration. This project will provide insights on the relationship
between choreography and ABM as tools for scientific sense-making and expand ABM
to consider the role of movement and bodies more broadly in physical space. It
will also contribute to an understanding of how underrepresented youth’s
perceptions and conceptions of science can be shaped through embodied science
activities, and of the relationships these youth see between their own bodies
and identities, science, and the creative arts. Finally, by involving
individuals from underrepresented communities as researchers, designers,
scientists, evaluators, and advisors, this project expands cross-cultural and
training opportunities within the field of education and STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.