* 2115393
* Seeing the World through a Mathematical Lens: A Place-Based Mobile App for Creating Math Walks
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Cathy Ringstaff, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,664,725.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Math is everywhere in the world,
but youth may see math as disconnected from their everyday experiences and
wonder how math is relevant to their lives. There is evidence that informal math
done by children is highly effective, involving efficiency, flexibility, and
socializing. Yet, more is needed to understand how educators can support math
engagement outside of school, and the role these out-of-school experiences can
play relative to the classroom and lifelong STEM learning. This Innovations and
Development Project seeks to conduct research on a location-based mobile app for
informal mathematics learning. This research takes place at 9 informal learning
sites and involves iteratively designing an app in which learners can view and
contribute to an interactive map of math walk “stops” at these sites. Learners
will be able to select locations and watch short videos or view pictures with
text that describe how mathematical principles are present in their
surroundings. For example, learners could use the app to discover how a painting
by a local Latino artist uses ratio and scale, or how a ramp in downtown was
designed with a specific slope to accommodate wheelchairs. Research studies will
examine the affordances of augmented reality (AR) overlays where learners can
hold up the camera of their mobile device, and see mathematical representations
(e.g., lines, squares) layered over real-world objects in their camera feed.
Research studies will also examine the impact of having learners create their
own math walk stops at local informal learning sites, uploading pictures,
descriptions, and linking audio they narrate, where they make observations about
how math appears in their surroundings and pose interesting questions about STEM
ideas and connections they wonder about. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
draws on research on informal math learning, problem-posing, and culturally-
sustaining pedagogies to conduct cycles of participatory design-based research
on technology-supported math walks. The research questions are: How does posing
mathematical scenarios in community-imbedded math walks impact learners’
attitudes about mathematics? How can experiencing AR overlays on real world
objects highlight mathematical principles and allow learners to see math in the
world around them? How can learners and informal educators be engaged as
disseminators of content they create and as reviewers of mathematical content
created by others? To answer these questions, five studies will be conducted
where learners create math walk stops: without technology (Study 1), with a
prototype version of the app (Study 2), and with or without AR overlays (Study
3). Studies will also compare children's experiences receiving math walk stops
vs. creating their own stops (Study 4) and explore learners reviewing math walk
stops made by their peers (Study 5). Using a community ethnography approach with
qualitative and quantitative process data of how youth engage with the app and
with each other, the project will determine how the development of math interest
can be facilitated, how learner-driven problem generation can be scaffolded, and
under what circumstances app-based math walks are most effective. The results
will contribute to research on the development of interest, problem-posing,
informal mathematics learning, and digital supports for STEM learning such as
AR. This project will promote innovation and have strategic impact through a
digital infrastructure that could be scaled up to support STEM walks anywhere in
the world, while also building a local STEM learning ecosystem among informal
learning sites focused on informal mathematics. This project is a partnership
between Southern Methodist University, a nonprofit, talkSTEM that facilitates
the creation of community math walks, and 9 informal learning providers. The
project will directly serve approximately 500 grades 4-8 learners and 30-60
informal educators. The project will build capacity at 9 informal learning
sites, which serve hundreds of thousands of students per year in their
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is
supported by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.