* 2115843
* Building Quantum Information Science Intuition through Digital Games
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Danielle Harlow, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2024
* USD 221,100.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
information science (QIS) is an emergent cross-disciplinary field at the
interface of physics, computer science, materials science, and engineering. Yet,
there are few educational programs that encourage young people to explore QIS
and understand its applications and societal benefits. Such programs are
critical for supporting the growth of a quantum-ready workforce. Building
intuition is a foundational first step but this is challenging because quantum
effects are neither visible to the naked eye, nor experienced in everyday life.
This project will create a suite of accessible, engaging digital games for
middle schoolers, and study their effectiveness in cultivating intuition around
QIS. Relating QIS concepts to common game mechanics is designed to increase
students’ confidence in their QIS knowledge, reduce their fear of tackling such
a subject, and consider pursuing a career in this field or another STEM area.
The game-driven design appeals to a broad population beyond the age groups
studied. Moreover, the deliverables will be freely available online, which
allows anyone with a phone or computer and internet access a way to learn about
QIS in an engaging, play-based environment. The program will partner with
teacher organizations and other community groups to share the games, maximizing
the project’s impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is guided by the QIS Key
Concepts developed in 2020, as well as research and best practices on
gamification of learning. The games will be designed for 6th-8th grade students
in an informal setting, focusing on the concepts of probability, superposition,
and role of measurement. A game world titled "Quander" will include videos that
explicitly tie game experiences to QIS concepts and applications. The project
will evaluate students' understanding after playing the games and watching the
videos, how they engage with aspects of the games, and how the game impacted
their interest in QIS. The project data will advance understanding of how to
facilitate QIS informal learning experiences in ways that engage young audiences
in QIS and similar abstract emerging areas of technology where current research
is scant. This project represents one of the first efforts to teach QIS concepts
in ways that connect directly to young learners’ play-based experiences. Data
gathered from the project will help future program designers understand the
ability of young learners to reason about QIS concepts such as measurement,
superposition and probabilities in game contexts, providing insights to the ages
at which students are ready for more technical
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.