* 2115392
* SRS RN: Connecting Rural and Urban Environments for Equitable Access to Transportation, Telecommunications and Energy (CREEATTE)
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Charles Sims, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 149,573.00

The United States faces growing challenges from the combination of climate
change, aging infrastructure, and the economic transformations and disruptions
driven by rapid technological change in electricity generation, transportation,
and high-speed telecommunications. These challenges interact because climate
change and aging infrastructure threaten economic well-being, and coordination
between different kinds of technological infrastructure and services offers
opportunities for economic growth, reducing vulnerability to climate change, and
reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The Southeastern states are especially
vulnerable to climate change because many jobs require outdoor work and because
agriculture is important to these states’ economies. In contrast with the
region’s rapidly growing cities, rural communities in the Southeast also
experience high concentrations of poverty and many are poorly served by existing
infrastructure. In this project, a team of engineers, natural scientists, and
social scientists will work with representatives of state and local governments,
businesses, and communities to understand the challenges they are experiencing.
With these groups a plan will be developed for a research network to investigate
opportunities for coordinating new electricity, transportation, and
communications infrastructure and services to address the needs communities
across the Southeast, with an emphasis on the region served by the Tennessee
Valley Authority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, an interdisciplinary
team of researchers will engage with a diverse group of stakeholders
representing government, business, community, and civic organizations to develop
a proposal for a large-scale research network to identify and address grand
challenges to sustainable coupled infrastructure systems serving rural and urban
communities. This research will advance understanding of interactions and
connections among electricity, transportation, and broadband telecommunications
infrastructure. The team frame infrastructure as technology that encompasses
social, behavioral, political, and economic aspects of the ways people use
infrastructure and the barriers they face in accessing infrastructure services.
This project will apply socio-technical and socio-ecological perspectives to
developing new insights into the challenges and opportunities of integrating
electricity, transportation, and telecommunications infrastructure across urban
and rural communities. This project will also document its process and produce
new understanding about how teams of researchers with diverse specialties learn
to work effectively together with one another and with diverse stakeholders from
government, business, civic, and community organizations. The project will
produce a plan for a research network that will deliver practical and useful
results for members of diverse constituencies, and will develop new tools for
education and public outreach so that members of different stakeholder groups
will be able to understand and fully participate in planning for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.