* 2115860
* The Blue Whales Project: Engaging audiences in adaptation related science content through a  giant screen film and educational activities in science centers and rural libraries
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Charles Kopczak, California Science Center Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,774,637.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the rich scientific
evidence of adaptations and their evolutionary basis, there are concerning
public misconceptions about evolution, processes of natural selection, and
adaptations in the biodiverse world. Such misconceptions begin early. Younger
elementary school children are often resistant to the idea that one “kind” of
animal could descend from a completely different kind of animal, and they see
features as having always existed. Other misconceptions lead to an inaccurate
belief that changes in individual organisms acquired in a lifetime are passed
directly on to offspring or that entire populations transform as a whole. These
cognitive biases and "intuitive” misunderstandings can persist into adulthood.
This Innovations in Development project will counter that narrative through an
informal science project focusing on the blue whale one of nature’s most
spectacular stories of adaptation. It is a species that lives life at extremes:
a long-distance migrator, a deep diver, an extravagant eater, the largest animal
to ever exist. With its awe-inspiring size and rich mosaic of anatomical,
physiological, and behavioral specializations, it serves as a bridge to an
enriched understanding of universal concepts in elementary biology and can begin
to dispel the deeply rooted misconceptions. The project deliverables include a
giant screen film documenting the field work of research scientists studying the
blue whales in the Indian Ocean and Gulf of Mexico; multi-platform educational
modules and programs that will build on the blue whale content from the film for
use in science center programs and rural libraries; and professional development
webinars that will offer content utilization and presentation skills for ISE
facilitators. Project partners include California Science Center, STAR Library
Education Network, HHMI Tangled Bank Studios and SK Films.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The external evaluation studies will gather data from 20
participating rural libraries and 6 science museums. A formative evaluation of
the film will be conducted in a giant screen theater setting with 75 families.
After viewing a fine-cut version of the film they will complete age-appropriate
post-viewing surveys on the film’s engagement, storytelling, content appeal and
clarity, and learning value in communicating key science concepts. An external
summative evaluation will include three studies. Study 1 will assess the
implementation of the project at the 26 organizations, addressing the question:
To what extent is the project implemented as envisioned in the libraries and
science center settings? Baseline information will be collected, and later
partners will complete post-grant surveys to report on their actual
implementation of the project elements. In addition, the study will examine
outcomes relating to professional development. Study 2 will be an evaluation of
the film as experienced by 400 youth and parents in science centers and
examining the question: To what extent does experiencing the film engage youth
and parents and affect their interest, curiosity, and knowledge of blue whales,
adaptations, and the scientific process? Study 3 will examine: To what extent
and how does experiencing an educational module (virtual field trips, hands on
activities, augmented reality) affect youth and parents’ interest, curiosity,
and knowledge of adaptations and scientific process?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new approaches
to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.