* 2115190
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Digitization, Exploration, Genomics, and Student Training to Illuminate Forces Shaping Appalachian Lichen Distributions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* James Lendemer, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 745,732.00

Understanding the distributions of species in nature is a driving theme in the
natural sciences, one that has remained elusive for centuries. Multiple forces
shape species distributions, including habitat dynamics, speciesâ€™ ability to
move, and species interactions, but the way they contribute on their own and
together remains incompletely understood. What we do know about species
distributions is based largely on studies of large plants and animals, and
processes discovered in those groups may not be the same as for other organisms.
This research aims to address fundamental gaps in knowledge of how forces shape
distributions of the smaller species that make up the majority of life on Earth.
To achieve this the project will focus on lichens (environmentally important
fungi that must form stable, permanent interactions with algae to survive) in
the Appalachian Mountains of the eastern United States. The Appalachian
Mountains are a globally unique and threatened diversity hotspot for many
lifeforms, including lichens. The goal of this project is to transform
understanding of lichen fungi in a threatened American region while providing
vital information for conservation and management of Appalachian ecosystems. A
cornerstone of this project is extensive scientific training at all higher
education levels, including undergraduate students, graduate students, and a
post-doctoral researcher. Authentic, research-based inquiry will be integrated
into undergraduate courses, and the developed curriculum will be made publicly
available. Outreach and education efforts for the American public will include
multiple courses and workshops for professionals and teachers and the Great
Appalachian Lichen Bioblitz. Creation of new large-scale, fully integrated,
open-access resources for lichen genomics, traits, and Appalachian diversity
will improve access to information for diverse audiences including scientists,
educators, land managers, and community scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
degree to which forces contribute individually, and through interactions, to
mold species distributions is not fully understood, especially for smaller,
sessile, symbiotic organisms. This project will use extensive new data resources
for lichen species and a comparative population genomics approach for lichens
with contrasting distributions to build an integrative understanding of how
extrinsic mechanisms and intrinsic biological attributes shape species
distributions in the Appalachian Mountain Biodiversity Hotspot. Existing large-
scale biodiversity datasets will be integrated with data from a new field
inventory to fill the last large Appalachian lichen sampling gap. This will then
be used to build comprehensive datasets for lichen distribution size and
reproductive traits. Comparative population genomics of species with contrasting
distribution sizes will yield datasets for symbiont specificity, gene flow, and
adaptation. These data will then collectively be used to test hypotheses that
will provide a new perspective on how forces shape species distributions in
obligate symbiotic organisms where individuals are non-
motile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.