* 2115916
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Vocational Education, Economic Development, and Socioeconomic Mobility
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Sydney Pullen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 23,330.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vocational education, a
descendant of industrial education, plays a key role in the approaches of some
U.S. states to economic development. Advocates of vocational education argue
that it provides a trained workforce for industry and a path to economic
mobility for individuals. Critics question whether the kinds of vocational
opportunities offered continue, as they did in the early twentieth century, to
be concentrated low-paying jobs, thereby reinforcing inequalities and stifling
socioeconomic mobility. This doctoral dissertation research project explores how
ideologies about vocational education have changed, and what impact those
changes have on economic development. In addition to providing funding for the
training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, data and findings will be shared with
economic development professionals, chambers of commerce, and vocational
education and workforce development administrators. Workshops on social science
literacy will be developed in cooperation with the vocational education programs
at an HBCU, broadening the participation of underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a study of economic opportunity zones in
Lowcountry South Carolina, this project investigates a) the foundations of
ideological formation in late nineteenth and early twentieth century industrial
education; and b) whether those ideologies have been transformed, and if so how,
in contemporary vocational education and workforce development policies and
programs. Methods include semi-structured interviews, life history interviews,
and participant observation with Lowcountry residents who are involved with
vocational education programs and economic development initiatives. The
linguistic anthropological techniques of discourse and narrative analysis will
be employed to evaluate and assess ideological formation and transformation. The
project contributes to educational anthropology, political economic theories
about the drivers of and obstacles to development, and linguistic
anthropological theories about language ideologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.