* 2115667
* The Global Diffusion of Anti-Terrorism Law and Its Impact on Human Rights
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jessica Stanton, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 411,480.00

International efforts to strengthen the global anti-terrorism legal regime
prompts many countries to make significant changes to their domestic laws
criminalizing terrorism-related offenses. This project investigates variation in
the incorporation of anti-terrorism law into domestic legal systems worldwide
and examines the human rights consequences of these laws. Many have debated the
impact of anti-terrorism laws on civil liberties, weighing questions about how
societies ought to balance respect for individual freedoms with a desire to
protect national security. Yet most existing studies of anti-terrorism laws
focus on European countries and great powers. This study provides a more
comprehensive analysis of anti-terrorism law and its human rights impacts. This
project is the first to provide a systematic cross-country study of the human
rights impact of anti-terrorism laws, offering insights into how governments and
intergovernmental organizations like the UN can continue to combat terrorism and
associated forms of political violence, while ensuring protections for human
rights worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although international anti-terrorism
efforts were intended primarily to address the threat from transnational
terrorist groups, this project considers how concern regarding internal
(domestic) threats impacted government decision making regarding the adoption
and implementation of new anti-terrorism laws. Governments that perceived
significant internal threats to their domestic political power adopted expansive
anti-terrorism laws – made possible by the inability of countries to agree on a
definition of terrorism at the international level - and used these laws as a
tool to repress domestic political opposition, often in violation of citizens’
human rights. In its global analysis of the anti-terrorism legal regime, this
project examines the adoption, implementation, and human rights impact of anti-
terrorism laws using an original, cross-national data set on domestic anti-
terrorism laws in 193 countries from 1945 to 2020. This new data set includes
detailed information on the scope and content of laws criminalizing five major
terrorism-related offenses: terrorist acts, terrorist financing, recruitment of
individuals to terrorist groups, provision of weapons or safe haven to terrorist
groups, and incitement of terrorism. In addition to making these new data
available for quantitative research, the project will create an online
searchable database of anti-terrorism laws worldwide, thus expanding access to
reliable data on the global legal regime for countering terrorism. Complementing
the quantitative analyses are a series of qualitative case studies investigating
the origins of anti-terrorism laws and their consequences for human
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.