* 2115104
* SHF: Small: Solving the Parallel Functional Programming Challenge
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Umut Acar, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 465,848.00

Nearly all computers today ranging from mobile devices to servers are multicore
systems that contain as many as hundreds of cores. Many applications therefore
demand parallel software, but parallel programming is understood and practiced
by few expert programmers (it is simply too hard). Researchers have argued for
decades that functional programming can be a game changer for parallel
programming, because functional programs can be parallel by default, and in
principle require no additional effort for parallelization. However, functional
languages have been unable to deliver the efficiency and performance expected of
parallel programs. Prior research has identified memory management as the key
performance bottleneck in functional programs. This project aims to solve this
problem. The projects novelties are 1) a theory of "disentanglement" that, based
on the principles of parallel programming, unlocks efficient and scalable memory
management 2) techniques for detecting and handling entanglement dynamically on
the fly and 3) provably and practically efficient memory-management techniques.
The projects impacts are 1) development of the foundations for parallel
programming that could enable everyday programmers to write performant parallel
programs and 2) development of educational materials for teaching undergraduate
students about parallel algorithms and programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, the project develops a technique for organizing the memory
as a hierarchy of heaps, which may be managed independently and in parallel,
except when entanglement arises due to non-deterministic accesses to mutable
data. To handle entanglement, the project develops techniques for detecting it
during run-time, and handling it so that parallel execution can continue
unimpeded. The project then presents space, work, and run-time bounds that take
the cost of memory management into account. Even though such bounds are critical
for all languages, including procedural ones, they are under-studied. The
project assesses the practicality of the techniques by providing an
implementation, evaluating it, and integrating it into
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.