* 2115568
* HSI IUSE Pilot: Implementation of a Model Recitation Period to Support STEM Student Development and Scientific Literacy Skills in Chemistry
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Pamela Kerrigan, College of Mount Saint Vincent
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 198,616.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this pilot PPP project aims to implement academic
supports that improve student learning and performance in introductory chemistry
courses, thereby increasing the number of students entering chemistry and
biochemistry majors. This exploratory research and development study will
contribute to the knowledge base on how best to support and improve chemistry
education for underserved inner-city minority students who are underprepared for
college-level chemistry. The project will benefit 30 undergraduate students who
are interested in chemistry and biochemistry majors but are at risk of not
progressing through the general chemistry and organic chemistry course
sequences. Based on lessons learned from prior implementation of a recitation
section for general and organic chemistry, the project team at College of Mount
Saint Vincent (CMSV) will redesign the recitation to focus on goal setting,
study skills, problem-solving specific to the general chemistry and organic
chemistry course sequences, and relevance of coursework to careers. The project
will provide preliminary evidence of the effectiveness of building student
skills in goal setting, problem-solving, and scientific literacy through
supplemental curriculum for general chemistry and organic chemistry and the
extent such skills improve student achievement and persistence in students,
especially inner-city students of color. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
for the project are to implement a model of recitation and show that it supports
student development of motivation, self-efficacy, problem-solving skills,
ability to relate course content to real-word problems and careers, and
scientific literacy. As a result, students will have improved grades in the
general chemistry and organic chemistry two-course sequences, increasing the
number of students who complete both courses and declare a
chemistry/biochemistry major. The project team, composed of chemistry faculty
and an education researcher, will investigate the following research question:
How well do the planned supports increase students’ self-efficacy, intrinsic
motivation, connection of course content to real-world applications and careers,
and scientific literacy, and do these improvements lead to higher major
declaration and persistence in chemistry/biochemistry? Evidence of the
effectiveness of achievement goal theory and the gradual release of
responsibility model will influence pedagogy in CMSV’s science programs and
contribute to strategies that help at-risk students at other HSIs. CMSV intends
to build upon the results of the pilot to develop an Implementation and
Evaluation Project proposal to further support the proposed recitation
strategies, and the College will fully implement the redesigned recitation model
to improve students’ chemistry achievement. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.