* 2115331
* Cultivating Tomorrow’s Engineers through the Entertainment &amp; Hospitality Landscape
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Venkatesan Muthukumar, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 602,236.00

This Innovations in Development project aims to foster the development of STEM
identity among a diverse group of middle school students and, in turn, motivate
them to pursue in STEM interests and careers. Vegas STEM Lab, led by a team of
investigators from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, will employ a mix of
online and on-site activities to introduce students to engineering methods in
the context of the entertainment and hospitality (E&amp;H) industry that is the
lifeblood of Las Vegas. Investigators will collaborate with local resorts,
multimedia designers, and arts institutions to offer field experiences for
students to interview, interact with, and learn from local experts. The Lab will
help youth overcome prevailing beliefs of STEM as boring and difficult, boost
their confidence as STEM-capable individuals, and expose them to the exciting
STEM careers available in their hometown. UNLV engineering undergrads will serve
as near-peer mentors to the middle school students, guiding them through Lab
activities and acting as role models. Investigators will measure student
learning and engagement over the course of the Vegas STEM Lab experience with
the aim of understanding how the Lab model—with its rich set of activities and
interpersonal interactions set in the local E&amp;H industry—can cultivate STEM
identity development and encourage students to pursue STEM pathways. Despite the
project’s hyperlocal focus on the Las Vegas community, if successful, other
cities and towns may learn from and adapt the Lab model for use in their youth
development programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vegas STEM Lab will provide online
materials for students’ STEM learning during the academic year followed by on-
site visits and hands-on project development during a three-week summer
experience. The Lab will run for three years with cohorts of 40 students each
(N=120) with the aim of iteratively improving its activities and outcomes from
year to year. The local school district will help recruit middle school students
who have demonstrated low interest in STEM to participate in the Lab, ensuring
that participants reflect the demographic makeup of the Las Vegas community in
terms of race and ethnicity, socio-economic status, and gender. Summer
activities will take students behind the scenes of the city’s major E&amp;H
venues; investigate the workings of large-scale displays, light shows, and
“smart hospitality” systems; and then build their own smaller scale engineering
projects. Investigators will employ the Dynamic Systems Model of Role Identity
(DSMRI) framework to study how intentionally designed Lab experiences shape
students’ understanding of themselves, their future aspirations, and their grasp
of the scientific enterprise. Summer activities will be integrated into the
online learning platform at the end of each year of Vegas STEM Lab, and in the
final year of the project, workshops will train local educators to use the
platform in either formal or informal learning settings. Materials and research
findings produced through this work will be disseminated to middle school
teachers and afterschool care providers, and shared with researchers through
academic publications and conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in
Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the public
of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.