* 2115610
* Leveraging the Power of Reflection and Visual Representation in Middle-Schoolers' Learning During and After an Informal Science Experience
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Catherine Haden, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 176,254.00

This project addresses a longstanding problem in informal science education: how
to increase the likelihood of consequential science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) learning from short duration experiences such as field
trips. Although informal learning experiences can greatly contribute to interest
in and knowledge of science, there is a shared concern among educators and
researchers that students may have difficulty recalling and using scientific
information and practices emphasized during these experiences, even though doing
so would further their science learning. Nonetheless, science learning is
rarely, if ever, a "one-shot deal." Children acquire knowledge about science
cumulatively across different contexts and activities. Therefore, it is
important that informal science learning institutions identify effective
practices that support the consolidation of learning and memory from exhibit
experiences to foster portable, usable knowledge across contexts, such as from
informal science learning institutions, to classrooms, and homes. To this end,
this Research in Service to Practice project seeks to harness the power and
potential of visual representations (e.g., graphs, drawings, charts, maps, etc.)
for enhancing learning and encouraging effective reflection during and after
science learning experiences. The project promises to increase learning for the
9,000+ 5th and 6th grade students from across the rurality and growing diversity
of the state of Maine who annually participate in LabVenture, a 2.5-hour
exploration of the Gulf of Maine ecosystem at Gulf of Maine Research Institute.
The research will provide new and actionable informal science learning practices
that promote engagement with visual representations and reflection, and science
understandings that can be applied broadly by informal science institutions.
This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) and the
Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) programs. It supports the AISL program goals
to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design
and development of STEM learning in informal environments. It supports the
DRK-12 program goal of enhancing the learning and teaching of STEM by preK-12
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is grounded in the idea
that visual representations, including drawings, can both enhance science
learning and encourage reflection on doing science that can support extension of
that learning beyond a singular informal science experience. The project uses
design-based research to address the following research questions: (1) Does
reflection during an informal science learning experience promote students’
retention and subsequent use of science information and practices that are part
of the experience? (2) Does interpreting and constructing visual
representations, such as drawings, improve students’ understanding and retention
of information, and if so, how and when? and (3) Does combining visual
representations and narrative reflections confer benefits on students’ science
learning and engagement in science practices both during the informal learning
experience, and later in their classrooms and at home? These questions will be
pursued in collaboration with practitioners (both informal educators and
classroom teachers) and a diverse team of graduate and undergraduate student
researchers. Approximately 600 student groups (roughly 3000 individual students)
will be observed during the LabVenture experience, with further data collection
involving a portion of these students at school and at home. The project will
yield resources and video demonstrations of field-tested, empirically based
practices that promote engagement with visual representations and reflection,
and science understandings that can travel within students' learning ecosystem.
In support of broadening participation, the undergraduate/graduate student
researchers will gain wide understanding and experience connecting research to
practice and communicating science to academic and nonacademic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.