* 2115093
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Security Versus Privacy in the Monitoring of People in Urban Areas
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Rebecca Stein, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 22,378.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biometric technologies,
technologies that fix official identities to physiological or behavioral traits,
have proliferated globally over the last two decades. Amidst the COVID-19
pandemic, governments worldwide have relied on such systems to limit and curtail
the spread of infectious disease. By some measures, the expansion of biometric
tracking and monitoring has intensified social inequality and insecurity for
communities long subjected to intensive state surveillance. However, engineers
and entrepreneurs producing and marketing such technologies frame biometric
surveillance as vital to the health and security of populations globally. This
doctoral dissertation research examines how digital rights activists, engineers,
entrepreneurs, and policymakers understand, experience, and respond to biometric
surveillance. As the use of biometric surveillance technologies rapidly expands
during and in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, this project has the potential
to help scientists apprehend the socio-cultural implications of biometric
surveillance among distinct communities. In addition, the researcher plans to
share data with lawmakers and non-governmental organizations to help inform
policy and regulatory debates surrounding the ethical use of such technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research includes ethnographic research among those
producing, marketing, and challenging the use of biometric technologies as tools
of disease tracking and monitoring. Qualitative methods include participant
observation in high-tech industry settings, interviews with engineers and
entrepreneurs, and research alongside city planners and regulators debating the
use and efficacy of such surveillance systems in diverse contexts. Through semi-
structured interviews and participant observation with digital rights organizers
and advocates, the investigation also asks why and how actors work towards
better regulation and oversight of such technologies. Research findings
contribute to social scientific theories surrounding the socio-cultural impacts
of science and technology more generally, and biometric surveillance in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.