* 2115365
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Digital Farming Technologies, Traditional Knowledge, and Agrarian Livelihoods
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Brian Silverstein, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 16,902.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Population shifts and shrinking
agricultural land are increasing pressure on agricultural production, leading to
food insecurity and economic, social and political instability in many regions.
A range of private and public institutions aim to increase efficiency (more food
from less land) by integrating digital farming technologies that provide farmers
with algorithm-generated recommendations to predict and manage their farming
(soil, plants, inputs, timing), finances (budgeting, credit) and insurance. They
also seek to revive and incorporate farmers’ traditional knowledge and practices
into the digital applications to promote agricultural innovation in food and
enhance socio-economic welfare. This research project investigates the everyday
experiences of the farmers with digital farming technologies and the impacts of
these technologies on their farming knowledges, practices and income. In
addition to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, the findings of this research will be disseminated to governmental and
non-governmental organizations with the aim of improving social, economic, and
ecological conditions of farmers and democratizing access to digital platforms
and data in food systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines
what traditional knowledge and practices of farmers are being revived and
retained and/or abandoned by digital farming technologies and what the effects
are on farmers’ farming practices and income. To answer these questions, the
researcher conducts archival research, analyzes digital datasets, and
interviews, participates in and observes the work of farmers who are engaging in
the digital farming projects and farmers who are not scientists, engineers and
public officials. This research enhances scientific understanding of how
emergent technologies and longstanding know-how interact in the production of
food, contributing to ethnographic work on the technopolitics of food
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.