* 2115295
* SRS RN: Regional Transition to Sustainability Beginning with Food and Water
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Peter Marra, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This Sustainable Regional Systems Research Network Planning Grant project
focuses on developing an action-oriented network of academic, industrial,
governmental, and non-governmental organizations with the reach and expertise to
define and parameterize a transition to a sustainable future and to outfit that
network with the tools it needs to measure and manage that transition. Beginning
with a focus on food and water subsystems (FWSS)—but eventually expanding to
other basic needs—the research agenda involves three major steps: (1) Creating a
shared understanding of the FWSS needs and challenges facing the multitude of
regional stakeholders, (2) creating a shared vision of a future where these FWSS
basic needs are met in a more sustainable and equitable way, and (3) engineering
the tools and processes needed to make that future vision a reality. Any
improvements to create better, more sustainable food and water systems requires
working regionally among different jurisdictions and collaborating across state
lines and all along the urban-rural continuum. Any lasting improvements to
create more sustainable systems will require agreement on a regional agenda. The
Washington, DC, region, given its size and complexity and position within the
Chesapeake Bay watershed, provides the ideal case study for a research network
to examine the complexities and promise of a sustainable regional systems
approach focused on food and water. This project meets the mission of the
National Science Foundation by providing actionable research to enhance the
national health and prosperity in an equitable
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant project focuses on
understanding how multiple stakeholders can achieve equitable regional
sustainability and how entities can measure and manage food and water
sustainability across complex systems at regional scales from a multiple
stakeholder perspective. The project leverages existing partnerships to lay the
groundwork for the creation of such an ensemble of adaptive interventions by (1)
mapping the problems from multiple stakeholder perspectives, (2) envisioning the
solutions and getting buy-in from those stakeholders, and (3) enlarging the
network to account for gaps in representation and to ensure the capacity to
eventually develop and deploy such an ensemble. The project will make the
methodology that emerges from these planning phases extensible to additional
basic needs subsystems and is transferable to other
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.