* 2115160
* STEM-based Making for Youth, Families, and Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Angela Calabrese Barton, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 925,733.00

For many youth, gaining access to quality STEM (science, technology, engineering
mathematics) experiences is a challenge. Inequity and underrepresentation of
youth of color in STEM persist. The makerspace movement holds great promise in
broadening participation in STEM among youth from underrepresented communities.
Makerspaces are defined as collaborative workspaces inside a library, school, or
other community location designed for creating, learning, exploring, and sharing
with high- to low-tech tools. Despite the availability of making programs
focused on STEM activities targeted towards youth of color, the field has few
models for designing these programs in ways that build upon youths’ cultural
assets and desires for making. Working collaboratively with youth, families, and
maker educators in Lansing, Michigan, and Greensboro, North Carolina, this
project aims to deepen the field’s understanding about the rich and deep
ingenuity in STEM-based making that youth from underrepresented communities can
engage. These insights will be leveraged towards advancing community-based maker
programming across four community-based makerspaces. The project will also build
capacity among STEM-oriented maker educators, researchers, and youth. This model
is important because the voices and perspectives of families and communities
have been largely absent from the formative knowledge and theory-building
processes of the field of makerspace education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will build new knowledge about how and why youth and families make at
home, in communities, and in STEM-based maker programs. Collaborators for the
project include the University of Michigan, the University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, and four STEM- and youth-oriented making spaces in Lansing,
Michigan, and Greensboro, North Carolina. This project will take place in two
phases, exploring two main research questions: 1) What are the learning results
of making at home and in the community? And 2) How do youth organize community
resources for sustained STEM making, and what facilitates or hinders such
organization? Phase one investigates the community resources (people, tools,
materials, knowledge, data, and spaces) youth leverage towards making and how
they do so across time. The project will study how youth connect these resources
to STEM-rich making and what youth and families learn in the process. In phase
two, design-based research will be used to apply phase one insights to the
design of community-based STEM-rich maker programs in four maker clubs in
Michigan and North Carolina. This work will develop an understanding of youths’
family and community-based STEM-based making practices, including the community
resources (people, tools, materials, knowledge, data, and spaces) that youth
leverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.