* 2115138
* Black SciGirls: Investigating a Culturally Responsive Media-enriched Approach to STEM Teaching and Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Rita Karl, Twin Cities Public Television
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,458,008.00

Black girls display high interest, confidence and ability in STEM but face
multiple barriers including racial, ethnic and gender stereotypes, low exposure
to STEM role models, low awareness of diverse STEM fields and financial
obstacles to STEM education. It is critical to infuse STEM education with
specific and intentional culturally responsive and anti-racist strategies to
attract and retain Black girls in STEM. Through this combination of media, role
modeling and outreach, Black SciGirls will help increase access to STEM
education for Black girls, preparing them for future workforce participation.
This project will study the impacts on elementary/middle school Black girls’
exposure to early career Black female STEM professionals as role models.
Deliverables include 1) professional development for STEM educators and Black
STEM professional women to prepare them to lead STEM programs for girls 2) a PBS
series of role model videos of early-career Black STEM professionals and 3) a
research study that examines how/if in person and media-based STEM role models
increase Black girls’ interest and confidence in STEM, motivation to pursue
future STEM studies, and STEM identity. While women make up 47% of the U.S.
workforce, they are underrepresented in STEM and only 1.6% are Black
women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research study will examine how educators’ use
of role models addresses a critical barrier for Black girls, seeing women in
STEM who look like them. The research study questions are: How and in what ways
do Black STEM women role models influence Black girls’ interest in STEM? How and
to what extent do role models report changes in their confidence and ability to
engage girls in STEM as a result of training in best practices in role
modelling? and, How and to what extent are parents engaged in supporting girls’
involvement in STEM, as a result of the participation of role models? The
research team will visit participating local SciGirls programs to collect
qualitative data, including observations of program activities, interviews, and
focus groups. To ensure reliable outcomes and utilize robust theoretical
underpinnings, the research will combine pre/post survey data and an in-depth
cross-case studies employing qualitative and quantitative data collection. This
mixed-methods approach will enable gathering data that comprehensively offers
insight into Black girls’ STEM experiences and those of the Black STEM
professional women role models and parents who support them. Qualitative data
that centers girls’, role models’, and parents’ perspectives will contribute to
this identity-centered study. A culturally responsive evaluation will determine
the extent to which the project builds educators’ ability to integrate equitable
and anti-racist practices to build Black girls’ interest and confidence in STEM
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.