* 2115151
* Hydroclimate Variability and the Evolution of Socioecological Complexity in Dryland Farming Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Erick Robinson, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 288,009.00

Understanding the ecological constraints on the evolution of social complexity
in dryland ecosystems remains a major challenge in archaeological research. Most
global case studies of foraging-farming transitions in drylands lack the
requisite chronological precision and fine-grained environmental information
necessary to reconstruct the subtle interactions between environment and society
during these important moments of subsistence change, population growth, and
social development. Early societies in western North America provide a rare
example of the ephemeral adoption of agriculture and development of social
complexity. Imprecise chronologies for relevant horticultural villages and their
immediate hydroclimatic contexts have led to a lack of consensus on the
development of social complexity. This project tests two hypotheses about the
formation of such villages: the largest and most socially complex villages had
the longest occupation spans; and the longest occupied villages occurred in
river basins that are least sensitive to hydroclimate variability regimes. The
project provides research sites for participants in the Utah State University
Native American Summer Mentorship Program, a focused research experience for
native students that encourages transfer and successful degree completion. The
PIs collaborate with faculty and students at the Eastern Prehistoric Museum and
Anthropology Museum to develop a traveling exhibit of the project findings that
will be hosted at four public museums throughout the state for three months
each. A three-part lecture series accompanies the exhibit where each project
investigator presents the results of their individual studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will develop tree-ring-based
reconstructions of local stream discharge for the last two millenia, build and
test a basin sensitivity model connecting local hydroclimate and geomorphic
variables, and evaluate village longevity, size and complexity using high-
density, high-precision chronological models. Communities that developed under
conditions where vulnerability thresholds were crossed with less frequency
should have longer occupational durations, larger sizes, and more evidence of
complexity. This project provides a comparative framework explaining the
fundamental processes of agricultural community formation and stability that
enabled the growth of populations and social complexity in dryland ecosystems.
The project systematically combines dendrochronology, geoarchaeology, and high-
precision archaeological radiocarbon dating to resolve time at the
multidecadal/multigenerational scales necessary to capture the dynamic social-
ecological processes constraining the stability, size, and development of social
complexity in early agricultural societies. The project findings are a key case
study in the global comparative analyses of the sustainability of past and
modern dryland agricultural societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.