* 2115620
* Collaborative Research: Intergenerational Learning, Deliberation, and Decision Making for Changing Lands and Waters
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Filiberto Barajas-Lopez, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 250,474.00

Creating science education that can contribute to cultivating just, culturally
thriving, and sustainable worlds is an important issue of our time. Indigenous
peoples have persistently been under-represented in science reproducing
inequalities in a myriad of ways from educational attainment, participation in
and contributing to innovations in foundational knowledge, to effective policy
making that upholds and respects Indigenous sovereignty. The development of
models of science education that attend to intersections of knowledge and
development, socio-scientific decision-making and civic leadership, and the
complexities and contradictions of these realities, is imperative. This five-
year Innovations in Development project broadens participation and strengthens
infrastructure and capacity for Indigenous learners to meet, adapt to, and lead
change in relation to the socio-ecological challenges of the 21st century. The
project engages multi-sited community-based design studies to develop and
research the impacts of Indigenous informal field-based science education with
three Indigenous leadership communities from the Pacific Northwest and the Great
Lakes. This project will have broader impacts through model development,
building infrastructure to transform the capacity of informal field-based
science education, and will produce cutting edge foundational knowledge about
pressing 21st century issues with a particular focus on Indigenous communities.
The project increases Indigenous participation in research through 1) engagement
of Indigenous community members as research assistants, 2) training of
Indigenous graduate fellows, and post-doctoral fellows, and 3) supporting the
careers of more junior Indigenous scholars.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
seeks to identify key design features of an Indigenous field (land/water) based
model of science education and to understand how learners’ and educators’
reasoning, deliberation, decision-making, and leadership about complex socio-
ecological systems and community change evolve in such learning environments.
The project also examines key aspects of co-design and partnership with Tribal
communities and how these methods of co-production of new science enable new
capacities for systems transformation. This multi-layered project is organized
through 3 panels of studies including: Panel 1) community-based design
experiments to develop and refine a model of Indigenous informal science
education; Panel 2) co-design and implementation of professional learning
programs for Indigenous informal science education; and Panel 3) foundational
studies in cognition and learning with respect to socio-ecological systems
thinking and the impact on learning and instructional practices. Of particular
importance in this research is the rigorous development and articulation of
effective pedagogical practices and orientations. More broadly, findings will
have clear implications for theories of cognitive development, deliberation and
environmental decision making and especially those pertaining to how knowledge
is shaped by culture and experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.