* 2115790
* Understanding how charged biopolymers destabilize membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Tristram-Nagle, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 479,404.00

Cell membranes form the barrier by which cells interact with the external
environment. As such, understanding the nature of how biopolymers interact with
the membrane and the mechanisms by which different types of interactions between
the biopolymer and membrane lead to changes in membrane structure will lead to
fundamental understanding of cell function. This project will specifically
examine the weak forces involved in the interaction between charged biopolymers,
like antimicrobial peptides, and cell membranes, and explore membrane
perturbation, adhesion, and signaling interactions. Membrane structure changes
will be quantified using techniques include x-ray diffuse scattering (XDS) and
circular dichroism (CD). The project will create hands-on experiences for
undergraduate researchers (10-15/year) who desire to carry out research in the
PI’s biophysics lab. The project will fund one postdoctoral associate who has
been trained in similar biophysical methods during her Ph.D. Besides mentoring
students and a postdoc in the lab, the PI will conduct outreach activities,
which primarily involve judging at several science fairs each year, including
the Pennsylvania Junior Academy of Sciences science fair, the Sigma Xi poster
competition at the Meeting of the Minds at Carnegie Mellon, and the Regeneron
International Science and Engineering Fair. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
forces involved in the interaction between charged biopolymers and cell
membranes are electrostatic, van der Waals and fluctuation. To investigate these
forces, synthetic charged biopolymers are employed to interact with lipid model
membranes that are mimics of real membranes (eukaryotic, bacterial, and viral
cell membranes). Recent work from the PI lab has demonstrated a close
correlation between measured membrane material properties and membrane
destabilization of bacterial and eukaryotic cell membranes interacting with
three biopolymers: colistin (a natural-occurring protein biopolymer) and two
novel engineered biopolymers, WLBU2 and D8. These three cationic biopolymers are
antimicrobial peptides, a new form of antibiotic. The project will use x-ray
diffuse scattering to obtain material parameters of lipid model membranes that
are mimics of bacterial and eukaryotic cell membranes as novel engineered
biopolymers are added. The PI with collaborators will design the protein
biopolymers and test them for membrane destabilization of clinical bacterial
isolates both in vitro and in vivo as part of their research program. The PI’s
biophysics lab will determine changes in elasticity and structure of biomimetic
membranes using XDS, and changes in biopolymer secondary structure using CD, as
the biopolymers encounter the lipid model membranes. Location of biopolymer in
the membrane will be determined using neutron scattering techniques and the
atomistic details will be obtained using molecular dynamics
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.