* 2115095
* I-Corps:  Developing A 3D Total Body Imaging and Analysis System for Early Detection of Skin Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Xianfeng Gu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high-speed and high-precision 3D imaging and skin analysis
system. Skin cancer is the most common cancer in the US, with 5.5 million new
cases diagnosed in 2019. Research shows that skin cancers are highly treatable
if detected early. Early detection of melanoma saves lives and improves the
treatment outcomes by reducing the risk of spreading cancer to other parts of
the body. Early detection of nonmelanoma skin cancers minimizes disfigurement
and enhances the quality of life and productivity for many patients. The
proposed technology may be a new tool for dermatologists and make skin cancer
screening more affordable by optimizing the skin evaluation process, supporting
teledermatology services, and lowering the overall costs of care. In addition,
there may be other applications of this 3D imaging technology in skin evaluation
for cosmetic product development, planning and evaluation of orthodontic and
cosmetic procedures, real-time monitoring of radiotherapy patients, facial
expression and virtual character creation for movie and virtual reality game
productions, and dynamic facial recognition for identity and property
protection. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a high-speed, high-accuracy 3D scanner using multi-wavelength,
phase-shifting structured light and an automated skin analysis software using
computational conformal geometry. The proposed 3D scanner is designed to capture
the human body’s geometry at high speed (up to 180 frames/second) and with high
precision (depth resolution of 0.2mm). Visual identification of skin changes in
2D is impractical. When the viewing angle is altered, the individual’s posture
varies, or the surface is deformed, image registration becomes challenging and
unstable. The proposed solution is based on extensive research in computational
conformal geometry. Due to the shape-preserving property of conformal mapping,
3D geometric analysis may be accomplished by processing 2D conformal images,
which is easier and faster. Independent of their geometric or topological
complexities, shapes in real physical worlds may be conformally transformed into
one of three canonical shapes (i.e., unit sphere, Euclidean plane, or planar
disk). Because of the uniformity, the design of all geometric algorithms can be
simplified, resulting in dramatically improved efficiency, accuracy, and
robustness. By combining high-performance 3D scanning and advanced conformal
mapping techniques, this foundational platform technology may enable many
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.