* 2115492
* The Utility of Stanols in Species Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Varenka Lorenzi, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 244,349.00

This project explores the limitations and potential of stanol biomarkers in
archaeological research. Stanols are a group of molecules produced during food
digestion. The combination of chemicals produced is unique to different
organisms, with humans producing a significant amount of the molecule,
coprostanol. This signature should allow researchers to differentiate the
contribution of humans in the environment. The analysis of these chemicals in
ponds, lakes, wetlands and soils is a new and promising geoarchaeological
technique for determining human presence on past landscapes. Moreover, changes
in the amount of stanols over time allows investigations of population changes.
Population events, such as migration episodes, site abandonment, and disease and
warfare, are important to understanding regional histories, but traditional
demographic approaches frequently rely on historical documentation and
archaeological excavation. Stanol analysis is a relatively noninvasive technique
that is independent of the historical record and applicable in numerous
archaeological and temporal settings. Additionally, the method can be performed
alongside paleoenvironmental analyses to directly study human-environmental
relations in the past. Despite the methodâ€™s promise, its limitations have not
been fully explored and a systematic analysis of the usefulness of stanol
molecules in archaeological research is needed to ensure reproducible and high-
impact results. The project will generate a stanol database that will assist
environmental scientists who study contamination in modern waters. This funding
supports multidisciplinary training of students at the high school,
undergraduate, and postgraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team's
multifaceted project seeks to 1) expand the number of documented stanol suites
for animals that may be present in ancient human environs and to determine if
these animals produce specific stanol molecules in quantities that may interfere
with a human signal, 2) determine if compound-specific isotope (CSI) values of
stanol molecules can be used to identify dietary changes in ancient populations,
and 3) study the factors that affect stanol mobility and preservation in
sediments. The research team, composed of geochemistry, biochemistry, and
geoarchaeology specialists, employs samples from a targeted selection of zoo
animals that have not been previously tested for stanol
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.