* 2115427
* SRS RN: Sustainable Transportation Electrification for  an Equitable and Resilient Society (STEERS)
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* William Fulton, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The US is in the midst of a massive transformation as both the electric grid
becomes much more renewable and transportation becomes much more electrified, a
change that will touch just about everyone. This NSF project goals are to ensure
that this change is done in a way that is fair and technically sound,
considering the need and well-being of all, done in a way that ultimately
provides a more resilient and equitable society. The project is transformative
by bringing together a broad team of researchers from four universities, coupled
with a diverse group of outside advisors, to focus on sustainable transportation
electrification in Texas, a state that is extremely diverse and has its own
electric grid. The goals will be achieved by utilizing the teamâ€™s broad
expertise in the many different areas needed to ensure success. The intellectual
merits include fostering a culture of diversity and inclusion, developing
criteria for success, developing the required research and education agenda, and
doing pilot studies. The broader impacts of the project include helping to guide
the equitable, sustainable and resilient electrification of transportation by
engaging with a wide variety of partners, including government, community
organizations and the business community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this project is to develop a convergent team and associated proposal focused on
the sustainable, equitable and resilient electrification of transportation. This
is needed because society is beginning a massive transformation as the electric
grid becomes much more renewable and as transportation becomes much more
electrified. The convergent work proposed here is to ensure that this
transformation is done so as to benefit all members of society. The specific
focus is the supra-aggregation associated with the connected urban-rural systems
in the electric grid covering most of the state of Texas, with results
applicable to the rest of the country. The team has broad expertise in the many
required areas including the electric grid, renewable generation,
transportation, urban studies, community planning, sociology, risk analysis,
large-scale computing and data analytics, demographics, and education. The
portfolio of research and education will be broad, leveraging the strengths of
the convergent team with key aspects including developing better modeling and
simulation, developing theories of change and more generalization theories,
broad stakeholder participation, and equity with the goal of advancing
knowledge. The effort has a strong focus on education to all, and should result
in overall societal benefit given its broad focus on the electric and
transportation infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.