* 2115432
* SRS RN (Track 2): Nevada Water: A Science-With-Society Research and Education Network
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Anne Nolin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 149,923.00

Paragraph 1&lt;br/&gt;Nevada is the driest state in the nation and is facing
multiple water sustainability challenges including declining mountain snowpacks,
extreme weather, rapid population growth, and increasing urban-rural tensions.
“Nevada Water” will develop a partnership of water suppliers, users, policy-
makers, and academics whose primary goal is to create a dynamic research,
societal, and education network focusing on critical urban-rural water issues
across Nevada. The network will include key public, private, tribal, research,
nonprofit, and educational water resource partners. These planning activities
will operate under the “Science With Society” concept, that emphasizes
communication, connections, and collaboration. In this one-year project, Nevada
Water partners will work together to a) identify crucial urban-rural water
sustainability issues; b) discuss and frame different ways of thinking about
water sustainability solutions; c) identify information, knowledge, and resource
gaps need to be filled; d) develop shared visions for desirable, equitable, and
sustainable water futures; and e) determine the best network structure to
address Nevada’s urban-rural water sustainability challenges. To achieve these
goals, regional and thematically-based groups of partners will prepare the
nascent network for a 2-day conference focused on characterizing information
gaps, co-identifying water priorities, and network development. Nevada Water
will foster new knowledge and collaboration strategies to significantly advance
integration, coordination, innovation, and sustainable regional systems
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across Nevada, water users, suppliers,
and policymakers are facing growing stressors including declining snowpacks,
extreme weather, rapid population growth, and increasing urban-rural tensions
around water sustainability. The Nevada Water network is a collaborative and
inclusive partnership of water-related practitioners and academics whose primary
goal is to create a dynamic research, societal, and education network focusing
on critical urban-to-rural water issues across Nevada. The network will include
key public, private, tribal, research, nonprofit, and educational water resource
partners. Through a transformative Science-with-Society convergent approach,
this Track 2 effort will a) co-identify key state and regional urban-rural water
challenges in a changing climate; b) initiate stakeholder conversations to frame
partner-based, equitable urban-rural water solutions; c) co-identify information
needs, resource gaps, theoretical frameworks, applications, and research
priorities towards advancing sustainable regional systems science to achieve
regional water sustainability; d) foster new knowledge and deeper understanding
of regional wicked water sustainability challenges, and envision desirable and
equitable water futures; and e) determine the best structure and function of the
network to serve these challenges, solutions, information needs, resource gaps,
and future priorities. Urban-rural “collaboratories” and thematic groups will
prepare a network for a 2-day conference focused on characterizing information
gaps, co-identifying water priorities, and network development. This Nevada
Water network will foster new knowledge and collaboration strategies to
significantly advance sustainable regional systems
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.