* 2115689
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parent Input Effects on Heritage Speakers Knowledge of Mood Selection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Javier Jasso, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 11,356.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heritage language speakers, who
grow up in household where a minority language is used in addition to the
society's majority language, have a grammatical system that differs in patterned
ways from monolingual speakers and those learning the heritage language as a
second language, but many questions remain about the nature of this process.
Characterizing and explaining what aspects of the language's grammar are most
commonly changed, and where in the transmission process these changes occur is a
longstanding question. Heritage grammars have been primarily studied in adult
bilinguals in university settings, and group differences are assumed to occur at
the level of the child. However, parents' grammars have also been shown to
change over speakers' lifespans. Direct evidence of language performance from
child and parent speakers can inform which structures were present but not
acquired and which structures were absent from the input itself. Statistical
methodological advances can aid in understanding questions of parent-child
input/transfer related to language transmission. By studying these small-scale
intergenerational changes in speakers' grammatical representations and the
speaker characteristics involved, this study contributes to an understanding of
bilingual acquisition processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses a dyadic
design (1 parent, 1 child), which offers novel methodological and analytical
contributions to the study of heritage grammars. Parent–child input transfer is
explored through the comprehension–production of mood selection (indicative vs.
subjunctive), a well-established variable phenomenon, in the heritage language
through timed acceptability ratings and an elicited production task. The study
examines 1) child–parent mood selection, 2) the effect of internal (categorical
vs. variable contexts) and external factors (e.g., speakers' language experience
and proficiency), and 3) the direct effect of parent's use of mood on child
production. Statistical models including dyadic analyses will directly test the
effect of parent mood production on child comprehension and the individual
factors that contribute to members' own performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.