* 2115450
* SRS-RN: Hybrid Water Infrastructure and Regional Sustainability - Planning a Convergence Science Approach in Greater New Orleans
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Ehab Meselhe, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 02/29/2024
* USD 149,343.00

Traditional water infrastructure systems like drainage pumps, flood walls, and
levees are increasingly incorporating nature based, or green infrastructure,
features. Many water governance agencies and private landowners are planning and
implementing these hybrid systems in the Greater New Orleans (GNO) area in
response to flooding vulnerabilities and environmental changes. These
infrastructure programs that blend natural and built features are some of the
most significant investments in the United States. At present, however, a lack
of performance standards, coordinated monitoring, regionally applicable modeling
tools, and strategies to tailor such tools to new localities present important
limitations for climate change adaptation efforts. For example, should new
investments in drainage pumping systems factor in newly constructed green
stormwater catchments in infrastructure plans? If so, what performance metrics
can be developed to integrate these combined natural and engineered approaches?
Major investments in sustainable and natural infrastructure lack clear system
definitions and scientific coordination across jurisdictions and projects.
Indeed, few investments in hybrid infrastructure occur at the regional scale,
and difficulties in blending and optimizing natural/traditional approaches
persist. This project brings together regional water infrastructure authorities,
scientific experts, and community organizations to assemble a full Sustainable
Regional Systems Research Network (SRS-RN) proposal to tackle these conjoined
challenges of water governance and water science of hybrid infrastructure
systems. The results of this planning grant, if successful, could lead to better
methods of infrastructure improvement across the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching objective of this planning process is the development of a novel
transdisciplinary program to integrate regional scientific and infrastructure
management activities and create standards, metrics, and tools of environmental
monitoring, evaluation, and modeling for regions instituting hybrid water
infrastructure systems. Scientific efforts related to water infrastructure will
be developed relative to current and projected local environmental, social, and
built environment conditions. This planning process presents an opportunity to
develop an approach to regional water science that incorporates key disciplines
(e.g., geomorphology, hydro-ecology, urban and regional planning, urban
development, civil engineering, urban ecology) and provides a road map for
diverse civic collaboration to accelerate equitable transitions towards regional
sustainability. The planning process is comprised of a sequence of activities
designed to foster broad community outreach and engagement with diverse
participants and stakeholders, and for knowledge co-production amongst team
members to ground partners in a shared understanding of how water infrastructure
impacts the region. The project is pursued through five phases: 1) Network
outreach, diversification, and engagement 2) Data collation workshops, 3) Field
and site visits 4) Formation of environmental competency groups, and 5) Full
proposal preparation. Regional sustainability problems and research approaches
that address local problems will be identified and contextualized within
theoretical challenges and frontiers in sustainability science and engineering
more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.