* 2115488
* Examining the Efficacy of a Co-Designed Culturally Sustaining STEM Learning Ecosystems Model for Youth, Their Families, and Informal Educators in Rural Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Scott Byrd, The High Desert Museum
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2025
* USD 961,872.00

Although approximately one-quarter of U.S. students reside in rural communities,
rural youth are fifty percent less likely to receive and engage in out-of-school
STEM experiences than their urban counterparts. In addition, there has been
significantly more investment in understanding and improving informal
experiences in urban settings than in rural settings. As a result, there is less
known about the characteristics of learning ecosystems and programs that support
STEM learning for youth in informal contexts within rural communities. This
Research in Service to Practice project aims to address this challenge by
exploring the feasibility of a culturally relevant and sustaining STEM program
designed specifically for rural youth and their families. Parents and caregivers
play a critical role in fostering youths’ interests and persistence in STEM
through their own engagement and by connecting them to STEM opportunities and
STEM-related fields and career pathways. Through a partnership between the High
Desert Museum in Oregon, the Institute for Learning Innovation, Maine
Mathematics and Science Alliance, JKS Consulting, and three informal science
education institutions, a year-long series of STEM-based workshops and
experiences for youth and their families will be co-designed by members of the
rural community, informal STEM educators, and STEM professionals and implemented
within the rural communities of the participating informal science education
institutions—Caddo Mounds State Historic Site Weeping Mary (TX), High Desert
Museum (OR), Oregon Coast Aquarium, and The Wild Center (NY). Each series will
reflect the cultural knowledge, connections, and resources specific to each
rural community. In addition, the informal STEM educators and STEM professionals
will receive training on facilitating the culturally sustaining workshops and
experiences. Researchers at the Institution for Learning Innovation and the
Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance together with the evaluator at JKS
Consulting will employ a collaborative design-based research approach to
identify and study the STEM learning practices and supports that occur within
the program to promote youths’ interests and persistence in STEM. The findings
will offer evidence-based insights to the field on how to better engage,
reflect, and provide opportunities for diverse rural communities. Ultimately,
this research has the potential to advance the current understanding thereby,
strengthening rural STEM learning ecosystems and broadening STEM participation
among youth in rural communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a four-year project
duration, a collaborative design-based research approach will be employed to
address the following research questions: (1) How does culturally sustaining
informal STEM programming for families in rural communities contribute to
increases in youth STEM persistence? (1a) How might this vary in relation to
family and community factors? (2) How does culturally sustaining informal family
STEM programming increase community connectivity between STEM-related resources
and institutions across informal and formal learning contexts in rural
communities leading to a more robust and inclusive STEM learning ecosystem? (2a)
To what extent do participating families, informal STEM educators, STEM
professionals, and community partners each play a role in increasing this
connectivity? The research sample will include 300 families with youth ages
8-11, informal science educators, and STEM professionals across all four sites.
Surveys, interviews and observations will be the primary data sources. Analysis
of Variance and simple descriptive statistical analysis will be used to analyze
the quantitative data. The qualitative data will be analyzed using thematic
coding through NVivo. In addition, to complement the research data, JKS
Consulting will conduct the formative and summative evaluations of the project
to hone effective practices for training informal science learning practitioners
in developing and implementing place-based, inquiry-based family learning in
rural communities and effective and sustainable practices for engaging rural
families in place-based STEM. Findings from the research will be made available
and widely distributed in publications, conference presentations, and a multi-
part Research to Practice Toolkit designed for parents and caregivers, informal
science educators, STEM professionals, and the informal education field at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in
informal environments and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.