* 2115431
* SRS RN: A novel approach - An Indigenous team leading the co-production of knowledge in sustainable resource systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Charles Jones, Swinomish Indian Tribal Community
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2024
* USD 171,549.00

The unique insights provided by tribal nations and their Indigenous knowledges
are recognized as being key to developing more sustainable futures. This project
empowers Northwest tribes to take the lead in identifying research priorities
for a sustainable regional systems research network that is driven by tribes for
tribes. The project will bring together multiple organizations, disciplines, and
tribes to co-produce a Sustainable Regional Systems Research Network (SRS RN).
The proposed work will focus on climatic impacts on forests, foods, and water.
Individual tribes have developed adaptation strategies grounded in Indigenous
knowledges that could benefit Indigenous and non-Indigenous communities as the
Northwest region of the USA faces rapid changes from climatic
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be based on the socio-ecological
system, a foundational concept in all Indigenous knowledge. The tribes of the
Northwest view their own health and wellbeing as existing via mutually
beneficial relationships among humans, nonhuman relatives, and the environment.
In collaboration with the Swinomish Indian Tribal Community, the project will be
led by the Affiliated Tribes of Northwest Indians (ATNI), whose member tribes
are implementing localized, sustainable adaptive resource management projects
founded on Indigenous knowledge in the context of climate change that may be
scalable to other regional systems. The 12-month project will consist of tribal
representatives meeting on monthly calls and two in-person workshops to discuss
their respective projects. Representatives will identify which projects might be
suitable to scale to a regional system, identify existing research gaps, hone
research questions, and develop hypotheses about the regional systems of study
(forests, foods, and water, in the context of climate) in preparation for
drafting an SRS RN full proposal. The sustainable resource management systems
that result from adaptations based on Indigenous knowledge would be desirable
societal outcomes for all communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.