* 2115189
* Improve Precalculus Success by Pairing a Precalculus Course with a Computer Science Course Centered on Select Precalculus Topics
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Manish Patel, West Los Angeles College
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,972.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track1 pilot project aims to improve
underprepared students’ transition from algebra to calculus using computer
programming to aid the learning of precalculus concepts and skills. Many
community college students intending to major in STEM are underprepared for
calculus so precalculus has become a gateway course for many STEM majors.
However, because of low student success in precalculus courses, these courses
create a major constriction in the STEM pipeline. The project will conduct
research on how pairing the traditional precalculus course with a redesigned
computer science course centered on numerical investigation of select
precalculus topics impacts student performance in (a) the precalculus course;
(b) subsequent calculus courses; and (c) in completion of STEM degree/transfer.
It will provide valuable insight into the ways in which computer programming can
elevate success in precalculus and (subsequently) calculus. For community
colleges, it has the potential to help ease the bottleneck between algebra and
calculus that constricts transfer rates and diminishes student interest in STEM.
Project results will also add to the body of knowledge on how using computing to
teach precalculus can help underserved and underperforming students gain access
to STEM disciplines. If proven successful, this approach will likely find
widespread use throughout the country, given that precalculus appears on almost
every college campus and is a prerequisite for STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the project is to boost student
success in precalculus, increasing the number of students able to enter and
successfully complete calculus thus reducing the number of students who opt out
of STEM majors. The project will accomplish the following objectives: (1)
Develop a supplementary computer science course centered on numerical
investigation of select precalculus topics to accompany the precalculus course;
(2) Provide the new course combination (computer science +precalculus) to at
least 60 students during the grant period; (3) Determine how this approach
impacts students’ (a) success rate in precalculus; (b) subsequent enrollment in
calculus courses; (c) success rate in calculus courses. The success of the
proposed approach will be determined through quasi-experimental procedures using
control and treatment groups, where the treatment group comprises students
completing the supplementary computer science course along with the formal
precalculus course; the control group will have only completed the latter. The
project team will widely disseminate project and research results at local,
regional, and national levels to share important findings with other educational
institutions and communities that seek to increase math attainment. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.