* 2115960
* HSI Planning Project: Development of an Early Attrition Predictive Model for STEM Majors at a Major Hispanic-Serving Institution
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Carpi, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,472.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: PPP proposal aims to undertake an
institutional-wide assessment of early STEM attrition to inform the development
of a predictive model that will identify students in STEM majors who are at risk
of leaving STEM or dropping out entirely, and group these students according to
their risk factors. Recognizing that deficit-oriented models fail to fully
explain the high-level of attrition of Hispanics and other underrepresented
minorities from STEM majors, the proposed model will use both institutional data
(e.g., student demographics, socioeconomic status, pre-college characteristics,
enrollment patterns, academic performance, and institutional factors) and
results of validated surveys administered to students and alumni who have
attrited from a STEM major to identify risk factors that can be addressed
institutionally. Doing so will allow the development of targeted interventions
that mitigate the risk factors identified by the model in a future Track 2
submission, which will be designed to provide students with the tools and
resources that will help ensure their retention and successful completion of a
STEM major and entry into a post-graduate STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aims of this proposal are to (1) work with key institutional data repositories
to gather student metrics and (2) administer surveys to students from cohorts
who have left the major to understand their reasons for leaving the STEM majors
at John Jay College to (3) develop and validate a predictive model to identify
whether patterns of attrition and factors related to attrition differ across
subgroups of students. The PI team hypothesizes that different factors will
affect attrition of different students, and that these factors can be predicted
and mitigated with intervention (e.g. tutoring, social support, remediation,
financial counseling, etc.). The final aim is to (4) work with the major offices
associated with undergraduate completion, a trained psychologist, and an
independent evaluator to develop a cohort of interventions and a plan for
rigorous evaluation of these interventions for submission as a future NSF HSI
program Track 2 proposal. The knowledge generated in this proposal will be
published in peer-reviewed literature and shared with other minority- and
Hispanic-serving institutions that wish to address attrition rates of STEM
majors. The model itself will be shared with other HSIs to allow them to analyze
the factors affecting attrition at their institutions. The NSF HSI Program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional
and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged
student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.