* 2115637
* WaterMarks: An art/science framework for community-engaged learning around water and water management in an urban area
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Mary Miss, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,255,790.00

Milwaukee has established itself as a leader in water management and technology,
hosting a widely recognized cluster of industrial, governmental, nonprofit, and
academic activity focused on freshwater. At the same time, Milwaukee faces a
wide range of challenges with freshwater, some unique to the region and others
common to cities throughout the country. These challenges include vulnerability
to flooding and combined sewer overflows after heavy rainfall, biological and
pharmaceutical contamination in surface water, lead in drinking water
infrastructure, and inequity in access to beaches and other recreational water
amenities. As do other cities, Milwaukee grapples with the challenges for urban
water imposed by global climate change, including changing patterns of
precipitation and drought. These problems are further complicated by Milwaukee’s
acute racial and economic residential segregation. With a population of
approximately 595,000, embedded within a metropolitan area of over 1.5 million,
Milwaukee remains one of the country’s most segregated cities. There is
increasing urgency to engage the public—and especially those who are most
vulnerable to environmental impacts—more deeply in the stewardship of urban
water and in the task of creating sustainable urban futures. The primary goal of
this four-year project is to foster community-engaged learning and environmental
stewardship by developing a framework that integrates art with Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) experiences along with
geography, water management, and social science. Synergies between STEM learning
and the arts suggest that collaborations among artists, scientists, and
communities can open up ways to bring informal learning about the science of
sustainability to communities. Project activities include
artist/scientist/community member-led Walks, which are designed to engage multi-
generational participants both from the neighborhoods and from across the city,
in considering the conditions, characteristics, histories, and ecosystems of
neighborhoods. Walks are expanded upon in Workshops with local residents,
scientists/experts, and other stakeholders, and include exploring current water-
related environmental challenges and proposing solutions. The Workshops draw on
diverse perspectives, including lived experience, scientific knowledge, and
policy expertise. Art Projects created by local artists amplify community
engagement with the topics, including programming for teens and young adults. A
website, and free Wi-Fi integrated into various Marker sites around the city,
encourage users to pursue self-guided learning to explore the water systems and
issues facing surrounding neighborhoods. Programming focuses primarily in
Milwaukee’s predominantly African American near North Side and the predominantly
Latinx/Hispanic near South Side. Many neighborhoods in these sections are
vulnerable to such problems as frequent flooding, lead contamination in drinking
water, inequities in safety and maintenance of green space, and less access to
Lake Michigan, the city’s primary natural resource and recreational
amenity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WaterMarks project advances informal STEM
learning in at least two ways. First, while the WaterMarks project is designed
to fit Milwaukee, the project includes development of an adaptable
implementation guide. The guide is designed so that other cities can modify and
employ its inclusive structure, programming, and process of collaboration among
artists, scientists, partner organizations, and residents to promote citywide
civic engagement in urban sustainability through the combination of informal
STEM learning and public art. Second, through evaluation and research, the
project will build a theoretical model for the relationships among science
learning, engagement with the arts, and the distinctive contexts of different
neighborhoods within an urban social-ecological system. Evaluation foci include:
How does the implementation of WaterMarks support positive outcomes for the
project’s communities and the development of an adaptable model for city-scale
informal science learning about urban environments? 2. To what extent do the
type and degree of outcome-related change experienced by participating community
residents vary across and/or between project sites? What factors, if any, appear
to be linked to these changes? 3. To what extent and in what ways do the
activities of the WaterMarks projects appear to have in situ effects related to
the experience of place at project sites? The project’s research questions
include: 1. How does participation in Walks focused on visual artistic
activities affect outcomes and experiences of informal STEM learning about urban
water systems? 2. How do outcomes and experiences of informal STEM learning vary
across different urban water topics, participants from different demographic
groups, and contrasting sociocultural and biophysical
contexts?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is led by
the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), in collaboration with City as
Living Laboratory (CALL) and the COSI Center for Research and Evaluation. The
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning
in informal environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM
in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.