* 2115447
* SRS-RN Track 2: MACRO-SETS: Microplastics Across the Columbia River basin to the Ocean - Social-Ecological-Technological System
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Heejun Chang, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2023
* USD 149,989.00

Microplastics are fragments of any type of plastic less than 5 millimeters in
length. Environmental microplastic contamination is a significant problem, as
microplastics have been found all over the world, from within deep sea creatures
to protected wilderness areas at altitude. The plastic cycle at the watershed
scale, from atmosphere to ocean, has significant data gaps. Environmental
microplastics take many pathways into the environment including roads,
agriculture practices, stormwater run-off, and wastewater systems. Microfibers
are the dominant microplastic found in all environments, and while some
microfibers sources have been identified and characterized, information about
other sources is needed. In addition, there is a disconnect between microfiber
sources, public awareness, and existing policy and management strategies. This
planning grant project aims to scope out research on microfibers in the Columbia
River Basin in order to understand deeply microplastic sources and their
connectivity. The project also has the goal of creating a regional network of
scientists, industry, agencies, and nonprofits engaged in understanding
environmental microplastic contamination, as well as recommending policy,
management, and technology solutions to reduce or eliminate microplastic
contamination sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant has the
objective of collecting preliminary physical and social data to inform a series
of workshops to engage diverse stakeholders in developing a project scope for
understanding microfibers in the Columbia River Basin. Both physical and survey
data collection will be informed by a Key Informant Workshop, a webinar of
Oregon-based stakeholders known to the project team. This group will convene to
provide input on sampling, survey content, and subsequent workshop design. A
second Basin-Wide Workshop will gather a larger group of stakeholders from
across the Columbia River Basin. The goals of this workshop are to provide
participants with an overview of the state of the science on microplastics; to
enlist their respective professions, disciplines, and regional and cultural
perspectives in identifying future microfiber research priorities; and to
identify practitioner-leaders for co-developing microfiber research with the
project team. These individuals will participate in a Network Advisory Team
Workshop to synthesize lessons from the planning process and to finalize goals
for a full-scale project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.