* 2115153
* Artificial Intelligence For All: A Framework for a College Certificate
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Joseph Weathers, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 986,535.00

This implementation and evaluation project from Miami Dade College (MDC) aims to
serve the national interest by increasing community colleges’ capacity to
develop and offer courses in artificial intelligence (AI) with the AI for All
project. MDC plans to attract and train more students in AI by creating a
College Credit Certificate in AI Framework. Innovative features of the project
include an HSI community college adapting AI courses originally developed for a
four-year university program and combining them with multiple on-ramps and
supports for engaging students such as bootcamps, workshops, and mentoring. The
interdisciplinary focus will allow for weaving AI engagement across MDC’s
colleges and programs providing students with a foundational literacy of AI that
will inform whatever career path they follow. The long-term impacts will include
increasing awareness and engagement for non-computer science students in AI
courses, developing a four-year AI degree at an HSI community college; and
broadening participation of groups historically underrepresented in computing
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to develop AI courses and an
interdisciplinary certificate that will lead to successful student outcomes,
while building capacity for the development of a four-year degree in AI at an
HSI community college. The STEM education research will explore the computing
identity development of students participating in the AI for All project
activities, examining how multiple entry points into and paths through the
certificate program function to build STEM identity and AI self-efficacy,
particularly in Black and Hispanic students. The findings will inform computer
science education practices and policies for MDC’s continued work across other
computer science degree programs. It will also inform the work of other HSI
community colleges developing AI programs. This research will be of value to
universities seeking to increase the success of their Hispanic and Black
students pursuing degrees in computer science. The project evaluation will
examine the collaboration process between MDC and its partners and those
findings will help inform MDC’s future collaborations, and those of other
community colleges who would like to explore these types of partnerships. The
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-serving Institutions Program
(HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.