* 2115730
* Youth-Directed Math Collaboratories and Mathematical Identity: African American Youth as Co-Learners, Co-Educators and Co-Researchers
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Naama Lewis, Young People's Project, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 07/31/2025
* USD 976,614.00

Many Black youth in both urban and rural areas lack engaging opportunities to
learn mathematics in a manner that leads to full participation in STEM. The
Young People’s Project (YPP), the Baltimore Algebra Project (BAP), and the
Education for Liberation Network (EdLib) each have over two decades of
experience working on this issue. In the city of Baltimore, where 90% of youth
in poverty are Black, and only 5% of these students meet or exceed expectations
in math, BAP, a youth led organization, develops and employs high school and
college age youth to provide after-school tutoring in Algebra 1, and to advocate
for a more just education for themselves and their peers. YPP works in urban or
rural low income communities that span the country developing Math Literacy
Worker programs that employ young people ages 14-22 to create spaces to help
their younger peers learn math. Building on these deep and rich experiences,
this Innovations in Development project studies how Black students see
themselves as mathematicians in the context of paid peer-to-peer math teaching--
a combined social, pedagogical, and economic strategy. Focusing primarily in
Baltimore, the project studies how young people grow into new self-definitions
through their work in informal, student-determined math learning spaces,
structured collaboratively with adults who are experts in both mathematics and
youth development. The project seeks to demonstrate the benefits of investing in
young people as learners, teachers, and educational collaborators as part of a
core strategy to improve math learning outcomes for all students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a mixed methods approach to describe how
mathematical identity develops over time in young people employed in a Youth-
Directed Mathematics Collaboratory. 60 high school aged students with varying
mathematical backgrounds (first in Baltimore and later in Boston) will learn how
to develop peer- and near-peer led math activities with local young people in
informal settings, after-school programs, camps, and community centers, reaching
approximately 600 youth/children. The high school aged youth employed in this
project will develop their own math skills and their own pedagogical skills
through the already existing YPP and BAP structures, made up largely of peers
and near-peers just like themselves. They will also participate in on-going
conversations within the Collaboratory and with the community about the cultural
significance of doing mathematics, which for YPP and BAP is a part of the
ongoing Civil Rights/Human Rights movement. Mathematical identity will be
studied along four dimensions: (a) students’ sequencing and interpretation of
past mathematical experiences (autobiographical identity); (b) other people’s
talk to them and their talk about themselves as learners, doers, and teachers of
mathematics (discoursal identity); (c) the development of their own voices in
descriptions and uses of mathematical knowledge and ideas (authorial identity);
and (d) their acceptance or rejection of available selfhoods (socio-culturally
available identity). Intended outcomes from the project include a clear
description of how mathematical identity develops in paid peer-teaching
contexts, and growing recognition from both local communities and policy-makers
that young people have a key role to play, not only as learners, but also as
teachers and as co-researchers of mathematics education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.