* 2115322
* SRS RN: To be truly regenerative, we must be reparative: a BIPOC agenda for regional sustainable systems
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Sarah Stanlick, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 131,606.00

Many Black, Indigenous, and other People of Color (BIPOC) communities identify
regenerative soil, water, and energy systems as the basis for intergenerational
healing from slavery and colonization. In this lens, the exploitation of land is
based on the exploitation of people, and the regeneration of land depends on the
regeneration of people. BIPOC farmers and food system actors have formed
regional urban and regional sustainability networks. These networks aim to
reconnect farmers with rural land after generations of slavery, genocide,
displacement, and exclusion, and are committed to feeding poor urban populations
with healthy, fresh food with these efforts. While these networks have achieved
a remarkable level of organizing and institution-building using a grassroots
approach, they have not received either funding and/or other support types that
have propelled other policy networks into higher levels of integration and
organization. The activities of this planning grant will provide this support to
secure these networks access to regional land for food, water, and energy
innovation and give them the freedom to vision regeneration goals 25+ years into
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partnering with the Northeast Farmers of Color
Land Trust (NEFOC) and Black Farmer Fund (BFF), this research team will work
collaboratively with stakeholders in the NEFOC service area to co-design and
build a network and framework for a Collective Impact (CI) model. Methods
include building on surveys completed by NEFOC and BFF, convening focus groups,
and conducting interviews within the collective impact framework to create a
common agenda for the networks using a structured form of collaboration. The
goal is to develop new knowledge about the factors that support sustainable
regional systems, understand the ways in which BIPOC policy networks foster
those systems, and determine the key assets and gaps to creating more collective
power in those systems for long-term sustainability. This project invests in
BIPOC sustainability policy networks advancing a reparative socio-ecological
framework to advance BIPOC networks into higher levels of integration and
organization, increase their capacity for land sovereignty, and support long-
term strategic planning for sustainable regional systems. In addition, these
BIPOC networks pose novel, integrative visions, which incorporate ecology,
culture, spirituality, history, and geography. Outcomes from the research will
provide opportunities to address entrenched legacies of racial injustice and
trauma, while repairing BIPOC relationships with the land and restoring regional
ecosystems. Strengthening BIPOC sustainability policy networks is foundational
to building healthy communities while improving strategies for protecting
regional ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.