* 2115463
* Diálogos: Harnessing Latinx Community Cultural Wealth to Support Executive Function in Early Childhood through Family Engineering Experiences
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Pattison, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,953.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has been well documented that under-
resourced Latinx communities face persistent barriers to accessing quality STEM
education and STEM careers, particularly in the field of engineering. For young
children and their families from these communities, the development of executive
function skills offers promising pathways to support educational success and
prepare children to engage with STEM practices and content. Executive function
skills, such as focusing attention, retaining information, and managing emotions
are critical for children’s development and long-term success, and have been
identified as central to engagement with STEM practices and content, whether in
or out of school. However, much of the work on development of executive function
skills to date has been conducted with White, middle-class children and has
largely ignored the knowledge, values, or perspectives of other communities,
including Latinx families. Similar gaps also exist in attention to culturally
responsive approaches to using family-based STEM activities to support executive
function skills. Taken together, there is a critical need to work with Latinx
communities to re-imagine the intersection of STEM learning and executive
function skills using equity-based frameworks. This Pilot and Feasibility
project will develop and test a new participatory, dialogic method that
leverages informal family engineering activities to support the development of
executive function skills for preschool-age children from Latinx families. The
combination of this proposal’s unique engagement of parents as research partners
with the study of engineering and executive functions could lay the foundation
for a promising program of future equity-focused
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research questions will guide the study: 1)
What knowledge, assets, and practices already exist within Latinx families
related to these executive function skills? 2) What aspects of executive
function skills can be supported through informal family engineering activities?
and 3) What are promising design strategies for adapting informal family
engineering activities to highlight family assets and support executive function
skills for young children? To address these questions, the project team will
engage Latinx parents in a dialogue series in which parents are central
collaborators, sharing their in-depth perspectives and partnering with
researchers to develop conceptual frameworks and new approaches. Data generated
through these ongoing discussions will be analyzed using (a) qualitative,
participatory approaches, including iterative co-development and refinement of
emergent themes with parents, (b) detailed inductive coding of parent dialogue
group discussions using grounded theory techniques, and (c) retrospective
analysis at the end of the project. The parent dialogue series will be supported
by a systematic literature review examining the intersections between
engineering design, executive function, and the strengths and assets within
Latinx families. The results of the exploratory research will include a (1)
conceptual framework co-developed with parents that highlights promising
opportunities and design strategies for using family engineering design
activities to support executive function skills for preschool-age children from
Latinx families and (2) research agenda outlining questions and priorities for
future work that reflect the goals and interests of this community. Aligned with
project’s equity approach, the team will work collaboratively with project
partners and families for dissemination, focusing on amplifying community
voices, sharing challenges and successes, and supporting improvements in the
local community. Results will also be broadly shared with educators and
researchers to advance knowledge and promote new equitable approaches to
collaborating with parents from Latinx communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Pilots and Feasibility project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the public
of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.