* 2115751
* Accessible Oceans: Exploring Ocean Data through Sound
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,414.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accessible Oceans study will
design auditory displays that support learning and understanding of ocean data
in informal learning environments like museums, science centers, and aquariums.
Most data presentations in these spaces use visual display techniques such as
graphs, charts, and computer-generated visualizations, resulting in inequitable
access for learners with vision impairment or other print-related disabilities.
While music, sound effects, and environmental sounds are sometimes used, these
audio methods are inadequate for conveying quantitative information. The project
will use sonification (turning data into sound) to convey meaningful aspects of
ocean science data to increase access to ocean data and ocean literacy. The
project will advance knowledge on the design of auditory displays for all
learners, with and without disabilities, as well as advance the use of
technology for STEM formal and informal education. The study will include 425
participants but will reach tens of thousands through the development of
education materials, public reporting, and social media. The study will partner
with the Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution Ocean Discovery Center, the Georgia Aquarium, the
Eugene Science Center, the Atlanta Center for the Visually Impaired, and Perkins
School for the Blind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage existing
educational ocean datasets from the NSF-funded Ocean Observatories Initiative to
produce and evaluate the feasibility of using integrated auditory displays to
communicate tiered learning objectives of oceanographic principles. Integrated
auditory displays will each be comprised of a data sonification and a context-
setting audio introduction that will help to make sure all users start with the
same basic information about the phenomenon. The displays will be developed
through a user-centered design process that will engage ocean science experts,
visually impaired students and adults (and their teachers), and design-oriented
undergraduate and graduate students. The project will support advocacy skills
for inclusive design and will provide valuable training opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in human-centered design and accessibility.
The project will have foundational utility in auditory display, STEM education,
human-computer interaction, and other disciplines, contributing new strategies
for representing quantitative information that can be applied across STEM
disciplines that use similar visual data displays. The project will generate
publicly accessible resources to advance studies of inclusive approaches on
motivating learners with and without disabilities to learn more about and
consider careers in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Pilots and Feasibility
Studies project is supported by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.