* 2115921
* Embodied Physics: Using the Lenses of Physics and Dance to Investigate Learning, Engagement, and Identity Development for Black and Latinx Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dionne Champion, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,072,048.00

The call for more science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
education taking place in informal settings has the potential to shape future
generations, drive new innovations and expand opportunities. Yet, its power
remains to be fully realized in many communities of color. However, research has
shown that using creative embodied activities to explore science phenomena is a
promising approach to supporting understanding and engagement, particularly for
youth who have experienced marginalization. Prior pilot work by the principal
investigator found that authentic inquiries into science through embodied
learning approaches can provide rich opportunities for sense-making through
kinesthetic experience, embodied imagining, and the representation of physics
concepts for Black and Latinx teens when learning approaches focused on dance
and dance-making. This Research in Service to Practice project builds on prior
work to better understand the unique opportunities for learning, engagement, and
identity development for these youth when physics is explored in the context of
the Embodied Physics Learning Lab Model. The model is conceptualized as a set of
components that (1) allow youth to experience and utilize their intersectional
identities; (2) impact engagement with physics ideas, concepts and phenomena;
and (3) lead to the development of physics knowledge and other skills. The
project aims to contribute to more expansive definitions of physics and physics
learning in informal spaces. While the study focuses primarily on Black and
Latinx youth, the methods and discoveries have the potential to impact the
teaching of physics for a much broader audience including middle- and high-
school children, adults who may have been turned off to physics at an earlier
age, and undergraduate physical science majors who are struggling with difficult
concepts. This project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is grounded in sociocultural
perspectives on learning and identity, embodied interaction and enactive
cognition, and responsive design. The design is also informed by the notion of
“ArtScience” which highlights commonalities between the thinking and making
practices used by artists and by scientists and builds on the theoretical
philosophy that all things can be understood through art or through science but
integrating the two lenses allows for more complete understandings. Research
will investigate the relationship between embodied learning approaches, design
principles, and structures of the Embodied Physics Learning Lab model using the
lenses of physics, dance, and integrated ArtScience to better understand the
model. The project employs design-based research to address two overarching
research questions: (1) What unique opportunities for learning, engagement, and
identity development for Black and Latinx youth occur when physics is explored
in the context of the Embodied Physics Learning Lab Model? and (2) How do
variations in site demographics and site implementation influence the impact and
scalability of the Learning Lab model? Further, the inquiry will consider (a)
how youth experience and utilize their intersectional various identities in the
context of the activities, structures, and essential elements of the embodied
physics learning lab; (b) how youth's level of physics engagement changes
depending on which embodied learning approaches and essential element structures
are used; (c) the physics knowledge and other skills youth attain through the
set of activities; and (d) how, if at all, the embodied learning approaches
engage youth in thinking about their own agency as STEM doers. An
interdisciplinary team of researchers, choreographers, and youth along with
community organizations will co-design and implement project activities across
four sites. Approximately 200 high school youth will be engaged; 24 will have
the role of Teen Thought Partner. Through three iterative design cycles of
implementation, the project will refine the model to investigate which elements
most affect successful implementation and to identify the conditions necessary
for scale-up. Data will be collected in the form of video, field notes, pre- and
post- interviews, pre- and post- surveys, and artifacts created by the youth.
Analyses will include a combination of interaction analysis, descriptive data
analysis, and movement analysis. In addition to the research findings and
explication of the affordances and constraints of the model, the project will
also create a curricular resource, including narrative text and video
demonstrations of physics concepts led by the teen thought partners, video case
training modules, and assessment tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.