* 2115154
* Collaborative Research: Coupling Archaeological shell and novel isotope approaches to reconstruct impact of nearshore productivity change
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Torben Rick, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 148,087.00

A central issue in archaeology is understanding how people were influenced by
past environmental change and how they, in turn, actively shaped ecosystems and
organisms around them. To explore those questions, some archaeologists have
attempted to understand the origins of hierarchical sociopolitical systems among
the densely populated coastal regions. Drawing on the analysis of artifacts,
village structure, human subsistence, and high-precision climate records,
archaeologists have rigorously debated the impact of hypothesized declines in
marine productivity and extended El Ni√±o conditions vs. extended drought. Even
in contexts with exceptionally high-resolution marine climate records in the
world, interpreting past climatic data can be incredibly challenging where
surface oceanography across the region is highly variable. This project provides
training opportunities for several undergraduate and graduate students,
especially members of historically under-represented groups and Indigenous
communities, and will support a wide variety of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand when and why
cultural complexity arose along one such region and any links it may have to
past changes in climate. To address these issues, the researchers draw on the
analysis of novel molecular/isotopes (compound-specific isotopes of amino acids
or CSI-AA) in shells obtained from archaeological sites. CSI-AA is well
preserved in archaeological shell and can directly record climate-linked shifts
in local oceanography, including nutrient sources, baseline primary production,
trophic structure, and algal community composition. This analysis offers a new,
highly localized source of past climate variation and environmental productivity
to help address the central research questions. This project is the first
systematic archeological application of CSI-AA analyses addressing broad social,
political, and cultural developments in California and will have far reaching
implications for archaeological research on past environmental change around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.