* 2115134
* CICI: UCSS: ACSP4HR: Assuring Cyber Security and Privacy for Human Resilience Research: Requirements, Framework, Architecture, Mechanisms and Prototype
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Shouhuai Xu, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 515,094.00

Citizens live in a world of prevalent adversities, ranging from childhood
trauma, to domestic violence, war, flooding, hurricanes, wildfires, terrorist
attacks, acute physical injuries, motor vehicle accidents, and pandemics. These
adversities affect many lives; for example, during the past decade alone,
unprecedented flooding, catastrophic hurricanes, and devastating wildfires
destroyed thousands of homes, vital infrastructure, and communities. Citizens
often struggle to cope with these adversities due to the trauma experienced
during these events as well as the extensive recovery stress. The Human
Resilience research community conducts scientific studies to (i) understand how
citizens suffer from these adversities and (ii) seek effective solutions to help
citizens recover or bounce back from the stress and trauma caused by these
adversities. The importance of Human Resilience research can hardly be
overstated because of the large population of citizens affected. Despite this
clear importance, the scientific discovery process of Human Resilience research
is hindered by the lack of cyberinfrastructure support for secure, privacy-
preserving, and policy-complying data sharing that would foster collaborative
research. This calls for solutions to modernizing and accelerating the
scientific discovery process of Human Resilience
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates a competent technical
solution to modernizing and accelerating the scientific discovery process of
Human Resilience research, by tackling a range of technical challenges
including: (i) specifying the requirements of a competent cyberinfrastructure;
(ii) defining a solution framework to adequately address these requirements;
(iii) designing a comprehensive system architecture to fulfill the framework;
(iv) investigating novel mechanisms and supporting techniques; and (v)
developing a prototype system and demonstrating its usefulness. The project
bolsters the scientific collaboration in the Human Resilience research community
by encouraging the adoption of security and privacy into its unique scientific
workflows and by pioneering a holistic security cyberinfrastructure environment
spanning the entire Human Resilience research data-sharing
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.