* 2115442
* SRS RN: Integrated Food, Energy, Water Units for Disaster Resilient Sustainable Regional Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Seth Blitch, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,529.00

Repeated national and state emergencies from natural disasters have created
unprecedented disruptions in human lives in the United States. Typical process
development tends to focus on individual scientific discovery towards technology
commercialization. Varying needs of regional rural-urban interconnected systems
under disaster conditions require a convergence of scientific and evidence-based
co-production of knowledge with societal and ecological considerations to create
resilient technological interventions to the disaster cycle. This SRS-RN
planning grant aims to build toward a research program that will develop a new
class of multi-faceted resilient systems to facilitate rural-urban connected
communities in sustainably managing their basic needs of food, energy, and water
(FEW) while enhancing ecological and community resilience to disasters. The
planning grant will bring together a diverse group of experts from academic and
non-academic institutions and relevant stakeholder groups for developing the
specific co-produced research questions, convergence approach, and meaningful
team formation with intensive stakeholder engagement
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The regional system for this planning grant is
geographically comprised of disaster-prone and disaster-impacted areas including
combinations of urbanized areas, urban clusters, and/or rural areas for the
states of Texas (TX), Louisiana (LA) and Mississippi (MS). Communities,
municipalities, local, regional, state, and federal governments, social capital
organizations, educational and research institutions, technology providers, and
ecological advocacy groups will be considered as components of regional systems.
Disasters to be considered include hurricane-related impacts (flooding and storm
surge) and long-term climate-related impacts. Food, energy, and water networks,
with a focus on combined FEW needs, and social networks will be the networks of
study. The team for this planning grant has representation from three public
university systems in the Gulf Coast (TX, LA and MS) to engage the
geographically relevant stakeholders in vulnerable and critical ecological
regions. Non-academic partners include the AIChE RAPID Manufacturing Institute,
The Nature Conservancy, Argonne National Laboratory, and an international
partner, Observer Research Foundation. The team has expertise in technology,
economics, governance, and policy domains for sustainability and resilience.
Specific focus areas include process systems, FEW Nexus, regional bioproducts,
ecological systems, development economics, and urban planning. Three jointly
planned and executed workshops, road-mapping activities, in-person stakeholder
meetings, surveys, webinars, and outreach will be held during the next year.
Activities from this phase are targeted to support detailed concept development
for 1) enhanced methodologies for design of disaster-resilient integrated
technological systems in the area of food, energy, and water, 2) strategies and
methods of adaptation, restoration, implementation, informing governance and
policy makers, protection of human and environmental health, and economic
robustness in times of national emergencies/crises, and 3) education and
development of culturally diverse and inclusive communities (and workforce) for
disaster-resilient sustainable regional systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.