* 2115215
* CNS Core:  Small: 3D RF/FSO Mesh Networking with Challenged Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Murat Yuksel, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

As Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are becoming part of civilian life, there is
a significant opportunity in their effective utilization for improving the
general wireless experience of people and provisioning better wireless access.
With no cellular infrastructure support, at low altitudes, managing dense
deployment of devices on the ground over the scarce radio spectrum is not
trivial. UAV-based coverage and aid of device-to-device (D2D) communications on
the ground has the potential to be marketed and deployed across the nation for
first responder teams operating under challenged infrastructure during disaster
response and mitigation, and other commercial applications. UAVs can enable
better altitude reuse by forming a 3D mesh network if they can utilize both
radio frequency (RF) and free-space optical (FSO) communication and offer super-
linear increases in the usage efficiency of the scarce wireless spectrum. To
realize such hybrid RF/FSO 3D mesh networking and wireless access provisioning
under challenged infrastructure, this project investigates UAV-guided D2D
communications, employing UAVs equipped with mechanically and electronically
steered directional FSO communication modules for spatial reuse, and designing
3D mesh network protocols of RF/FSO communication links for smart altitude
reuse. The project will provide graduate and undergraduate students with
mentorship opportunities in the emerging field of UAV technology. With UCF being
recently categorized as a Hispanic Serving Institution, the project will also
offer a great opportunity for involving minority groups in cutting edge
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Possible outcomes from this project include novel
UAV platform designs, multi-element FSO modules for inter-UAV communication, and
3D RF/FSO mesh network topology and protocol designs. The intellectual merits
include: (i) Opportunistic integration of 3D mesh networks at Troposphere
altitudes for spatial reuse into legacy RF technologies via UAVs with highly
directional FSOC transceivers; (ii) Capability of steering directional
transceivers and 3D UAV topology configuration both individually within a
cluster and in the presence of uncoordinated multiple clusters of UAVs; (iii) 3D
routing protocols that consider altitude, channel frequency and directionality,
and residual energy of UAVs; (iv) Techniques to discover and maintain an FSO
link between UAVs with minimal support from infrastructure or out-of-band RF
channels; (v) Optimal multi-element full-duplex FSO transceiver design and
tiling for 3D mobility; (vi) Low size, weight and power factor spherical and/or
conformal transceiver design for UAVs; and (vii) Prototype of an experimental
UAV-based D2D communications system to demonstrate the feasibility of UAV-based
3D mesh networking and assess the effectiveness of the proposed
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.