* 2115028
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Integrating Cybersecurity into Artificial Intelligence Education
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Robin Burke, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 04/30/2024
* USD 297,712.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) is an increasingly critical component for the
computing workforce but also for society as a whole. Therefore, it is essential
to safeguard AI technology from vulnerabilities and unintended uses. While the
relevance of cybersecurity expertise to AI has never been clearer, these aspects
of computing education are often addressed separately. This project will
integrate cybersecurity as a topic into university AI courses at multiple
levels, ensuring that students who will someday build or maintain AI systems
will have the skills they need to operate in an adversarial environment. The
goal of this project is to improve education in this area and impact the future
workforce in a way that leads to more secure and trustworthy AI
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cybersecurity curriculum will be created in
collaboration with instructors of university AI-related courses. It will be
evaluated through classroom observation, interviews with instructors, and
student surveys that measure learning outcomes, engagement, and attitude
changes. As a result, this project will add to the body of knowledge for both AI
and cybersecurity education in computer science, by evaluating the efficacy of
integrated, cross-cutting approaches and learning experiences that situate
cybersecurity content in the context of AI knowledge-building. These curricular
innovations will also have broader impacts through the creation and
dissemination of open resources that can be used by other educators. Moreover, a
computing curriculum that stresses social impact (by including, for example,
harm mitigation) can improve retention and spark interest among students from
traditionally underrepresented groups. Finally, educational strategies for risk
assessment and vulnerability analysis in the classroom will be evaluated for
their usefulness and potential as models for practices within real-world AI
design teams and will provide insights into strategies for better synergy
between AI and cybersecurity in practical settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy
Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations
between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The
SaTC program aligns with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development
Strategic Plan and the National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and
preserve the growing social and economic benefits of cyber systems while
ensuring security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.