* 2115107
* CICI: UCSS: Towards Secure and Usable Push Notification Authentication for Collaborative Scientific Infrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Nitesh Saxena, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,934.00

Second factor (2FA) or passwordless authentication based on notifications pushed
to a user's personal device (e.g., a phone) that the user can simply approve (or
deny) has become widely popular due to its convenience, especially to protect
scientific resources at Universities and similar organizations. This project is
studying the premise that the effortlessness of this approach gives rise to a
fundamental design vulnerability arising from concurrent login sessions (one
initiated by the user and the other initiated by the attacker), and then
redesigning push-based authentication systems that can counter the identified
vulnerability without degrading the overall usability of the approach. The
proposed new design attempts to address the concurrent login attacks by
establishing a unique binding between the user’s browser session and the push
notification.

The research consists of three inter-related activities: (1) formalization and
study of a fundamental vulnerability against standard push notification
authentication schemes; (2) design and implementation of low-effort push-based
authentication schemes that can defeat the identified vulnerability without
undermining the usability; and (3) formal studies of the proposed new push-based
authentication schemes, conducted in lab settings and field environments. The
developed resilient push authentication system designs are expected to offer an
improved level of protection, accessibility and usability to everyday users in
scientific and collaborative settings. The research prototypes are expected to
be of broader value in future research on building resilient and usable
authentication services in practice. The project is emphasizing technology
transfer by working with major players in the push-based authentication domain.
The proposed research is being integrated with educational activities in the
form of advanced curriculum development and student mentoring in the broad
domains of Authentication and Human-Computer Interaction, and the involvement of
high school and K-12 students and minority populations are broadening the reach
of the project.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.