* 2115147
* Group Identification Under Stress: A Comparative Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Thomas, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,608.00

This study investigates how one localized segment of an advantaged group
understands its position in the societal context in an era in which general
views of that position may be changing. Theory and past research suggest that
people’s ideas are influenced by the major social, political, and economic
events through which they live, and that people’s sense-making tends to vary by
region and locality. In this research, members of the target group are
interviewed to investigate their understandings of their position and their
associated thought processes. Findings from this project will help to develop a
more nuanced view of the regional group studied, and in particular will aid
those designing practices to mitigate undesirable effects of differences in
opportunities. Honors undergraduate students will assist in data collection,
helping to build the methodological skills of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data for this project come from in-depth
interviews of 150 members of the advantaged group, divided between two
locations: one moderately sized city and one town. Sampling follows a purposive
design to maximize the range of interviewees’ contexts and relevant experiences.
Data are analyzed using flexible coding and standard software for analyzing
interview and qualitative data. This project is jointly funded by the Sociology
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.