* 2115200
* CIF: Small: Secure and Fast Federated Low-Rank Recovery from Few Column-wise Linear, or Quadratic, Projections
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Namrata Vaswani, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 564,500.00

Large-scale usage of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, smartphones and
surveillance cameras has resulted in huge amounts of geographically distributed
data in current times. This naturally leads to questions of algorithm design for
efficient processing and inference on this data. There is a need to compress
(sketch) this data before it can be stored, processed, or transmitted. At the
other extreme, in projection-imaging settings, such as magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), computed tomography (CT), Fourier ptychography, or sub-
diffraction imaging, data is acquired one sample at a time, making the process
very slow. In this scenario as well, data may be distributed, e.g., for a
jointly reconstructed functional MR images of different human subjects, with
scans that may have been acquired at different hospitals around the country. In
many of these settings, privacy concerns dictate that the acquired measurements
need to be processed in a federated manner. Moreover, the distributed nature of
the data necessitates the design of secure approaches that are robust to attacks
by potentially malicious nodes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both efficient sketching
and fast dynamic projection imaging require the ability to recover the true
signal or image sequence from highly undersampled measurements. Since the early
work on compressed sensing (CS), sparsity and structured sparsity assumptions
have been exploited very fruitfully for both type of problems. However, there is
limited literature on the use of the low-rank (LR) assumption on signal
sequences, and almost none that theoretically analyzes the resulting approaches.
This project develops fast, sample-efficient, and federated (private and
communication-efficient) algorithms for provably correct subspace learning and
low-rank matrix recovery from few column-wise independent linear, or quadratic
projections. Extensions to LR plus sparse (LR+S) recovery are also examined. It
should be noted that this problem setting is very different from other well-
investigated LR recovery problems such as multivariate regression (due to the
use of different independent measurement matrices for each signal), LR matrix
sensing, or LR matrix completion. The team is investigating the design of
Gradient Descent (GD) based solutions that are guaranteed, with high
probability, to recover an n x q rank-r matrix from m independent linear
projections of each of its q columns with m just large enough to satisfy mq &gt;
C (n+q) r^2 approximately, and that converge geometrically to the true matrix.
Furthermore, this project designs novel secure algorithms that are robust to
Byzantine nodes for the above classes of problems. This effort is expected to
lead to newer solution approaches and analysis techniques, since commonly used
assumptions such as strongly convex cost functions and i.i.d. measurements do
not hold in this setting. Finally, this project partially supports the new
CyMathKids initiative, whose goal is to provide sustained year-long support and
extension in Mathematics to grade-school students from under-funded school
districts in Des Moines, Iowa. It is intended to fill some of the academic
achievement gaps between disadvantaged students and advantaged ones, and do so
while the gaps are still small: the pilot phase focuses on elementary students
with a plan to follow the same students through the school
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.