* 2115293
* SRS RN: Sustainable and Equitable Urban Stream Corridors: Improving aesthetic, social, water quality, and ecological values of urban watersheds to achieve downstream rural benefits
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Brian Bledsoe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,989.00

Urban watersheds and stream corridors export large amounts of pollutants to
downstream rivers. These pollutants include pesticides, trash, and excessive
concentrations of sediment and nutrients. These urban non-point source
pollutants increase the cost of treating drinking water downstream and
contribute to algal blooms in lakes, reservoirs, and estuaries. Many cities are
rethinking their goals for urban stream corridors and revising landscape plans
and building codes accordingly. Some cities have redeveloped urban waterways as
visual, recreational, and social amenities and have improved downstream water
quality in the process. This exploratory project asks: What are alternative
urban stream corridor management paradigms that would provide a wider range of
ecosystem services for a broader spectrum of the community and improve
downstream water quality? What are the social, regulatory, and engineering
impediments to alternative paradigms?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse core team
will recruit urban stormwater managers and stakeholder groups to come together
to re-imagine urban stream corridors that can provide a wider range of valuable
ecosystem services to a wider spectrum of urban residents and improve the
function of downstream rural aquatic systems. The ultimate goal is to develop a
process by which a broad cast of actors and stakeholders come together to
develop new paradigms for urban stream management that provide equitable
delivery of ecosystem services to local and downstream residents. This planning
grant will lay the groundwork for this new paradigm by facilitating discussions,
creating collaborative scientific networks, and integrating and assimilating
data relevant to urban stream corridor management. Urban stream problems involve
many intertwined hydrologic, ecologic, engineering, social, economic, and
political issues, and this effort will test approaches for bridging disciplinary
divides in communication, perception, and
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.