* 2115309
* MRI: MRI: Acquisition of a X-ray Machine at Chicago Botanic Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Marcello De Vitis, Chicago Horticultural Society
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 157,550.00

An award is made to the Chicago Botanic Garden (CBG) to purchase a cabinet x-ray
machine to support research on seed biology and ecology for applications in
ecosystem conservation and restoration. The x-ray machine is critically
important for expanding the scope and impact of direct conservation activities,
which provide diverse and broad benefits to society. Such activities include
seed banking of globally imperiled plant taxa and plants of the tallgrass
prairie as well as conserving and restoring native plant populations and their
habitats. Improved curation of CBG’s over 11,000 seed collections banked for
long-term conservation benefits Center for Plant Conservation and Seeds of
Success, the national native plant seed banking programs for rare plants and
restoration-relevant plants respectively. The new x-ray machine will also
enhance CBG’s educational mission. Learning about and using the machine will
improve the quality of research training for conservation professionals,
graduate students, and participants in our Science Career Continuum (SCC)
program, which engages middle school, high school, and undergraduate students
(including REU participants) in scientific research focusing on groups
historically excluded in science. Graduate students in the Plant Biology and
Conservation Program offered by CBG and Northwestern University will use it for
research, as will faculty and visiting scientists from local, regional, and
national conservation institutions, governmental agencies, and other research
institutions. Importantly, the new x-ray equipment will fill a national
infrastructure need. The facility builds much-needed capacity in Chicago and the
upper Midwest to conduct basic and applied seed-related research and to conserve
and restore native plants and their habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The x-ray
machine will enable CBG to increase its capabilities to advance knowledge in
ecology, evolution, conservation biology, restoration ecology, pollination
biology, and in conservation methods and practice. CBG studies encompass the
biology of small, fragmented plant populations; demography of both rare and
threatened native plants, and invasive plant species; plant and pollinator
responses to environmental changes; functional traits of seeds; invasive
potential of ornamental plants; genetics of seed transfer zones; and more. CBG
scientists will use the x-ray machine to assess embryo formation in seeds, test
seed viability, better model plant demography with improved measures of plant
fitness, and observe fat reserves in bees, among other uses. X-ray imagery is
both rapid and non-destructive and allows one to conduct research that would be
impossible without it – for example, measuring seed embryo characteristics and
then linking them to germination of individual seeds. Lastly the x-ray facility
will facilitate studies on improving seed banking methodology, benefiting
society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.