* 2115229
* Broad Implementation: Expanding a Successful Model of Fully Virtual Professional Learning for Afterschool Educators
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Heidi Cian, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,720,297.00

This project will scale up fully virtual or face-to-face STEM professional
development to afterschool educators in both urban and rural settings. Given
that many afterschool educators have little or no background in STEM education,
there is demand for professional development that is effective, inexpensive, and
accessible. This project will build national capacity in STEM education by
developing the STEM skills of over 1,500 educators across multiple states and
will ultimately impact over 31,000 under-represented youth in these areas. The
project will also deliver robust materials through a free open-source mechanism,
for use by educators anywhere and anytime. The project will broaden
participation in STEM by engaging community educators in the rural parts of the
nation, a critically under-represented group in STEM. It will also reach
educators from low-income urban communities across three states and seven
cities, targeted through strategic networks and partnerships, including
organizations such as the YMCA, 4-H, and the National Afterschool Association.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project is scaling the ACRES model
(Afterschool Coaching for Reflective Educators in STEM). The model humanizes the
virtual experience, making it social and engaging, and allows educators to
learn, share, and practice essential STEM facilitation skills with a focus on
making STEM relevant and introducing STEM careers to youth. In addition to
enhancing the professional STEM skills of rural and urban educators, the project
will create a national cohort of coaches with deep expertise in (i) converting
in-person activities for youth into a highly engaging, choice-rich online
format, (ii) engaging isolated informal educators in supportive professional
learning communities, and (iii) coaching foundational research-based STEM
facilitation skills that ensure these activities are pedagogically sound. A key
part of this broad implementation project involves studying how to integrate an
effective professional development program into afterschool organizations,
including the ways afterschool programs adapt the materials to be culturally
responsive to their local communities. The researchers will also study factors
contributing to the longer-term sustainability of the program. The research will
use surveys, interviews, direct observations, and case studies of participants
to provide the field with valuable insights into scaling a program in the
afterschool world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to advance new approaches to,
and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning
in informal environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for
extending access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments,
and developing understandings of deeper learning by
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.