* 2115638
* Lamont-Doherty Core Repository:  Curation, Service, Professional Development, Outreach
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Maureen Raymo, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 494,108.00

The project will support the ongoing operation of the Lamont-Doherty Core
Repository (LDCR). The LDCR contains a large collection of deep-sea cores from
every major world ocean and sea. The collection also contains seafloor dredge
samples, coral samples, and wetland and river cores. Scientists from throughout
the earth science community use the LDCR collection to study a wide range of
topics. Examples include studies of past climate variability, polar ice sheet
history, and recent ocean hypoxia. The project would support curation of the
sample collections and providing samples to the geoscience community. It would
also support improving the digital interface for online searches. The Broader
Impacts of the project would include professional development opportunities for
graduate students and undergraduates. Additional broader impacts activities
include education and outreach efforts aimed at K-12 students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks support: a) to provide for the
long-term curation and archiving of samples and cores collected by the
geoscience community in order to ensure their preservation and usefulness to
current and future generations of Earth scientists; b) to serve the needs of the
national geoscience community by fulfilling sample requests as well as providing
sample descriptions, core log measurements, and basic sedimentological,
geochemical, and geophysical analyses on materials of interest; c) to pursue new
initiatives designed to enhance the utility of the archived collections; d) to
create professional development opportunities for students and early career
scientists, including summer internships and opportunities to use state of the
art instruments; e) to continue development of outreach and educational
materials and continue educating teachers, students, and the general public
about the important role the Core Repository plays in building a better
understanding of Earth processes such as climate change, ocean acidification,
evolution, and tectonics. The intellectual merit of the Repository stems from
the use of its personnel and resources to accomplish scientific advances across
a diverse array of contemporary research topics. These topics include deep-sea
exploration, geological hazards, marine geology, tectonics, sedimentology, lake
and wetlands studies, polar region studies, geochemistry, evolution,
environmental pollution, and paleoclimatology. The Broader impact activities of
the LDCR include educational activities at all levels, an active on-line
presence, and hosting hundreds of visitors a year (thousands when the annual
Lamont Open House is counted), all of whom leave with an understanding of the
scientific and educational resources available at the LDCR as well as the NSF-
supported service role we play in the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.