* 2115040
* Collaborative Research: EAGER SaTC-EDU:  Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity: From Research to the Classroom
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Geoffrey Herman, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 80,000.00

One of the most critical security challenges of the 21st century is protecting
the cyber-physical systems that manage and control our infrastructure, vehicles,
homes, and personal devices as well as the information that they store, use and
exchange. Artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning-based tools can help
human analysts sort through large volumes of data to determine if an attack on
these systems has happened. Yet, AI components are also vulnerable to attacks,
and require development of techniques to make them more robust. This
collaborative project between the University of Maryland Baltimore County (UMBC)
and the University of Illinois addresses the research and educational aspects of
combining AI and cybersecurity. Educational and training materials will be
developed for use by college and university instructors and students and by
cybersecurity and AI professionals. These materials will address how AI can
improve security systems and how cybersecurity analytics can protect AI systems.
In addition, the project will recruit students from groups that have been
traditionally underrepresented in computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three interrelated topics. The first focuses on education and extends the
project teamâ€™s existing cybersecurity concept inventory to include relevant AI-
related concepts. Student knowledge and understanding of cybersecurity and AI
relatedness will be assessed before and after taking AI or cybersecurity
courses. Educational materials and projects will also be created to demonstrate
how AI can be applied to cybersecurity problems and how cybersecurity tools can
protect AI systems from attack. The second topic explores how the latest AI
tools can support cybersecurity tasks. The creation and maintenance of semantic
knowledge graphs of cyberthreat information will be studied and used to support
reinforcement learning systems that are better at detecting the presence of
malware in a host. The third topic focuses on finding new ways that
cybersecurity tools can protect AI systems from becoming compromised by attacks
such as data poisoning. Cyberthreat knowledge graphs and neural networks will be
used to detect and eliminate likely disinformation from data used to train AI-
based cybersecurity systems. This aspect of the project has applications beyond
cybersecurity, such as countering disinformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program,
which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case
specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.