* 2115004
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Teaching High School Students about Cybersecurity and Artificial Intelligence Ethics via Empathy-Driven Hands-On Projects
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Tom Yeh, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2024
* USD 60,999.00

Empathy, a unique human capacity to think from others' perspectives and feel for
others, is an essential skill that will not be replaced by automation. While
empathy is valued, there have been serious concerns about its absence in
technology development. This project seeks to address that gap by developing
hands-on labs to train high school students and to increase their empathy of
others so that they can identify cybersecurity and artificial intelligence (AI)
ethics issues. The hands-on labs developed in this project will be made publicly
available so schools or teachers may freely use them. These labs, workshops, and
summer camps will improve high school students' knowledge of, as well as skills
and career interests in, cybersecurity and AI ethics. These activities will also
foster high school students' empathy for others, especially young children. This
project will help the next-generation workforce learn and apply knowledge and
skills in designing and using future technologies in a secure and ethical
manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project presents a radically different
approach to integrating cybersecurity and AI ethics education. It will use an
empathy-driven approach to teach high school students about young children who
are most vulnerable to cybersecurity and AI ethics issues. To enhance empathetic
responses to young children, the project will include real-life examples of
young children who are interacting with unethical AI or exposed to cybersecurity
risks. Specifically, this project aims to develop, deploy and evaluate hands-on
labs to train high school students and to increase their empathy of others in
the context of cybersecurity and AI ethics issues. The labs will cover a wide
variety of scenarios such as online gaming, social media, mobile apps, and smart
toys. In addition to knowledge-based measures, this project will explore the
usage of a cutting-edge non-invasive neuro-imaging technique, functional near-
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), to assess the impact of these labs on the
activation of brain regions associated with empathy in high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by a special initiative of the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to foster new, previously
unexplored, collaborations between the fields of cybersecurity, artificial
intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.