* 2115690
* Molecular regulation of Insulin signaling in nutrient stress response in Drosophila.
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2020,06/30/2024
* Jianzhong Yu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 673,366.00

Organ growth is one of the most fundamental biological processes during metazoan
development and is tightly regulated by multiple mechanisms. A key factor that
determines adult size in the fruit fly Drosophila is nutrient availability
during the larval growth phase. Reduced nutrition decreases larval growth, and
eventually the final size of an adult fly. This research project aims to
understand how animals adjust their growth rate in response to nutrient
availability. It will provide new insights into the molecular mechanisms
underlying nutrient stress response during animal development. In addition, this
project will provide a platform for broadening participation of students under-
represented in STEM fields at multiple levels. The results of this research will
be integrated into workshops, seminars, and courses for undergraduate and
graduate students, which will inspire prospective students to pursue education
and careers in biological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The insulin signaling
pathway plays critical roles in controlling cell growth, proliferation and
metabolism in response to intracellular and extracellular stimuli. In
Drosophila, PTEN mutant cells showed a strong growth advantage under nutrient
starvation conditions. Strikingly, while the increase of PTEN mutant eye size
was mainly caused by enlarged cell size under nutrient rich conditions, the
overgrowth of the PTEN mutant eye under nutrient starvation conditions was
largely due to massively increased cell number. How reduced nutrition primarily
affects the proliferation potential of PTEN mutant cells remains unclear.
Drosophila Headcase (Hdc) is a nutrient stress specific growth regulator that
regulates cell cycle progression. Hdc genetically interacts with multiple
insulin signaling pathway components. In addition, Hdc protein is phosphorylated
by Akt, a key protein kinase of the insulin signaling pathway. The central
hypothesis of this project is that Hdc functions as a novel downstream regulator
of the insulin signaling pathway and mediates PTEN regulated nutrient stress
response. This hypothesis will be tested by three specific aims: (1) define the
upstream signal that links nutritional status to Hdc growth inhibition function,
(2) investigate the molecular regulation of Hdc by Akt induced phosphorylation,
and (3) determine the role of Hdc in PTEN mediated nutrient stress response. The
proposed research is expected to reveal novel molecular architecture of the
insulin signaling pathway in nutrient stress response. This project will provide
a platform for broadening participation of students that are under-represented
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.