* 2115075
* CICI:UCSS:Improving the Privacy and Security of Data for Wastewater-based Epidemiology
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ni Trieu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 06/30/2024
* USD 499,592.00

The field of Wastewater-Based Epidemiology (WBE) collects and analyzes data from
sewage systems that relate to public health. These data include genetic and
chemical biomarkers of identity, ethnicity, behavior, consumption, pollution,
and pathogenic infections. Interest in WBE exploded recently, as researchers
turned to wastewater samples to estimate SARS-CoV-2 infection levels in local
populations and inform public health responses to the pandemic. Because data
collected from wastewater are aggregated at the population level, they are
typically assumed to be anonymous, and are therefore not subject to health
privacy or other regulatory protections. These data are most useful when shared,
yet sharing raises security and privacy issues, for individuals as well as
neighborhoods, schools and governments. The project is developing technology and
tools to support legitimate uses of WBE datasets while minimizing abuse, and it
is designing protocols for protecting individual and organizational privacy.
These tools will encourage wide participation in WBE consortia by enabling
organizations to protect their data from adverse uses, which in turn will help
improve the health of the general public and reduce morbidity and
mortality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses three key security
threats: those posed by individual queries; those posed by sharing, whether
through joint queries or large-scale association studies; and those posed by the
presence of human genetic material in wastewater samples. These threats are
mitigated by: (1) supporting secure queries on wastewaster data using
homomorphic encryption; (2) enabling federated data analysis based on secure
computation; and (3) protecting genomic privacy with differential privacy. These
components are being implemented to allow different entities to execute query
processing and train Machine Learning models on joint databases while
maintaining the privacy and format of each database. The system is being
evaluated using real-world datasets with use cases that match important threat
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.