* 2115302
* SRS RN:  Track 2:  Reimagining the Chemical Heartland:  Closing the loop on the oil-plastics-recycling nexus to forge a resilient circular economy
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Bjorn Birgisson, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The vision of this SRS RN planning grant is to explore convergent research that
develops a network to address the unique challenges faced by the “chemical
heartland” on the US Gulf Coast and reimagine how the massive petrochemical
infrastructure can be redeployed to foster a resilient, sustainable, and
circular economy. The Gulf Coast of the US is the energy hub of the nation,
comprising intricate networks that are critical to all aspects of the US society
but that are also vulnerable to climate changes, market fluctuations, economic
factors, geopolitical events, social disruptions, and other influencers that
require the establishment of sustainable regional systems. The goal over the
planning grant period will be to (1) map materials and energy flows across the
Gulf Coast and (2) through a series of workshops and stakeholder interviews,
identify fundamental scientific research priorities, technology development
gaps, possible policy interventions, workforce development needs, and
opportunities for private public partnerships that will allow the region to
reinvent itself in the face of impending disruption. The extensive reach of the
Texas A&amp;M System will be leveraged to build partnerships across the Gulf
Coast spanning academia, local government, industry, non-profits, community
organizations, and industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The target of this
planning exercise is the development of knowledge and collection of expertise
that will allow for building a team to conduct convergent research and education
leading to the establishment of a roadmap for reimagining the US Gulf Coast
region as a global leader in the creation, processing, and recycling of novel
plastics, infrastructure materials, and critical materials in a post-carbon
economy. Understanding the problem, defining testable hypotheses, identifying
areas where science and engineering research can have meaningful impact,
charting a plan for facilitating translation of scientific innovation to real
world applications, and connecting with stakeholders requires an
interdisciplinary team. The proposers have assembled a planning team to convene
regional stakeholders, refine the vision, and identify promising directions that
can be pursued through defining and establishing a full- scale Sustainable
Regional Systems Research Network effort. Examples of convergent research themes
that will be explored include: (1) sustainability and circular economy; (2)
Texas after the energy transition; (3) materials criticality; (4) resilience
after Katrina and Harvey; (5) reimagining urban landscapes. Data and methods
will be directed toward gaining detailed understanding of the current drivers,
modeling will be advanced, and theories of change will be defined across
workshops and through stakeholder interviews. The planning grant will set the
stage for subsequent convergent studies to develop generalizable theories and
outcomes that produce scalable strategies to be implemented to address
anticipated future urbanization and urban-rural needs in ways that are
environmentally, economically, and socially sustainable and equitable, with a
focus on imagined 2050 scenarios. The Texas A&amp;M System spans 11 universities
and 8 state agencies and includes a Historically Black College and University,
four Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), and two emerging HSIs. The combined
land-, sea-, and space-grant missions, tradition of serving large veteran
populations, and presence in all 254 counties of Texas uniquely positions the
proposing team to serve as the nodal group to bring together stakeholders and to
define key knowledge gaps, frame testable hypotheses, and identify specific
objectives to achieve the broader vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.