* 2115335
* SRS-RN: Land Use in Regional Sustainability Transitions: Establishing a Network of Research and Practice to Support Governance in Linked Urban and Rural Systems of Massachusetts
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* ELISABETH STODDARD, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 10/31/2023
* USD 149,873.00

The goal of this project is to promote sustainability and resilience in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts through integrated land use planning and
management. Using land for one purpose, such as energy generation, can have
implications for other purposes, such as sustainable food systems and forest
ecosystems. Regional landscapes reflect complex political, economic, social, and
cultural forces. Over time, choices made by local, state, regional, and national
actors create mosaics of land use with a range of costs and benefits. Future
land use choices will affect strategies that are essential to achieve regional
sustainability and climate resilience, such as reducing greenhouse gas
emissions; ensuring food security; supporting healthy economies and communities;
and maintaining and enhancing natural environments. However, collaboration and
coordination of land use planning and management across actors, regions, and
scales is challenging. This project will advance sustainability and climate
resilience goals in Massachusetts, support undergraduate and graduate education,
and serve as a model for integrated land use governance in other regions with
connected urban and rural communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore the challenges and opportunities of integrated governance by
investigating how land use choices mediate trade-offs, synergies, risks,
benefits, and equity among sectors, scales, and communities. To achieve this
goal, Tuler and colleagues will expand existing partnerships and lay the
foundation for a Massachusetts Integrated Landscape and Land Use Research for
Sustainability (MILLURS) Network to support integrated land use planning and
management. The Network will be comprised of diverse policymakers, civil society
stakeholders, and researchers whose work at multiple scales intersects with land
use planning in urban and rural communities. The planning grant aims to 1)
characterize the connections among governmental and civil society actors whose
efforts impact land use choices; 2) identify the structures and knowledge
systems that have common goals or are barriers to integration; 3) co-develop
models and identify measures for integrated land use governance goals; and 4)
propose a structure for future work and identify potential pilot programs,
research questions, and educational activities to accomplish in future efforts.
This work will advance the science of sustainable urban-rural regional systems
through the lens of land use by drawing together lessons emerging from the
MILLURS Network and insights from three streams of scholarship and practice:
multi-level governance; integrated knowledge systems and tools for
sustainability and resilience; and analytic-deliberative processes to support
co-learning and governance among diverse stakeholders. This project will advance
collaborative governance by initiating collaboration among sectors where
communication and coordination for governance and climate resilience is
weak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.