* 2115071
* CIF: Small: Fundamental limits in ambiguous communication
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ivan Todorov, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 182,588.00

Noise, either arising from the environment or due to inherent randomness, is an
unavoidable feature of information channels, which are used to transmit data
between two or more parties. So-called zero-error capacities of such channels
are the optimal rates at which information can be transmitted via the channel
with a zero probability of error when multiple uses of the channel are allowed.
While in practice the effects of noise change with time, the capacity theories
available until now focus mostly on the simplified picture where the successive
uses of the channel are independent. This project aims at establishing the
theoretical foundations that would allow the estimation of zero-error capacities
and closely related parameters in the state-dependent regime, where each
individual use of the channel depends on its previous uses and the current state
of the surrounding noise. It is using the developed framework to study a special
case of information channels, which are viewed as strategies for games -- called
two-prover games -- in which two players are tested by a verifier, through a
question-answer process, for the joint possession of a certain piece of
knowledge. Such games have until now been considered only in the memoryless
situation where the successive rounds of the game are played independently from
each other. The project is studying the winning rates of two-prover games, where
the players and the verifier possess memory and the rules of the game -- the
tested knowledge -- may evolve with time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the setting of
information channels, the project is defining and studying the zero-error
capacity of a channel with memory, which covers as a special case the usual
zero-error capacity of a memoryless channel as a one-shot parameter. This is
being achieved through the introduction of the confusability graph of a state-
dependent channel, while estimations and bounds for this parameter are obtained
by developing a measurable version of the well-known Lov√°sz number of a finite
graph. In the setting of two prover games, the project is developing no-
signaling correlations between players with memory, including useful subclasses
such as the class of quantum correlations, as a far-reaching generalization of
no-signaling correlations between players of games with finite question-answer
sets. This approach allows the consideration of value-separation questions and
the identification of the players' asymptotic behavior in a general framework,
allowing the application of functional analytic and operator theoretic
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.