* 2115453
* SRS RN: Convergent Innovations in Regional CirCULAR Economies (CIRCULAR)
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Weslynne Ashton, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 149,994.00

A research network organized around the goal of creating and implementing
circular economy solutions could address growing social, economic, and
environmental impacts facing regional systems. Using a case study based upon the
city of Chicago and its surrounding urban-rural linkages, research network
planning will explore the underlying system structures and interactions that
give rise to unsustainable resource consumption and waste generation. The
planning will also identify potential solutions grounded in the emerging field
of circular economy. The planning team will engage interdisciplinary researchers
and non-academic partners in a process to co-create a research agenda for
transforming regional systems towards circular economy. The group also will
explore convergent research mechanisms for the deep integration of knowledge,
methods, tools, and expertise from diverse perspectives that can advance the
study of regional circular economies. Finally, the team will devise a
collaborative platform on which the scientific community and key stakeholders
can share knowledge, translate findings, and enhance diversity and
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A planning activity will be undertaken to
analyze how different actors in a regional circular economy affect the stocks,
flows, depletion and regeneration of various types of capital, and how explicit
identification of these flows might shape potential innovations. New thinking,
technologies, and business models will be explored to tackle the circular
economy challenge from the front end of the supply chain by re-designing
products and developing resource sharing models and from the back end by closing
material loops. The creation of circular economy business opportunities,
especially in marginalized urban and rural communities, will be addressed
through convergent approaches encompassing multi-capital flows, data science,
and public policies with participatory co-design methods. This approach elevates
the knowledge and experiences of diverse participants to that of subject matter
experts so that any innovations developed will result in resource conservation
and will meet community needs. The team's community partners are leaders in
developing and implementing new models that seek to broaden the influence of
circular economy-based solutions. Throughout the efforts of this planning
activity, the importance of justice, equity, diversity and inclusion to the
project's framing of circular economy will be
emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.