* 2115489
* University of Alaska Fairbanks/Sikuliaq Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* Ethan Roth, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 89,615.00

The University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) operates R/V Sikuliaq, a 261-foot,
global class ice-capable oceanographic research vessel owned by the NSF as part
of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF) fleet. Sikuliaq provides a general-purpose
platform for multidisciplinary research missions from polar to temperate
latitudes. The ship was delivered in 2014 and has completed six years of funded
operations. UAF requests funds to purchase and install Oceanographic
Instrumentation that would be custom engineered to enhance the vessel's
capability in support of NSF-sponsored research to be undertaken on Sikuliaq in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2020, during the pandemic-shortened season,
Sikuliaq completed 134 days 124 (93%) of which were for NSF. In 2021, the vessel
is scheduled to sail 220 days with 124 (56%) days of the schedule for NSF. With
this proposal, UAF provides technical descriptions and rationale for the
acquisition of the following Oceanographic Instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;1) Solar
Radiometers $25,335 &lt;br/&gt;2) Optical Fluorometers $56,580 &lt;br/&gt;3)
EK80 Acquisition Computer $7,700 &lt;br/&gt;4) Science Kiosk Computers $7,228
&lt;br/&gt; $96,843 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.