* 2115367
* SRS RN Track 2 - Aligning upstream and downstream: increasing equity in watershed management with and for underrepresented communities
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Donna Fennell, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The goal is to plan an inclusion and equity framework to improve regional
strategies for research, planning, and water resource management thereby
increasing effective cross-community and cross-stakeholder water resources
stewardship for the Passaic River Basin (PRB). This project is working with
“upstream” Munsee Lunaape Elders and with “downstream” disenfranchised
communities, notably African American and pan-Latin American neighborhoods in
Newark (and Greater Newark) to promote the values of equity and environmental
justice. The Passaic River flows through Northern New Jersey and Southeastern
New York State encompassing ten counties, and numerous urban and peri urban
municipalities. This region was among the earliest US industrial centers, based
on a combination of waterpower, water supply, estuarine ports, all adjacent to
rapidly expanding New Yor City. Over time these activities resulted in pollution
of the urban water supply and consequent shift of water supply to areas further
upstream to areas within the basin. As a result of this pollution, the Ramapough
Turtle Clan settlement at Upper Ringwood has been twice-designated Superfund
site. 2020 EPA studies have confirmed the ongoing danger. Dangerous pollution
within the basin, disinvestment, and decline of industry have left the PRB
communities with high proportions of disadvantaged peoples living and working in
toxic and vulnerable sites. In the Newark area, pollution sources include water
pollutants of the entire Basin upstream impacting reservoirs. Downstream
industrial pollutants include dioxin discharges from a facility making
herbicides, used in making Agent Orange, and lead pipes. The vision in this
project is to enhance sustainability of the PRB and its environs through an
inclusive approach that engages the disadvantaged communities and other
stakeholders in PRB leading to remediation activities to restore the water
quality and improve quality of life for the entire community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;While the PRB upstream and downstream communities had little prior
interconnection, they are interlinked by the area’s growing urban centers that
depend on the Passaic River Basin for water supply. Aligning upstream and
downstream communities will: a) develop a community of practice centered on
equity; b) enable asset mapping of water system members; c) promote
relationships of co-learning; and d) develop a participatory, sustainable,
equity-led approach. It is this combination of shared interest in good water
quality and addressing past exclusions that provide an opportunity for
collaborative learning and shared development of approaches, notably interlinked
via The Price Institute with the Rutgers School of Environmental and Biological
Sciences (SEBS), with their Cooperative Extension (NJAES). This planning grant
will begin to cultivate a culture of stewardship among and between local
communities and interests for the health and sustainability of the water system
and ongoing connection to regional leaders. During implementation, historically
marginalized communities will increase knowledge and application of water
science, engagement, and public resource stewardship. More local research
involvement for more data inputs and insights will also improve the accuracy,
nuance, and understanding of the PRB. A community of shared research interests
will promote an ethic of greater equity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.