* 2115333
* SRS RN: Integrating Land and Sea: Building Coastal Resilience and Ecosystem Services for Sustainable Urban-Rural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Gavin Fay, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 149,314.00

Connections between coastal resources and local economies are often overlooked
when making planning and management decisions across rural and urban
communities, even though marine and near-shore ecosystems are important parts of
the economy and cultural identity of coastal communities. This Sustainable
Regional Systems Research Networks (SRS RN) project will bring an
interdisciplinary group of researchers and community stakeholders together
through a series of participatory workshops to collaboratively build solutions
to socio-environmental challenges in Massachusetts that explicitly include
connections between people and coastal environments, helping to foster a kind of
“coastal literacy” and building a collaborative research network to co-create
solutions. Examples of relevant stakeholder sectors within Massachusetts coastal
communities include fishing and offshore renewable energy. This project will
also create a community of professional learning for K-12 teachers to develop
curriculum associated with coastal literacy as it relates to community-relevant
issues in Massachusetts, providing a more inclusive approach to possible
solutions for a sustainable future. The research network will explore how a
diverse perspective, systems thinking and ways of knowing can contribute to
coastal sustainability, and will engage with coastal stakeholders who do not
normally have a voice in solutions and decisions. An important outcome of the
research network will be a model that can be generalized to other coastal areas,
showing how to leverage environmental data to integrate with complex social data
to empower communities with the literacy and agency to derive actionable
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build an inclusive
Sustainable Regional Systems Research Networks Research Network (SRS RN) to
collaboratively address socio-environmental challenges among urban and rural
communities in Massachusetts. This RN will leverage linkages between human
systems and coastal environments, acknowledging the inherent uncertainty and
tradeoffs across environmental, social, and economic interests. It will bring
together a diverse and interdisciplinary group of researchers, educators,
policymakers and community stakeholders through a sequence of participatory
modeling workshops to surface local knowledge and needs, identify research
questions, and outline methodologies that will be used for an eventual RN Track
1 proposal. The plan is to integrate the development of the network with the
creation of a learning community to foster coastal literacy and systems
thinking, and to enable place-based socio-environmental problem-solving as it
relates to community-relevant issues. This diverse learning community will come
from across the blue and green economy to jointly develop processes and pathways
for social learning that couples human and natural coastal systems toward
effective and impactful decision-making. The RN will explore how a systems
approach to community coastal literacy and an ecosystem services approach to
connecting coastal, rural, and urban communities can contribute to
sustainability-focused governance and decision-making that promotes resilience
and robustness in the face of community-relevant change. It will explore how
different scales of governance and decision space affect the ability to improve
the sustainability and resilience of natural-human systems. It is anticipated
that the process of advancing coastal literacy through participatory model
building will result in open tools, systemic educational resources and
processes, a model framework to guide convergence among disciplines in social,
environmental, and economic research, and design of resources. Assets developed
through this process will serve the needs of communities facing the complex
environmental and governance issues that emerge from the confluence of land use,
economic and demographic trends, gaps in cultural funds of knowledge, and
inadequate access to education and social services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.