* 2115745
* Collaborative Research: Brittle-plastic deformation, fluid-rock interaction, and extensional reactivation  along Laramide thrust faults in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, Colorado
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Rahl, Washington and Lee University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 55,717.00

This collaborative project investigates the deformation history of structures
involved in formation of the Rocky Mountains and Rio Grande rift in southern
Colorado. Through detailed fieldwork and laboratory analyses, the investigators
will evaluate the timing and directions of motion along fault zones and the role
of fluids in weakening these zones and facilitating tectonic activity. These
results will help geoscientists better understand how rock strength affects
fundamental mountain-building processes. This project will directly support
thesis work for three Colorado State University graduate students and three
Washington and Lee University undergraduate students, who will disseminate
research results via publications and conference presentations. The study area
in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains borders Great Sand Dunes National Park, which
receives over half a million visitors each year, and the investigators will
communicate research results with the park geologist to help provide additional
geological context for educational outreach. This project will also support
three years of an interdisciplinary student-led research seminar on the Sangre
de Cristo Mountains within the Colorado State University Department of
Geosciences. This seminar will involve at least 15 students (graduate and
undergraduate) and 7 faculty members from across the Department, exposing
students to a highly interdisciplinary approach to research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project area in the Sangre de Cristo Mountains exposes some of
the deepest Laramide and Rio Grande rift structural levels in the Rocky Mountain
region, offering a rare opportunity to investigate deformation near the brittle-
plastic transition. The investigators hypothesize that fluid-rock interactions
weakened faults in this region, allowing contractional deformation to take place
at relatively low stresses during the Laramide orogeny and extensional
reactivation to occur on structures not optimally oriented for failure during
development of the Rio Grande rift. Widespread shortening across the Laramide
orogen may have been facilitated by fluid-related weakening, and extensional
reactivation of thrust faults may represent a fundamental component of orogenic
collapse. The investigators will test their hypotheses using a multidisciplinary
research approach that includes geologic mapping, microstructural analysis,
electron backscatter diffraction, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy,
stable isotope analysis, fluid inclusion analysis, geochemistry, and
geo/thermochronology. Data generated in this project will provide key
constraints on the stresses, temperatures, deformation mechanisms, and fluid
involvement associated with intraplate shortening near the strongest part of the
crust. This research will also shed light on the relations between Laramide
contraction and Rio Grande rift extension and the role of shear zone geometry
and rheology on extensional reactivation, providing a framework for
understanding extensional reactivation of thrusts in other
orogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.