* 2115025
* EAGER: SaTC-EDU: Transformative Educational Approaches to Meld Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity Mindsets
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Theron Hendrix, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,941.00

Society is becoming increasingly dependent on technology that is susceptible to
abuse by bad actors. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and cybersecurity are, like
much of computer science, extremely technical fields that continue to advance at
rapid rates both in knowledge and application. Computer science often allows a
small team to leverage its members' expertise through the use of plug-and-play
solutions that require little or no user intervention. In contrast, it has
become obvious that reliance on a limited number of highly skilled people does
not work as well for cybersecurity . This inadequacy appears to be addressable
through the application of AI concepts and by training individuals who are
expert in both AI and cybersecurity. However, the amount of time, focus, and
effort required to become highly proficient in both AI and cybersecurity fields
is a significant barrier to this solution. This project strives to explore
potentially transformative educational approaches in order to prepare a more
robust workforce at the intersection of AI and cybersecurity. Specifically, the
project team proposes a collaborative, group-based, and hands-on course that
combines students with a specific interest and existing background in either the
AI or cybersecurity domain with students with the complementary background. This
educational approach will produce students who share a combined AI and
cybersecurity mindset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental assumption of this
project is that students will rarely need to apply a deep, technical
understanding of the AI field within the cybersecurity domain. As such, a more
viable and succinct approach to producing a workforce competent in both domains
is to focus on expanding students’ toolkits and providing them reference-
anchors. This approach will enable students to more efficiently collaborate with
domain-specific experts and across domain boundaries when they enter the
workforce. In order to explore this approach, the project team proposes to
develop a course directed at students with backgrounds in AI or cybersecurity.
The course will combine elements from problem-based learning , studio-based
learning, and group-based learning. This approach will cultivate students with a
melded AI and cybersecurity mindset even though they may lack technical depth in
their non-focus domain. This mindset or awareness will prepare these students to
enter the workforce and collaborate across technical disciplines. While a future
goal may be combined AI and cybersecurity “natives” it is important first to
evaluate the more easily attainable option of instilling technical awareness and
a multi-perspective approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
a special initiative of the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program to
foster new, previously unexplored, collaborations between the fields of
cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and education. The SaTC program aligns
with the Federal Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the
National Privacy Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social
and economic benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.