* 2115512
* Effects of Financial Sanctions in the Criminal Justice System
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Michael Mueller-Smith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,544.00

The use of legal financial obligations, colloquially referred to as financial
sanctions, imposed on individuals who come into contact with the criminal
justice system is widespread and growing in the U.S. criminal justice system.
These fees and fines could generate serious social and economic consequences,
particularly among low-income populations who are unable to pay them on time.
These costs may outweigh the intended benefits, such as deterring crime,
compelling court appearances, and making restitution, of financial sanctions.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the economic and social consequences of
financial sanctions in the justice system on affected individuals and their
families. Since fines vary widely across jurisdictions and stages of the justice
system to which they are applied, this is a multi-state project that will
leverage multiple natural experiments across a variety of states to document
potential heterogeneous impacts and understand mediating
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this, researchers will use the
Criminal Justice Administrative Record System (CJARS), combined with individual-
level demographic and economic data held by the U.S. Census Bureau. Furthermore,
the project will link individuals to their family members to assess spillover
effects on their spouses and children, significantly improving the current
understanding of financial sanctions. To measure the impact of financial,
researchers will leverage natural experiments from the enactment of a variety of
policies on different financial sanctions across various states, using a sharp
regression discontinuity for causal identification. Outcomes of interest are
labor market outcomes and criminal behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.