* 2115130
* CICI: UCSS: Helix++: Securing Open Science Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Anh Nguyen-Tuong, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2024
* USD 498,021.00

The Helix++ project’s goal is to use recently developed, promising cybersecurity
research results to secure open-science platforms. Securing these open-science
platforms is vital because compromise of research infrastructure can have severe
consequences, including the delay of critical research, corruption of research
results, theft of intellectual property, and exposure of personally identifiable
information. Beyond providing researchers customized, secure packages of widely
used open software, the Helix++ project will provide insights and directions for
future research and strategies for protecting critical cyber infrastructure.
Using two existing operational open-science platforms at the University of
Virginia, the project will investigate the interaction of technical and policy
issues which are fundamental to infrastructure
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The open-source Helix++ project improves the
security posture of open science platforms by applying cutting-edge
cybersecurity techniques to diversify and harden software automatically. A
distinguishing feature of Helix++ is that it does not require source code or
build artifacts. It operates directly on software in binary form—even stripped
executables and libraries. This feature is key as rebuilding applications from
source is a time-consuming and often frustrating process. Helix++ enables the
rapid generation and deployment of secure containers and virtual machines,
wherein various applications and libraries are transformed to incorporate the
Helix++ protections. Diversification breaks the software monoculture and makes
attacks harder to execute as information needed for a successful attack will
have changed unpredictably. Diversification also forces attackers to customize
an attack for each target instead of attackers crafting an exploit that works
reliably on all similarly configured targets. Hardening directly targets key
attack classes. The combination of diversity and hardening provides defense-in-
depth, as well as a moving target defense. Helix++ is evaluated on two open
science platforms to demonstrate its efficacy and
usability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.