* 2115007
* A Neuroethological Approach to Understanding Cerebellar Function
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Nathaniel Sawtell, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2025
* USD 700,000.00

Many breakthroughs in neuroscience have come from studies of “champion” animal
species. For example, much of what we know about hearing has come from studies
of owls and bats, animals whose survival depends on capturing their meals in
darkness. Fundamental knowledge about the electrical signals through which
neurons communicate with one another came from studies of squid, where electric
signals travel through “wires” that are particularly large, enabling fast
reactions that help the squid to avoid becoming a meal (and making them easy for
neuroscientists to study). Here, the PI will apply this straightforward logic to
understand a region of the brain that has long fascinated neuroscientists but
whose function remains mysterious. Though relatively small in size, the
cerebellum contains ~3/4 of all the neurons in the human brain. Moreover,
diseases of the cerebellum cause profound disorders of movement as well as
emotion and thought, including autism. Developing treatments requires a better
understanding of the normal functioning of the cerebellum. To achieve this, the
project proposes to study the cerebellum in the animal in which it the largest
and most highly-developed—a group of fish from Africa known as the mormyrids.
The cerebellum is so large in mormyrids that their brain is even larger (for
their body size) than the human brain. This will help them to build models of
how the cerebellum works, down to the details of its microscopic structure.
Because this microscopic structure is extremely similar across animals, our work
may reveal fundamental principles that apply directly to
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though the crystalline circuitry of the cerebellum
has long inspired efforts to link neural circuit structure and function, our
understanding of its function remains restricted to a few select cases, such as
classical reflex conditioning. This projects addresses this challenge by
applying integrated experimental and computational approaches to studies of the
vertebrate group with the proportionately largest and most highly developed
cerebellum--weakly electric mormyrid fish. Preliminary studies of a common
mormyrid species, Peter’s elephant-nose fish, have identified a region of the
cerebellum, known as C1, dedicated to controlling the finger-like chin
appendage, or schnauzenorgan, for which these fish are named. The highly-mobile
schnauzenorgan is densely covered with electroreceptors and is vital for the
foraging behavior of this species. Remarkably, C1 output neurons project
directly to the brainstem motor neurons that innervate schnauzenorgan muscles
and control its movement. This concise circuitry contrasts with the complex and
highly distributed paths via which the mammalian cerebellum contributes to
commonly studied behaviors such as locomotion or reaching. Rapid progress is
expected due to the inherent advantages and ecological validity of this system
coupled with the tightly integrated experimental and computational modeling
approaches. On the experimental side, the PI will leverage new methods for high-
resolution behavioral analysis and large-scale neural recordings in freely
swimming fish during foraging. Machine learning tools, neural circuit models,
and biomechanical models will allow us to identify the computational problems
involved in sensorimotor control of the schnauzenorgan and to develop and test
hypotheses regarding how they may be solved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.