* 2115117
* Marine Sediment Sampling Facility (MARSSAM) Oceanographic Instrumentation:  Acquisition of a Vibracorer
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Mitchell Lyle, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,982.00

The Marine Sediments Sampling Group (MARSSAM) located at Oregon State University
requests funds for the purchase of a vibracore system. MARSSAM provides the full
gamut of coring services to the University National Oceanographic Laboratory
System (UNOLS) community, from surface sampling to piston cores of up to ~25 m
in length. MARSSAM coordinates with principal investigators (PIs) with research
cruise time supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and other federal
agencies, determining what equipment is necessary for the accomplishment of
scientific goals, and ensuring that equipment is compatible with vessel
capabilities. Central to this mandate, MARSSAM adapts coring technology to the
vessels of the Academic Research Fleet (ARF) requested by science PIs so that
they can recover the sediments needed for their research. MARSSAM designs,
maintains, and rebuilds coring equipment, supervising coring and meta-data
collection at sea, and training the science party in the collection of shipboard
physical properties data and core splitting. MARSSAM technicians also provide
logistical support needed to cycle coring gear to and from globally distributed
research vessels as well as to return cores to NSF marine geology archives post
cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibracoring System $126,222 &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present
proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF
19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and
its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic
research projects (which individually undergo separate review by the relevant
research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-
use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab
access to working, calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost
of that research, and expanding the base of potential
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.