* 2115457
* SRS-RN: Planning for a Network to Address Pressures, Responses and Sustainability Intersections across a Growing, Innovative, and Dry State
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Cross, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Colorado, like many dry states in the western U.S., faces significant
sustainability challenges from population growth, technological innovation,
climate change, and competing development preferences and priorities. These
challenges span the connected urban and rural areas within the region. While
many researchers, practitioners, and communities in Colorado are working to
understand and address these challenges, efforts are fragmented. Solving
regional sustainability challenges requires an approach that understands regions
as nested layers of natural, built, social, public, and government networks. The
aim of this planning grant is to improve the ability to share knowledge,
resources, and data across the public, private, and non-profit sectors in all
phases of the research, leading to a more sustainable and regional system in
Colorado. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong, connected, and coordinated cross-
sector (university, government, industry, non-profit), and transdisciplinary
network is needed to improve the capacity of groups already working on
sustainability challenges in Colorado. During the twelve-month planning period,
the network will use a survey instrument to better understand the connectivity,
collaboration, diversity, inclusivity, perceived opportunities, barriers, and
the range of sustainability work being done across Colorado in the existing
network. The second step will be to host workshops focused on understanding past
and current sustainability activities, identifying which pressures are most
important to different communities, and how these issues define relationships at
various spatial scales. The cross-sector, interdisciplinary workshops aims to 1)
expand existing network ties to include additional communities and minority
serving institutions; 2) build knowledge and trust across diverse stakeholders;
and 3) formulate a set of research objectives, methods, and scope for the
development of a Track 1 Sustainable Regional Systems Research Networks (SRS-RN)
proposal. Finally, researchers will conduct network and economic analyses
designed to assess broad inequalities in resources and connections across the
state to better understand barriers and inequities across various communities.
Network analyses will also examine how connections across disciplines, or lack
thereof, are impeding development of a transdisciplinary research agenda The
workshops and analyses will focus scientific researchers and communities in
conversations meant to identify the necessary social and technical platforms
needed to break through these barriers, and to strengthen and empower the
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.