* 2115149
* RAPID: Decentralization and Privacy for Secure Vaccination Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Ramesh Raskar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 03/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The objective of this project is to develop and deploy a privacy-protecting,
user-centric, digital solution to enhance vaccination coordination and to create
a privacy-preserving, data-aggregation platform for researchers. The project
will enable a decentralized, end-to-end protocol that spans the entire vaccine
user journey, from enrollment in phased vaccination to long term monitoring of
adverse effects. The team will consider health equity from the perspective of
trust, privacy, and inclusivity. Current systems for vaccination coordination
focus on a single part of the system or require a smartphone for every vaccine
recipient which aggravates the equity concerns. This project addresses such
concerns through an array of user-facing solutions: QR codes on paper
vaccination cards which can operate offline as well as mobile phone apps without
live internet access. The standardized data sharing system consolidates both
population-wide and individualized information in a single platform to increase
the speed and effectiveness of the intervention, vaccination in this case, so
that it can be monitored and analyzed. This enables a bird’s eye view of the
cyber-physical-social ecosystem without creating a surveillance state. The
project will push the boundaries of data-driven predictive analytics for
pandemic response and pandemic preparedness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to provide a user-centric
solution that can aid researchers and planners of the current and future
pandemics. In this project, the user’s journey and the relevant de-identified
data collection is divided into four parts: (i) Digitally enhanced enrollment
system for phased vaccination using digitally signed coupons, (ii) A privacy-
preserving QR code based vaccination card, and a smartphone app to interface
with vaccination sites without revealing any personally identifiable information
to centralized servers, (iii) Proof of vaccination in a tamper-evident and
secure manner available with digitally signed offline credentials, (iv)
Monitoring and alert systems for adverse reactions that enable users to upload
their symptoms in a cryptographically authenticated manner. The project involves
building data aggregation and data dissemination solutions with varying levels
of granularity for population-scale and individual scale analysis. For
aggregation, to preserve the privacy of early contributors, the project will use
a new generation of techniques based on secure multi-party computation. For
dissemination, the project will use Split Learning and Split Inference methods
invented by the investigator at MIT that may be able to better address privacy-
utility trade-offs. Vaccination data is critical at all three levels: (i)
logistics and monitoring of vaccines (ii) vaccination workflows and (iii) user
experience before and after vaccination. This project will generate tools for an
efficient data gathering monitoring system for future pandemics and emergencies
of a similar nature without invasion of personal freedoms. The systems and
methods are being built by a consortium of epidemiologists, engineers, data
scientists, digital privacy evangelists, professors, and researchers from
various institutions. Such a diverse collaboration is essential to minimize
disruption to the existing vaccination system and ensure a smooth vaccination
roll-out across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.