* 2115405
* SRS RN: Multiscale RECIPES (Resilient, Equitable, and Circular Innovations with Partnership and Education Synergies) for Sustainable Food Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kiho Kim, American University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2026
* USD 15,000,000.00

Forty percent of food produced in the US is never eaten. Outside of contributing
to a complex waste stream that creates negative environmental and ecological
impacts, this waste contains lost resources used in production, lost economic
costs to businesses and households, and lost nutritional value. However, food
that would otherwise be wasted can be repurposed as a resource by, for example,
creating strategies to prevent losses, increasing food access by diverting high-
quality surplus to food-insecure communities, recycling nutrients back into
agricultural production, and converting food wastes into bioenergy that powers
regional infrastructure. The U.S. aims to halve waste of food by 2030, an
ambitious goal that will require research to generate new knowledge and
partnerships with communities, businesses, and governments to put this knowledge
into action. This Sustainable Regional Systems Research Network (SRS RN) will
carry out convergent research to understand how and why food is wasted in
regions across the U.S. and then to create solutions that can minimize and
sustainably manage waste. Research will be co-created with a coalition of
stakeholders in policy, industry, municipalities, non-profit, and business
sectors to translate implementable strategies, inform policy, and guide best
practices across the food system. In parallel, a comprehensive educational
platform built on “student science” will be used to establish an undergraduate
food system journal, educate K-12 students, partner with minority and disability
serving institutions to engage students in research experiences, train the next
generation of sustainability workforce, and foster public engagement and
understanding through public outreach and curriculum. If successful, the
Multiscale RECIPES for Sustainable Food Systems SRS RN will aid in the
development of new infrastructure and protect the Nation’s food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SRS RN will assemble a convergent team of
researchers, students, and stakeholders to co-create novel data, models,
theories of change, and generalizable solutions to: 1) understand the drivers
and interactions within regional food systems that lead to waste; 2) advance
solutions that will enhance the sustainability, equity, and resilience of the
food system; and 3) integrate siloed knowledge to create convergent research and
systems change. This SRS RN will create new methods for regional systems to
aggregate, curate, and visualize data across scales and regional contexts. This
data will be used to model food system interactions and quantify consequential
changes in sustainability, equity, and resilience and to generate generalizable
typologies for analyzing sustainable regional systems under different scenarios.
The transformative science in this project includes new approaches to collect
and integrate data that elucidate underlying drivers of wasted food at multiple
scales, from advanced imaging science that estimates plate waste of a single
individual and agricultural models that compute on-farm losses, to community-
engaged research that measures food donation potential for an entire region and
models that estimate food and waste flows spanning the national economy. A new
multiscale modeling framework will then use these data to evaluate food system
resilience, equity, and sustainability and the potential for new technology-,
policy-, education-, and stakeholder-driven solutions to improve these outcomes.
A human-centered design framework will be applied to facilitate these
collaborations and to study the mechanisms that effectively foster convergence.
A cross-section of diverse regions will be used to create typologies that
classify organizations and contexts that can then be generalized to predict co-
benefits and tradeoffs across different regional systems and the linked
infrastructure, ecology, governance, cultural, and economic systems therein.
Education activities will be integrated with, be guided by, and amplify outputs
of the RECIPIES research programs. The network will engage a broad range of
academic audiences, providing knowledge and research skills to transform public
understanding of food systems. Network research, education, and engagement
activities will be evaluated using methods from network science, human-centered
design, and mixed-methods approaches, serving as a guide for future research
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.