* 2115827
* Transport of Virus-like Nanoparticles through Mucus
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ashis Mukhopadhyay, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 333,135.00

Covid-19 is the disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus
2 (SARS-CoV-2). This virus, similar to many others, is nearly spherical in shape
with a core of protein-nucleic acid complex surrounded by an envelope of a
protein-decorated lipid bilayer. After landing on the respiratory tract surface,
viruses need to navigate through a dense, viscous, and heterogeneous mucus
network, which is under constant beating of cilia that try to clear the trapped
virus away. This experimental project will use soft, patchy nanoparticles as
virions, gel-forming mucin molecules as the mucus barrier, and a shear flow as
the beating of cilia. The model system will capture the pertinent underlying
physics and generate reproducible results that will reveal how transport across
mucus layers is affected by the softness of the particles, particle interactions
with the model mucus molecules and fluctuations in the state of the model mucus
molecular network. The research will lead to a better understanding of how air-
borne viruses interact with the mucus membrane, which will help fight against
diseases. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in an
interdisciplinary field that will prepare them to explore a wide range of career
opportunities. Middle and high school students will be trained to participate in
STEM competitions with the research team serving as a coach for the Science
Olympiad Tournaments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
investigate the transport behavior of soft patchy nanoparticles (NPs) through
mucin gels and solutions subjected to constant sliding velocity.
Core(gold)-(gel)shell NPs will be used with diameters from 50 nm to 150 nm,
elastic moduli from 0.1 kPa to 10 kPa, and surfaces functionalized with amine,
carboxylic acid, and poly(ethylene glycol). The synchronized beating of cilia
will be mimicked by applying a triangular shear wave of physiologically relevant
frequencies from 2 Hz to 20 Hz. The experiments will measure the time-dependence
of mean-square-displacement over four decades in dynamic range by using
fluctuation correlation spectroscopy (FCS). Diffusion at sub-micrometer length
scale as measured by FCS will be compared with transport through physiologically
relevant thicker mucus layer by a capillary penetration experiment. Phase
modulated ellipsometry, rheology, and dynamic light scattering experiments will
be performed to quantify the particle-matrix interaction, viscoelasticity of the
network, and its fluctuation. The research will address the fundamental question
of how the nano-scale dynamics couples with the structure, rheology, and barrier
property of mucus. From a broader perspective, the knowledge gained will be
relevant to better understand the transport of particles and macromolecules in
crowded biological systems, such as cytoplasm, microbial biofilms, and
extracellular matrix, as well as in various engineering fluids, including gels,
emulsions, and jammed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.