* 2115614
* Urban Youth Participation in Community and Citizen Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Kevin Cuff, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,429.00

Environmental Protectors is a four-year project based at the University of
California at Berkeley’s Lawrence Hall of Science. The project is designed to
explore the educational and developmental impact of an informal science
education programming model that features Community and Citizen Science (CCS)
activities for youth of color residing in urban communities. The project is
grounded in hypothesis that CCS-focused experiences result in learning outcomes
that better position youth of color to more effectively engage in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) related educational,
occupational, and civic activities. Each year, in three economically challenged
urban communities located throughout the country, youth of color between the
ages of 14 and 18 will participate in month-long summer or semester-long
afterschool programs. These programs will feature CCS-related activities that
include collection, analysis, interpretation and presentation of data that
addresses local, pressing environmental quality concerns, such as soil lead
contamination and air particulate matter pollution. The project will use a mix
of qualitative and quantitative data collection and analysis to assess the
impact of youth engagement in these CCS activities. Overall, through its
implementation the project aims to generate information useful in nationwide
efforts designed to identify effective strategies and approaches that contribute
to increasing STEM understanding and interest among youth of
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research is guided by the following
questions: A) What are ways to increase STEM engagement among those who have
typically been underrepresented in Community and Citizen Science (CCS) research
projects in particular and STEM in general? B) When youth are engaged in CCS,
what outcomes are observed related to their science agency and science activism?
What other unanticipated outcomes are observed related to benefits of
participation and learning? C) How does science activism develop in youth
participating in CCS?; and D) How do differences in program implementation
impact youth outcomes. In particular, the project explores the manner in which
particular CCS activities (e.g., project design, data analysis and
interpretation, data presentation) impact youth “Science Agency,” defined as a
combination of constructs that include Science Identity (i.e., sense of
themselves as science thinkers), Science Value (i.e., awareness of the potential
benefits of applying scientific practices to addressing critical community
health and environmental issues) and Science Competency Beliefs (i.e., belief of
themselves as competent science practitioners) and “Science Activism,” defined
as a combination of perceived behavioral control and personal salience. Through
its execution the project will refine a theory of learning that makes explicit
connections between these constructs. Information derived from the execution of
the project will contribute to deeper understanding of the potential for using
of CCS projects as a key component of science education environments in urban
areas and in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice
project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which
seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the
design and development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide
multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning
experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning
in informal environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM
in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.