* 2115275
* SRS-RN Planning Grant: Integrated and Convergent Sea Level Adaptation for Urban and Rural Systems in the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Regions
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Murat Erkoc, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,577.00

The proposed planning grant will address the challenge of responding to sea
level rise (SLR) in linked urban-rural systems located along the Gulf of Mexico
Coastal Region (GCR). Urban and rural areas in the GCR are part of a
geographical continuum composed of interdependent nodes connected by synergistic
linkages, wherein the urban areas depend on the rural areas for natural
resources and the rural areas depend on the urban areas for services. SLR
threatens the links that bind urban and rural communities together in the GCR.
Compared with much of the world, the rate of SLR is quite high across much of
the GCR and its landscape is a relatively low-lying coastal plain. Moreover,
disadvantaged minority groups compose a large fraction of both the urban and
rural population in this region, yielding a high degree of social vulnerability.
The typical SLR response strategies in the GCR are often practiced
differentially across urban versus rural areas. The aim of this planning grant
is to build a consolidated SLR adaptation strategy that enables urban and rural
communities to collaboratively sustain the natural and physical infrastructure
that links them together. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed approach will be
driven by convergent research of experts and by co-production of knowledge and
ideas from stakeholder engagement. The project team will bring together an
inclusive and diverse group of researchers, community leaders, and policy makers
who do not normally interact. This group will create convergent research outputs
and foster stakeholder relationships to build a collaborative Track 1
Sustainable Regional Systems Research Networks (SRS-RN) proposal. The execution
of this effort will follow a trajectory with three phases: (1) an on-line high-
performance charrette will be used to coordinate partnering researchers and
stakeholders, and assemble the foundations of the network, (2) an in-person
charrette will be used to co-produce research priorities and hypotheses for the
proposed SRS-RN, (3) a concentered expert workshop will integrate these efforts
and synthesize the output products. This planning grant is a unique opportunity
to (a) coalesce interdisciplinary teams, focus on the commonalities at the
urban-rural linkages, (b) identify priorities, needs, and incentives of diverse
stakeholders, (c) build knowledge and trust across these communities, and (d)
formulate the research objectives, hypotheses, and methods for an innovative
research network structure. Network activities will focus on the inclusion of
minority constituencies, groups, and institutions that have been historically
excluded from the SLR response conversation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.