* 2115579
* Breaking Stereotypes through Culturally Relevant Storytelling: Optimizing Out-of-school Time STEM Experiences for Elementary-Age Girls to Strengthen their STEM Interest Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Gloria Yeomans-Maldonado, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,087,864.00

The U.S. urgently needs the perspective and knowledge of females who are Latinx
and African American in STEM fields. Providing early STEM interest pathways for
these populations that are historically underrepresented in STEM fields is
critical to creating gender equity in the STEM workforce. There are profound
inequities in STEM fields for women of color that impact their interest and
persistence in these fields. This Research in Service to Practice project will
build important knowledge about early pathways for reducing these inequities by
developing early interest in STEM. Gender stereotypes around who can do STEM are
one of the sociocultural barriers that contributes to girls’ loss of interest in
STEM. These stereotypes emerge early and steer young women away from STEM
studies and pursuits. Exposing girls to role models is an effective strategy for
challenging stereotypes of who belongs and succeeds in STEM. This project will
explore how an afterschool program that combines narrative and storytelling
approaches, STEM role models, and family supports, sparks elementary-age girls’
interest in STEM and fosters their STEM identity. The project targets K-5
students and families from underrepresented groups (e.g., Latinx and African
American) living in poverty. The project will evaluate an inquiry-based,
afterschool program that serves both elementary school girls and boys and
explores if adding storytelling components to the out-of-school time (OST)
learning will better support girls’ interest in STEM. The storytelling features
include: 1) shared reading of books featuring females in STEM; 2) students’ own
narratives that reminisce about their STEM experiences; and 3) video interviews
of female parents and community members with STEM careers. A secondary aim of
this project is to build capacity of schools and afterschool providers to
deliver and sustain afterschool STEM enrichment experiences. Museum-based
informal STEM experts will co-teach with afterschool providers to deliver the
Children’s Museum Houston (CMH) curriculum called Afterschool Science,
Technology, Engineering, Arts and Math (A’STEAM). Although A’STEAM has been
implemented in over 100 sites and shows promise, to scale-up this and other
promising afterschool programs, the team will evaluate how professional
development resources and the co-facilitation approach can build afterschool
educators' capacity to deliver the most promising
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at the Children’s Learning
Institute (CLI) at UTHealth will partner with Museum-based informal STEM
educators at CMH, YES Prep, a high performing charter school serving &gt;95% of
underrepresented groups, and other afterschool providers serving mostly
underrepresented groups experiencing poverty. Storytelling components that
highlight females in STEM will be added to an existing afterschool program
(A'STEAM Basic). This derivative program is called A’STEAM Stories. Both
instantiations of the afterschool programs (Basic and Stories) include an
afterschool educator component (ongoing professional development and coaching),
a family component (e.g., home extension activities, in-person, and virtual
family learning events), and two age-based groups (K-G2 and G3-G5). Further, the
A’STEAM Stories professional development for educators includes training that
challenges STEM gender stereotypes and explains how to make science interesting
to girls. The 4-year project has four phases. In Phase 1, researchers, CMH, and
afterschool educators will adapt the curriculum for scalability and the planned
storytelling variation. During Phase 2, the research team will conduct an
experimental study to evaluate program impacts on increasing STEM interest and
identity and reducing STEM gender stereotypes. To this end, the project’s team
will recruit 36 sites and 1200 children across Kindergarten through Grade 5.
This experimental phase is designed to produce causal evidence and meet the
highest standards for rigorous research. The researchers will randomly assign
sites to one of three groups: control, A’STEAM Basic, or A’STEAM Stories. During
Phase 3, researchers will follow-up with participating sites to understand if
the inclusion of afterschool educators as co-facilitators of the program allowed
for sustainability after Museum informal science educator support is withdrawn.
In Phase 4, the team will disseminate the afterschool curriculum and conduct two
training-of-trainers for local and national afterschool educators. This study
uses quantitative and qualitative approaches. Data sources include educator and
family surveys, focus groups, and interviews as well as observations of
afterschool program instructional quality and analysis of parent-child discourse
during a STEM task. Constructs assessed with children include STEM interest,
STEM identity, and STEM gender stereotype endorsement as well as standardized
measures of vocabulary, science, and math. Findings will increase understanding
of how to optimize OST STEM experiences for elementary-age girls and how to
strengthen STEM interest for all participants. Further, this project will
advance our knowledge of the extent to which scaffolded, co-teaching approaches
build capacity of afterschool providers to sustain inquiry-based STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research in Service to Practice project is
funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to
(a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.