* 2115300
* Collaborative Research: National Symposium on PRedicting Emergence of Virulent Entities by Novel Technologies (PREVENT)
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Krista Wigginton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2021
* USD 11,378.00

In the past year, the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has severely disrupted the
livelihoods of our planetâ€™s human inhabitants, infecting over 85 million
individuals, and causing nearly 2 million deaths. What actions might have been
taken to minimize the severity of this pandemic (and others before it in the
past decades such as Zika, SARS and Ebola)? In retrospect, many actions could
have played key roles: environmental monitoring for potential animal-to-human
infection spillovers, establishment of pipelines for rapid vaccine development
and optimal deployment and distribution, designing data-science tools to
accurately forecast trajectories, fast and adaptive syndromic surveillance and
behavior tracking, designing and timing effective interventions, training
susceptible individuals for measures needed to inhibit the spread of infectious
agents, and others. What lessons have been learned and what gaps in our
knowledge, methodologies, technologies, and policies remain? The investigators
propose a two-day multi-disciplinary National Symposium on PRedicting Emergence
of Virulent Entities by Novel Technologies (PREVENT) to begin to address these
and related challenges. As a whole the highly interdisciplinary organizing team
has significant experience in various aspects of the topics touched upon by this
symposium. Bridging fundamental gaps in what is known (and perhaps even what is
knowable) can require coordination that goes far beyond sharing of instruments,
standardization, or the exchange of methods and data; these define broader
societal challenges of complex problems beyond pandemic prediction. This meeting
will help enable coordinated team-science efforts that can assist in bringing
disparate groups together, whether in small teams or large teams, including
bringing in the public as citizen scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key in
fostering convergence for predictive intelligence for pandemic prevention will
be co-envisioning computing, science and engineering in ways that are integrated
across disciplines so that community efforts are optimally suited to (and nimbly
able to) respond to and prevent new pandemics. The symposium has been structured
around four themes and perspectives: Molecular, Physiological,
Population/Epidemiological and End-end/Multi-scale. The proposed meeting will
provide a valuable opportunity for the community to begin to build the necessary
convergence. A combination of plenary talks, short talks, panel discussions and
small breakout thought sessions will be used to help achieve these aims. For
several significant reasons, predictive intelligence for pandemic prevention
stands to benefit by drawing upon convergent computation, science and
engineering insights alongside traditional disciplinary repositories of
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.