* 2115414
* SRS-RN: The Continuum of Urbanity as an Organizing Concept to Promote Sustainability in the Mid-Hudson Region
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Winslow Hansen, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Learning how people can sustainably live in a world where urban areas are
increasing is critical to support happy and healthy communities. However, it is
poorly understood how connections between urban and rural areas, past human
actions, new pressures like COVID-19, and climate change will affect the
sustainability of these regions. The Hudson Valley presents a unique opportunity
to understand how to improve sustainability. The valley is close to a large
urban center where people are moving to rural areas from urban centers. Many of
the valley’s rural and wild ecosystems are still intact, making it possible to
understand how the migration of people from the urban centers will affect these
systems. The project will bring together diverse stakeholders to plan a large-
scale research, education, and community engagement program on the
sustainability of the Hudson Valley, with results that could also help improve
sustainability in other regions of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is guided by an overarching question: “How do changes in connectivity interact
with past human actions to create barriers and opportunities for sustainable
development, adaptation, and transformation across a continuum of urbanity?”
Continuum theory suggests that measurable conditions of livelihood, lifestyle,
and regional landscape structure and function interact with the drivers of
changing connectivity. The Hudson Valley Region (HVR) includes urban and rural
areas from north of New York City to Albany, NY. The HVR is an ideal test case
because it is geographically and historically understandable as a system with a
long history of urban-rural interactions and increasing connectivity. A future
research and stakeholder engagement program that answers the overarching
question while helping guide the HVR towards a more sustainable future, will
meet four goals: 1) Work outward from the core research team to build an
inclusive network of social and economic scientists, ecologists, land change
researchers, humanists, and stakeholders representing community groups,
environmental and planning non-profits, urban design firms, and government
agencies; 2) Collect and analyze existing regional and local sustainability
plans to understand current goals at multiple scales across HVR; 3) Facilitate
stakeholder interaction and inform joint work with these stakeholders; and 4)
Identify the scope of research with stakeholders. The scope of research will be
based on (a) co-produced research questions of mutual interest to practitioners,
policy makers, communities, and academics; (b) identified focal ecosystems or
social-ecological places; (c) appropriately set spatial and temporal scales for
each focus; (d) key measurements of regional change and connectivity; and (e)
strategies to promote equitable and just engagement with
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.