* 2115472
* Ingenieros Ingeniosos (Ingenious Engineers): Connecting Latinx Youths' Workplace Practices with Engineering through Out-of-School Time Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Marisela Martinez-Cola, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 07/31/2026
* USD 648,558.00

Millions of Latinx youth, aged 14 to 18, work formal or informal jobs to provide
income for themselves or their families. In the context of these workplaces,
Latinx youth demonstrate numerous skills that are essential to industrial
engineering, such as minimizing workplace injuries or optimizing processes to
maximize efficiency. However, their workplace ingenuity and skills are often
underrecognized by educational systems. To counter this lack of recognition, the
purpose of this project is to iteratively develop and research an out-of-school
engineering program for working Latinx youth. This program is designed to
recognize and build from youths’ workplace experiences by connecting them with
industrial engineering concepts and practices, such as those used to promote
worker safety. This program is also designed for youth to articulate
transformational visions of industrial engineering, which expand current goals,
values, and methods commonly embraced within this discipline. This year-long
program will be facilitated by educators of existing out-of-school programs
(e.g., Mathematics, Engineering, and Science Achievement), in partnership with
undergraduate mentors from the Society for Professional Hispanic Engineers and
other local organizations that serve Latinx youth (e.g., Latinos in Action).
Approximately 220 youth are expected to participate in the programming.
Researchers will explore whether and how youth participants develop identities
in engineering, as well as how the educators and mentors understand and enact
assets-based, out-of-school engineering education grounded in youths’
experiences. Researchers will also identify the individual, institutional, and
systemic factors that support or inhibit sustained implementation of the program
over time in different sites and contexts. This project will result in a set of
empirically tested, bilingual program materials that will be disseminated widely
to professional organizations dedicated to out-of-school programming and to
serving Latinx youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a
localizable, transferable, and sustainable model for an out-of-school time
program that recognizes and amplifies Latinx youths’ workplace funds of
knowledge and leverages them toward youth-driven visions and applications of
engineering. This program, which will connect with other people and sites in
youths’ learning ecosystems, is grounded in principles of translanguaging,
transformational mentorship, and educational dignity and recognition. In
partnership with youth participants, researchers will use a social design
experiment to explore the following research questions: What are the engineering
identity trajectories of working high school youth, and how do specific moments
of identity negotiation and recognition relate to broader patterns across
program sessions and identity trajectories for individual participants over
time? To answer these questions, a pre-, mid- and post-program Engineering
Identity Scale; recordings of program implementations; interviews; and youth
artifacts will be analyzed using various methods such as critical multimodal
discourse analysis. After implementations of the program across multiple sites,
researchers will use design-based implementation research to answer the
following questions: How do educators and mentors understand and enact assets-
based pedagogies designed to foster recognition across sites? What institutional
and systemic features (designed or naturalistic) support or inhibit productive
adaptations and implementations of the program? These questions will be answered
using constant comparative analyses of data sources such as interviews with the
program educators and mentors, observations of program implementations,
observations of professional development sessions, and public documents.
Culturally responsive, educative evaluation will be used to iteratively improve
the program. The resulting research and program materials will be disseminated
widely through professional organizations dedicated to Latinx youth, engineering
education, and out-of-school learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in
Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and evidence-based
understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to and
engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on and
assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the public
of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.