* 2116164
* The Semantics of Negation across Time and Space
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Claire Bowern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 366,627.00

Human languages have many ways of describing things that do not, have not, or
will not happen in the world. This area of language is called 'negation'.
Languages across the world have different ways of describing these topics, and
this area of language changes over time. The concept is not explicitly taught
(children are never explicitly instructed in how to talk about things that
aren't there, or that don't happen), and being able to understand negation is
critical to understanding what people say when they speak or sign. Yet even
within a language, strategies for negation can vary extensively. This
combination of basic, universal meaning and variation is what makes linguistics
--the scientific study of language--such a powerful tool for investigating both
the human mind and human society. Language patterns can be investigated like
archaeological sites, to uncover past aspects of human society, such as which
groups have been in contact with one another. By exploring the limits of how
languages vary, this project offers a window into the human
mind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses several methods to study
language. The first involves detailed investigations of languages with prior
documentation--that is, languages which already have some written information
about them, such as corpora and reference grammars. The second involves work (in
person and through video chat) with native speakers of indigenous languages,
conducting experiments about precise meanings of words and phrases. Methods
include translation tasks, linguistic analysis of narratives, and eliciting
descriptions of pictures. Thirdly, this project uses state of the art
statistical methods in machine learning, data science, and computational
phylogenetics, to discover and to understand the relationships between different
languages. Through analyzing the systematic patterns inherent in language, it is
possible to understand how languages change over time and why some meanings are
stable while others are not. This project provides training in quantitative
methods to students, and involves teaching about language and society. It is
planned that research findings will be published in academic journals and
through public science outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.