* 2116944
* How Poverty Falls
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Paul Niehaus, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 404,640.00

The share of the world’s population in extreme poverty declined from 43% in 1981
to 36% in 1990 to 10% in 2015, representing one of humanity’s great successes.
Despite this success, the process by which poverty reduction takes place in
nations is not well understood. This research project will use a large data set
and innovative methods to study how this reduction in poverty happened: what
changed across generations and within the lives of individual households as they
moved out of poverty. The researchers do this systematically by using detailed
household survey data from countries that collectively accounted for up to 85%
of global poverty reduction since 1990. The project aims to advance
understanding of the forces that give rise to shared prosperity, as well as
contribute to scientific literacy about poverty’s decline and to graduate
training in economics. The results of this research will provide important
inputs into the design of policies to reduce poverty in the US and across the
globe. It will also establish the US as the global leader in poverty reduction
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms through which
poverty decreases is important in crafting policies to reduce poverty. This
research project will use household- and individual-level data from many
countries to systematically describe and study the forces behind the global fall
of extreme poverty since circa 1990. The research will examine what accounts for
changes in households’ earnings as they exit from (and enter into) extreme
poverty, considering the roles of structural change, occupational choice, the
division of labor, and gendered participation in labor markets, among other
factors. This research will also examine the importance of these within-
generation changes in aggregate poverty decline, relative to between-generation
dynamics, as older, poorer generations are replaced by younger, less-poor ones.
The research will use nationally and near-nationally representative longitudinal
and repeated cross-section datasets from countries that collectively account for
as much as 85% of the global reduction in extreme poverty since 1990. The
results of this research will provide important inputs into the design of
policies to reduce poverty in the US and across the globe. It will also
establish the US as the global leader in poverty reduction
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.