* 2116647
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Machine Learning-aided Discovery of Synthesizable, Active and Stable Heterogeneous Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Eranda Nikolla, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2023
* USD 432,455.00

Catalytic materials have long been used to improve the efficiency and product
selectivity of many processes of vital importance to chemical manufacturing,
petroleum refining, and pollution control. Given the complexity of catalytic
reactions, and the need for the catalyst to operate under harsh conditions in
many cases, considerable development effort – particularly from industry - has
gone into the design of catalyst materials that can be readily synthesized, and
that maintain stable performance for long time-on-stream. Academic research
efforts, in contrast, have largely focused on theoretical, computational, and
experimental identification of more active and/or lower-cost catalytic
materials, but with little attention to synthesizability and stability. The
project creates a new catalytic materials research framework that combines the
search for more active materials with screening for synthesizability and
stability under reaction conditions. The added complexity is addressed through
the addition of powerful machine learning (ML) approaches that augment
theoretical and computational tools to yield a more complete set of properties,
or “descriptors,” associated with synthesizable, highly active, and stable
catalytic materials. Ultimately, the goal is to package the various discovery
tools in the form of an intuitive approach that delivers optimal results for
catalysis practitioners.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the widely
practiced descriptor approach to catalysis research, where a descriptor of
catalytic activity (e.g., adsorption energy of an adsorbate) is computed using
quantum chemical Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations on various
catalyst surfaces. Research efforts extend the current approaches by developing
synthesizability, stability, and activity descriptors, using ML tools to rapidly
screen through these descriptors, and collaborating with experimentalists in an
iterative feedback loop to examine the accuracy of the predictions and to ensure
the “catalysis practitioner-friendliness” of the combined methods. The approach
will be developed in two case studies focusing on bimetallic catalysts for low
temperature preferential CO oxidation in the presence of H2 (CO PROX) and
partial oxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide. The project will create a
computer-aided workflow and open-source tools for predicting the
synthesizability, activity, and stability of catalysts. By combining ML and DFT
modeling with operando experimental characterization and testing, new structure-
function relations will be identified for both reactions. In doing so, ML
methods will advance beyond the prediction of activity for highly idealized
systems to more realistic catalytic systems under operating conditions.
Predicted materials structures and compositions will be validated against open-
source high-fidelity experimental datasets in a feedback discovery loop that
accelerates catalyst discovery. Beyond the technical component, the project will
include outreach efforts focused on student professional development, broadened
science participation, and informal science communication to help create a
world-class scientific workforce. Cross-disciplinary training activities at the
University of Michigan (U-M) and Wayne State University (WSU) will provide
graduate and undergraduate students with a foundation to continue making
scientific advances throughout their careers. A Data Science for Catalysis
Training Program will enable undergraduates from WSU to visit U-M during the
summer to learn the basics of data science and catalysis. Underrepresented
students from Detroit schools, and their parents, will engage in science
outreach events hosted by team members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.