* 2116799
* Renewable energy, mining, and extraction governance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Karen Rignall, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,149.00

This project is jointly funded by Cultural Anthropology and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). This project compares how
solar energy and conventional mining projects are governed to determine the
opportunities and challenges of a renewable energy transition. Using
collaborative research methods that involve local communities in the design and
conduct of the research, the project will examine to what extent large-scale
renewable energy projects draw upon the same economic and governance strategies
as conventional extraction. The research team will document the legal,
bureaucratic, and economic frameworks for developing and operating large-scale
projects in rural areas. Conventional extraction projects have historically
deepened the economic and political marginalization of many rural zones, which
experience high rates of poverty while shouldering the environmental and
economic costs of extraction. If renewable energy projects draw on the same
mechanisms for expropriating resources as mining, then strategies for just
energy transition should focus on more than reducing carbon emissions and
include socio-economic and political measures to address the systemic
marginalization of rural areas. Research results will be shared in the
communities participating in the research, through national and international
policy venues addressing a renewable energy transition, including among U.S.
civic groups, communities, and policymakers engaged in rural energy and economic
transition work. Other broader impacts include collaborative analysis training
workshops on civic engagement and extraction, which will broaden participation
in science to underrepresented populations in Central Appalachia.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This ethnographic and documentary research initiative will engage
civic organizations and rural communities in collecting data about the laws,
procedures, and practices that facilitate large-scale solar and mining projects.
The project team will produce outreach materials on these governance practices
as the basis for field-based, qualitative research on strategies state and
corporate actors use to manage these projects. The research will also establish
the commonalities and differences in how residents engage with renewable energy
and conventional extraction to make claims for services, policies, or
representation related to and extending beyond specific projects. This project
will advance anthropological theories of extraction as an expression of
governance practices, not only the material resource being extracted, and will
relate those theories to agrarian studies of the challenges facing rural areas
and the social science of renewable energy
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.