* 2116989
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Active assignment of quantifier scope guides language processing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Masaya Yoshida, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2023
* USD 9,385.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Language processing often appears
to be effortless as humans rapidly decode linguistic signals to form meaningful
representations of what they have just heard or read. While much of what has
been observed in human language processing is well predicted by linguistic
theory, some grammatically illicit sentences are perceived as acceptable. These
linguistic illusions, where observed behavior does not align neatly with
predictions of well-established grammatical theories, provide opportunities to
observe differences between the structure of language and how language is
processed. This doctoral dissertation project addresses one of these illusions,
the negative polarity item illusion, and develops a new framework in which the
illusion follows as a consequence of independent principles for processing
quantification and scope. Developing frameworks for the processes that drive
these linguistic illusions is critical for both our grammatical theories and
theories of language related behavior. Beyond the benefits to linguistic and
language processing research, these models also provide critical theoretical
scaffolding for work in domains such as human computer interaction and
neurolinguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses eye-tracking while
reading along with other online and offline measures to observe the processing
of various kinds of sentences. These include sentences which are related to the
negative polarity item illusion and are designed to isolate how different
factors such as polarity valence and the syntactic environment contribute to the
observed illusion effect. Additional sentences investigated are designed to
examine how scope is computed in online processing, a critical but understudied
factor in the negative polarity item illusion. Based on existing research and
the newly acquired data, the primary goal of the project is the development of a
new model for the processing of scope and quantification called reckless scope
processing, which recasts a problematic illusion as an expected consequence of a
necessary language processing procedure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.