* 2116552
* Culturally Relevant Messaging and the Political Socialization of HBCU Students
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Amanda Wilkerson, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 01/31/2024
* USD 122,171.00

This project examines the relationship between how political issues are
identified, framed, and disseminated to subsequently influence the political
interest and participation of Black students at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). The project develops a profile of political attitudes
developed by Black college students, examines indicators of political behavior
of young Black students, and assesses the efficacy of a campus social media
contest for fostering political engagement of Black college students. The
findings have practical application for the development of culturally relevant
civics education curricula, new tactics for engaging Black adolescents in
politics, insights about digital citizenship, and the ways in which social media
are used to produce and distribute micro-targeted culturally relevant political
messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research extends Digital Political
Socialization Theory (DPST) to advance understanding of the political
socialization of college youth. Specifically, the project assesses how political
issues are identified, framed, and disseminated to subsequently influence the
political interest and participation of Black students, The research design
compares Black students at two Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) to Black students at one non-HBCU university in Florida. The multi-
method project relies on focus groups, interviews, and a video contest, with 20
students at each study site participating over a 4-6 week period of time. The
research advances knowledge and understanding of Black college youthâ€™s
individual and group attitudes, preference formation and expression and, more
broadly, political behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Accountable Institutions Program and the SBE Science of Broadening
Participation Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.