* 2116728
* Determining Bulk and Surface Degradation Mechanisms in Potassium Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Lauren Marbella, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 423,005.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;The development of new types of batteries that
do not rely on lithium will enable cheaper and more widespread adoption of
renewable energy. Potassium is a particularly attractive option to replace
lithium because it has high natural abundance and desirable electrochemical
properties. However, simply swapping Li atoms for K leads to severe performance
decline in potassium ion battery (KIB) analogues. With this project, supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, Prof. Marbella and her research group gather fundamental
information required to develop KIBs. They use nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy to study each component of the battery at the molecular-level,
including the electrode, the electrolyte, and the electrode/electrolyte
interface. Specifically, this research program tests the hypothesis that the
larger atomic size of K compared to Li leads to unique degradation mechanisms
that ultimately contribute to battery failure. The research project aims to
identify the relationship between bulk and interfacial degradation modes and
electrochemical behavior in KIBs. This provides insight that generate pathways
to redesign materials that are optimal for KIB technologies. Broader impacts of
this work include research opportunities and workshops created specifically for
underrepresented undergraduate women interested in pursuing graduate education.
This research project is also closely integrated with educational activities
that engage underrepresented and underprivileged students in energy storage
research projects at the undergraduate and high school level through
partnerships with Barnard College (all women liberal arts college affiliated
with Columbia University) and Ellis Preparatory High School for recent
immigrants in the Bronx, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;Identifying and parsing the complex interplay between bulk
and surface degradation modes in beyond-Li ion batteries is critical to
realizing cost-effective solutions for the widespread adoption of
electrochemical energy storage. This project, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
leverages the high chemical and elemental specificity of nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) to identify the chemical mechanisms underpinning failure in
potentially high capacity tin phosphide anodes for potassium ion batteries
(KIBs). The large atomic size of K generates highly disordered and mechanically
unstable structures during potassiation of tin phosphides that are susceptible
to a loss of electrical connectivity and parasitic side reactions during
electrochemical cycling. In the bulk, phase transformations that occur upon K
insertion/removal are difficult to measure with traditional materials
characterization tools (e.g., diffraction) that require long-range order for
structural assignment. In contrast, NMR can directly probe local P and Sn
environments in the anodes to identify specific compounds that facilitate
reversible K alloying reactions. Further, the volume expansion associated with K
insertion exposes fresh surface for electrolyte consumption, presenting the need
for strategies that can decipher electrolyte reactivity. NMR is used to
describe, at the molecular-level, electrolyte solvation structures that generate
unique electrolyte decomposition products. NMR analyses allows the creation of
some of the first molecular-level descriptors of bulk phase transformations and
interfacial reactivity in KIBs. This research plan is closely integrated with
educational activities that engage underrepresented and underprivileged students
in energy storage research projects at the undergraduate and high school level
through partnerships with Barnard College (all women liberal arts college
affiliated with Columbia University) and Ellis Preparatory High School for
recent immigrants in the Bronx, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.