* 2116932
* Collaborative Research: advancing language research and outreach in a language museum
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Patrick Plummer, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 55,196.00

This award is funded with support from NSF's program for Advancing Informal STEM
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a partnership between
language researchers and Planet Word, a new museum devoted to language in
Washington D.C., to engage museum visitors in scientific research and outreach.
Interested museum visitors from all ages and backgrounds are invited to
participate in behavioral research studies on a range of language-related
topics. This "living language laboratory" of interactive studies includes
accompanying educational demonstrations. These activities will lead to the
development of infrastructure and best practices that will allow future language
researchers to engage with the public at Planet Word and other similar sites.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances scientific understanding by engaging
visitors in activities that expose them to active science about language as a
part of their visit to the museum. For example, the research examines topics
from understanding what makes certain American Sign Language signs more
learnable, to why it is easier to understand people we know rather than
strangers, to whether we think differently when we are reading a text message
compared to reading more formal writing. In doing so, the project raises the
profile of linguistics among the general public and promotes scientifically
informed attitudes about language. The project also provides key opportunities
to disseminate research findings of interest to the public and to promote
greater interest in STEM topics among museum visitors, as well as student
trainees and museum staff. The project creates educational and research
opportunities for students, who will be trained in a hands-on course, and will
gain first-hand experience with research and outreach in a museum setting.
Through the collaborative partnership of researchers from University of
Maryland, Howard University, and Gallaudet University, the project broadens
participation of underrepresented minority students in the language sciences,
seeking to diversify the pipeline of scholars continuing in careers in the
language sciences and related STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.