* 2116573
* Collaborative Research: Subsurface plumbing, tremor migration, and eruption cycle of Yellowstone Geysers
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,632.00

The Yellowstone hydrothermal system hosts the largest number of geysers on
Earth. These natural wonders attract millions of visitors each year. Despite a
history of scientific investigation spanning over 150 years, fundamental
questions about geysers remain: What structures are required to create geysers?
Why do some geysers erupt regularly and others do not? What controls eruption
characteristics such as the volume erupted, the interval between eruptions, and
the height to which geysers erupt? Can eruptions be accurately predicted? This
project aims to address these questions by collecting and analyzing
interdisciplinary data from few iconic geysers in Yellowstone, including Old
Faithful and Steamboat. Using naturally excited ground vibration observed across
dense seismic arrays, the subsurface plumbing structure will be imaged and the
thermal state within will be inferred during each stage of the eruption cycle.
By mimicking the natural geysers, laboratory geyser models will be built to
examine how plumbing geometry and other factors give rise to eruption
characteristics. Through the research, the project will support undergraduate
and graduate education and the scientific findings will be disseminated through
the education and outreach platforms of National Park Service and USGS
Yellowstone Volcano Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geysers are springs that
intermittently erupt mixtures of steam and liquid water. They provide a window
into the transport of mass and energy in hydrothermal systems. To understand how
and why geysers exist and erupt the investigators will use a multidisciplinary
approach to study the iconic geysers of Yellowstone National Park, in
particular, Old Faithful, the geysers of Geyser Hill, and the world’s tallest
geyser, Steamboat. They will use dense temporary seismic arrays and novel
interferometry-based array analyses to track subsurface hydrothermal tremor
migration and hence the evolving thermodynamic conditions before, during, and
after eruption. Similar analyses will be used to image the plumbing system of
geysers and deeper geological structures that enable geysers to exist and
identify changes in those structures over time. Laboratory models and in situ
pressure and temperature measurements will be used to interpret seismic
observations and develop a generalized understanding of geysering phenomena and
signals. Together, a combination of seismic data and models will be used to
forecast eruptions, including their timing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.