* 2116377
* Testing the Value of Rapport Building to Enhance Adolescent Disclosures in Online and In-Person Interviews
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jodi Quas, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2024
* USD 613,290.00

In contrast to large bodies of research devoted to testing methods of improving
children’s and adults’ eyewitness capabilities, no comparable amount of research
has been directed toward testing methods of enhancing teenagers’ reporting
abilities. This omission is striking, considering the sheer number of teen
victims of and witnesses to crime: They are second only to young adults in their
risk for experiencing violent crime, and teens comprise 22% of abuse and neglect
victims. When teens are questioned, it is unclear which of two very different
best-practice types of interview strategies would be most helpful at eliciting
disclosures from them: strategies developed for children (i.e., largely ages
3-12) or strategies developed for adults (i.e., college age and older).
Teenagers’ general reluctance to tell adults about their negative or risky
experiences, combined with their increasingly common engagement in risky
behavior, feelings of autonomy about their actions, and allegiance to peers who
may have acted in delinquent or risky ways all decrease their willingness to
disclose when they have experienced or witnessed crime. Yet, in order to protect
these teens, law enforcement, as well as parents, teachers, and other concerned
adults, need guidance on how best to overcome this reluctance and elicit
complete and accurate reports from teens. The purpose of the present research is
to provide this guidance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two studies will test the
effects of pre-interview rapport building strategies on 14-19 year-olds’ reports
of a prior misdeed they committed (Study 1, n=306) or negative event they
witnessed (Study 2, n=306). Rapport building, which is designed to foster open
communication between an interviewer and interviewee, includes a number of
different strategies. Three will be compared in the current studies: (a)
interviewers and teens will begin with a mutual self-disclosure activity, which
has been shown to increase reporting in adults; (b) interviewers will begin by
having teens practice answering open-ended questions, an activity that increases
reporting in children, or (c) interviewers will begin by asking closed-ended
questions (e.g., How old are you?), a traditional low rapport approach. Half of
the interviews will be conducted in person and half will be conducted remotely
via Zoom. Undergraduate and graduate students will assist in all phases, and a
postdoctoral scholar will co-direct the studies. Findings will provide much-
needed insight into the efficacy of rapport building on teenager disclosures.
Findings will also reveal whether online interviewing formats are a viable
alternative to in-person interviews with teens when the latter are precluded
because locations are remote or because of safety concerns. Overall, the studies
will lay the foundation for the development of best-practice interviewing
strategies for vulnerable and often overlooked teenage victims and
witnesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.