* 2116037
* NSF/MCB-BSF: Sentinels: Viral First Responder Cells (VFRCs) for COVID-19 and Future Rapidly Emerging Infectious Diseases
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Ron Weiss, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,195,831.00

COVID-19 necessitates new approaches to artificial immunity for people at-risk,
recently exposed, or in early stages of viral infection, for which there are
limited treatment options. Rapid onset of lung inflammation caused by Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), the respiratory illness
responsible for the coronavirus pandemic, can in principle be overcome with
immunomodulatory gene therapy, but achieving this goal faces long-standing
challenges. Further, there is a need for anti-viral therapies across other viral
families such as H1N1 (flu), West Nile, Zika, Yellow Fever Virus, and emerging
variants. To address these challenges, this project will create Viral First
Responder Cells (VFRCs), a new type of sentinel/therapeutic cell. VFRCs are
genetically engineered patient cells programmed to mount a first line defense
against highly contagious viral diseases with long incubation periods, vector-
borne diseases, and future viral diseases. Upon viral detection, VFRCs produce a
cocktail of outputs to stop viral replication and activate an appropriately
modulated immune response. The project’s scientific output will focus on
equitable distribution (e.g. genetically diverse target responses) and will
broadly disseminate research-focused training material in novel media, including
new grant-specific virtual lab training modules for remote and at-home learning.
The project will provide inclusive viral therapy and COVID-related learning
opportunities for underrepresented minority students, integrate with MIT’s
efforts to address systemic racism, and increase retention of women and
minorities via an outreach portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
a new synthetic immune system to overcome limitations in traditional artificial
immunity (e.g. immunization or antibody therapy) by genetically engineering
patient cells (e.g. a small subset of lung epithelial cells) with broad-range
and virus specific sensors of infection (VFRC sentinels). VFRCs rapidly detect
viral entry using precise multi-input sensors that monitor for changes to
cellular transcriptional signatures and genetic logic that responds by
activating both pathways that lead to eradication of the virus, including
appropriate activation of innate and adaptive host immune responses. Creating
the capability to both sense immune state changes / viral entry and trigger
powerful immunomodulatory responses in a controlled fashion will define a
radically new approach for anti-viral therapies, define a new area of
immunomodulatory biological design, and lead to new therapies for emergent viral
threats. VFRC circuits limit side effects to cells already compromised by the
virus and provide a more effective and tuned response based on the both the
stage of infection and the degree of patient immunocompetence. An important
element of VFRC safety is restricting intracellular response to occur only
during active infection. When the virus is not present, genetic circuits
introduced into the VFRCs remain in a vigilant but inactive “monitor” state. In
this state, VFRCs monitor for signs of infection but do not alter the
transcriptome. VFRCs also include a physician regulated genetic safety switch to
deactivate any undesired response. Once proven safe and effective for one virus,
this approach, which already includes broad viral entry sensors, can be
customized for new viruses. This research will also answer fundamental
scientific questions about viral immune responses and immunomodulatory therapy
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.