* 2116697
* Conference: Waves of Change
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Nikki Traylor-Knowles, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 05/31/2022
* USD 197,803.00

To help fulfill the mission of NSF to support basic research and science
education this proposal aims to provide training, mentorship and scientific
collaboration for minorities in microbiology, immunology, ecology, evolution and
marine science. The initiative called, ‘Waves of Change’, will be accomplished
through a year-long set of virtual professional development events that include
panels, workshops, science information sharing, structured mentoring
opportunities, and networking to increase retention of minorities in science.
The outcomes from this proposal will have broader impacts on society by training
a new generation of scientists, assisting in creating a diverse workforce, and
expanding opportunities for early career scientists through networking and
mentorship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science is driven by innovation and discovery.
This innovation is accelerated when diverse voices are heard. When people from
different backgrounds can work together on a common goal, science can achieve
great things. However, to accomplish this goal, training is needed to bring
together different perspectives and share information. This is particularly
relevant in ecology, evolution, and marine science where collaborations are the
foundation of success. This proposal called ‘Waves of Change’ will bring
together diverse voices and create a forum for networking and professional
development for early career scientists from underrepresented groups in ecology,
evolution, and marine science. ‘Waves of Change’ will consist of monthly
workshops, networking hours with scientific leaders, and panels that will
address many including science policy, mentoring in academia and science,
productivity in science, science communication, career paths in science,
leadership in academia and beyond, self-care in science, scientific publishing,
computational skills in science, challenges in science, networking,
decolonization of science, and outreach-community based science. The goal of
‘Waves of Change’ will be to build community and networking opportunities with
the scientific community at large while contributing to the retention and
success of diverse scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.