* 2116350
* Family Bereavement: Societal Prevalence, Patterning, and Consequences
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Abigail Weitzman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 254,788.00

This project investigates family bereavement—the phenomenon of experiencing the
death of a family member. Extensive research has identified how economic and
social hardship can contribute to an individual’s risk of death; yet we know
less about whether the death of a family member can induce hardships for those
bereaved. Scientific efforts to understand family bereavement are highly
relevant given the COVID-19 pandemic—a global mortality event of historic
proportions that has left millions of individuals grieving the abrupt death of
relatives. This study offers a life course overview of family bereavement and
its socioeconomic and health consequences. Whereas past studies have focused on
singular types of family loss, like parental death, this study considers
multiple relatives. This allows clarification of the societal burden of
different types of bereavement and their unique consequences for individuals.
Findings can inform programmatic efforts to address the effects of bereavement
on population health, prosperity, and welfare. In addition to generating
findings of high relevance to public health, this research supports diversity in
science through the mentoring and training of students from historically under-
represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the project is to
identify the consequences of family bereavement by analyzing rich survey data on
a cohort of 1,500 young adults. The data feature detailed family history
information, including whether relatives are still alive and if not, how long
ago they died, how old they were at the time of death, and whether they suffered
from prolonged illness. These data are used to analyze whether experiences of
family bereavement influence young adults’ wellbeing, including their mental and
physical health and educational success. The second goal of the study is to use
cross-national survey data on more than 3.7 million youth and 1.8 million adults
to offer a comprehensive overview of the societal and life course patterns of
family bereavement in more than 50 locations. By identifying the societal burden
of family bereavement at the community, regional, and higher levels, and
elucidating between-family and cohort differences in life course patterns of
bereavement for multiple birth cohorts, the study offers foundational knowledge
on family bereavement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.