* 2116679
* Institute for Theoretical, Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics (ITAMP)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* James Babb, Harvard University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,399,997.00

Atomic, Molecular and Optical (AMO) physics is an enabling science that has
contributed to some of the most significant scientific and technical advances of
the last century. While the first quantum revolution led to an expanded
understanding of the structure of atoms and molecules -- the elementary building
blocks of matter -- with applications in navigation, medicine, computing, and
communication in use across the industry, society and economy, a new quantum
revolution is fully upon us. The second quantum revolution is powered by
remarkable technological advances in precision and control of interactions
between atomic species, and manipulation and study of the coherent properties of
light and matter. Large-scale programmable quantum systems with atoms and ions
are now routinely realized. Quantum simulators, with atoms trapped over
macroscopic distances in optical tweezers and strongly coupled with Rydberg
excitations, promise to allow scaling up of fast quantum gates. Advances in
precision measurement, clocks and sensing using atoms, molecules, and artificial
atoms now impact our understanding of the most fundamental aspects of quantum
physics and cosmology. A center of excellence in AMO theory will serve as the
integrator of activities in helping to lead this revolution in quantum
technologies. The Institute for Theoretical Atomic, Molecular and Optical
Physics (ITAMP) hub will serve a broad community of physicists in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ITAMP at the Harvard-Smithsonian Center for
Astrophysics (CfA) in Cambridge, MA will strive to be an incubator facility for
theoretical AMO physics by providing resources and access to the rich AMO-
related ecosystem of excellence in Cambridge, to create a collaborative
environment for visiting fellows and for the training and mentoring of junior
fellows, to broadly advocate for the field, and to lead in forefront research in
AMO physics and outreach efforts to the community. ITAMP will hold and host
targeted meetings in which large groups of practitioners will gather in critical
mass to mount coordinated attacks on topical challenges in AMO physics and find
novel solutions to these problems. Postdoctoral fellows and students will
benefit from proximity to these recognized figures in theoretical and
experimental AMO science. Visiting fellows, housed in an enriching office
environment, will interact with the postdoctoral and scientific fellows in ways
not otherwise possible. Winter Graduate Schools will be scheduled to train
students keen on learning fundamental and advanced topics in AMO physics. As
part of its programmatic mission, the Institute will recruit faculty/student
teams from minority-serving colleges as summer
Fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.