* 2116127
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Psychiatric Deinstitutionalization and Community Mental Health Transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Jocelyn Chua, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 16,075.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Psychiatric
deinstitutionalization continues to pose challenges to local communities. These
challenges encompass how to better provide care for the severely mentally ill at
community mental health centers and within the community at large. In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in
the methods of empirical data collection and analysis, this doctoral
dissertation project provides a scientific analysis of the social effects of
psychiatric deinstitutionalization in the everyday lives of community members,
caregivers, and clients. By examining scientifically the effects of psychiatric
deinstitutionalization, this dissertation project will provide greater
understanding of its effects in the everyday lives of community residents. The
project also broadens the participation of underrepresented groups in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project
examines how community members become involved in caring for deinstitutionalized
clients and their community. It asks three main questions: (1) How are community
residents involved in the process of psychiatric deinstitutionalization? (2) How
are practices of community care enacted? (3) Does psychiatric
deinstitutionalization reshape the boundaries between the clinic and the
community? The researcher will conduct ethnographic observation, semi-structured
interviews, focus groups, and archival research to explore the social effects of
psychiatric deinstitutionalization in the community. Remote fieldwork methods
such as virtual interviews, photovoice, and journaling, will also be used. Data
will be thematically coded and analyzed carefully to explore how discourses
around psychiatric deinstitutionalization, community mental health, and
community care are developed and enacted by caregivers, clients, and community
members. By scientifically investigating how community members participate in
community care activities for deinstitutionalized clients, and by asking what
happens to the boundaries between clinic and community, this dissertation
project will make significant contributions to research on mental health care in
the community setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.