* 2116971
* Systematic Investigation of Alfvenic Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Coupling in the Dayside Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Andreas Keiling, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 449,751.00

Aflven waves have been discovered in many astronomical plasmas, such as the Sun
and the magnetospheres of planets including Earth, Jupiter, and Mercury. Alfven
waves transport energy in the magnetosphere and accelerate and heat particles.
This project will further our understanding of the global role Alfven waves play
in the coupled solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere system, particularly on the
dayside. The results are applicable to improving space weather forecasts,
providing boundary conditions for future space missions. The project supports
training and education of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will systematically investigate the dynamics of Alfven waves and the associated
electromagnetic power as a global phenomenon in the solar wind-magnetosphere-
ionosphere coupling as it occurs at the entry point to the dayside auroral
acceleration region. A 12-year database from the Polar satellite will be used to
conduct statistical studies, along with solar wind and interplanetary magnetic
field data, geomagnetic indices, and the evolution of the storm phases. The goal
is to quantify and predict the global Alfven wave contribution and dissipation
under various scenarios on the dayside and test the results against
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.