* 2116199
* Marine Geological Samples Laboratory: Graduate School of Oceanography, University of Rhode Island (support of marine sample curation)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Rebecca Robinson, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 395,696.00

Samples of seafloor rocks, cores, corals, hydrothermal vent fluids and chimney
deposits, sediments, other materials are valuable scientific resources that are
collected at great expense on scientific oceanographic expeditions. Some samples
come from shallow, near-shore environments of unusual and ephemeral character
and others come from mid-ocean ridges, seamounts, the abyssal plain, the roots
of volcanic islands, and continental shelves. Many samples come from
inaccessible places miles below the surface of the ocean and are retrieved from
the seafloor by specialized robotic vehicles, human occupied submersibles,
coring devices, and/or rock dredges. To preserve these valuable samples and make
them available to other scientists for studies not envisioned by the original
collectors, the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program of the Division of Ocean
Sciences of the National Science Foundation funds four professionally run
repositories that house samples collected by seagoing scientists. This award
funds the curation, storage, and distribution of marine seafloor samples by the
University of Rhode Island's Marine Geological Sample Laboratory. Samples are
distributed upon request to scientists and educators wishing to better
understand the ocean basins, the distribution of its resources, and how the
Earth works. &lt;br/&gt;Over the past 3 years, this repository has distributed
almost 800 samples of seafloor material to US and international scientists to
advance our knowledge of the seafloor, ocean crust, mantle, seafloor volcanism,
and the history of ocean chemistry and Earth's climate. Samples from the
repositories have been used to pioneer new analytical techniques and provide
important insights into the seafloor, the continental margins, and sub-oceanic
magmatic processes. Broader impacts of the work include training of graduate
students in curation and the techniques used to collect samples, graduate level
course involvement, and public outreach via tours for primary and secondary
school groups, local community organizations, and other interested parties. This
award also provides support for an essential piece of marine geology
infrastructure and provides support to an institution in a state that does not
receive a significant amount of Federal funding (i.e., an EPSCoR
state).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.