* 2116641
* HNDS-R Collaborative Research:  Measuring Belief Distortions to Improve Predictive Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sydney Ludvigson, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,805.00

Systematic expectational errors embedded in beliefs (belief distortions) can
have important effects on the economy. This project aims to explore the relation
between belief distortions and economic outcomes. The research will explore to
what extent beliefs pertaining to key variables closely related to monetary
policy, such as interest rates and financial aggregates, may be distorted. The
project will also examine how the beliefs and sentiments voiced in polling, such
as those pertaining to elections, may produce biased forecasts of election
outcomes. In exploring these questions, the project will utilize textual data
from written documents such as online news outlets and social media, and data
from betting markets, which will further be combined with other economic
indicators. By utilizing this data, the project will account for biases in
surveyed expectations about the future path of monetary policy as well as the
performance of polls and surveys in predicting financial market variables and
election outcomes. The project will develop machine learning based methods to
improve prediction and estimation in a range of settings that rely on surveys by
uncovering systematic errors in survey responses, and by correcting these errors
using artificial intelligence algorithms. These tools will provide considerable
potential improvements in prediction accuracy of surveys in a variety of
contexts in the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental challenge in
addressing whether beliefs are biased is that no objective measure of such
distortions exists. This research aims to address this challenge by leveraging
advancements in machine learning. A general premise of the approach followed in
this project is that big data algorithms can be productively employed to reveal
subjective biases in human judgements in multiple contexts, thereby facilitating
more accurate objective forecasts. The project will construct and study a
comprehensive, methodologically consistent, econometric measure of belief
distortions in expectations about future monetary policy and electoral outcomes,
among other variables. This objective requires employment of large amounts of
data related to real-time decision making and machine-learning tools to reduce
sampling noise. Data scraped from written documents will be analyzed using a
Latent Dirichlet Allocation type of model to extract high-frequency measures of
the topics covered by news outlets and social media. Data about election
outcomes, betting markets, and financial market futures contracts will be added
to a large real time dataset of economic information. The research will then
incorporate these methodologies and data to study beliefs and possible
judgmental errors found in survey expectations related to the future conduct of
monetary policy, the behavior of financial markets, and the outcomes of
elections. The inclusion of fast-moving variables taken from options and futures
markets and scraped from online documents will enable high-frequency tracking of
revisions in beliefs and objective forecasts. This framework will allow high-
frequency revisions in beliefs to be connected to specific news and
announcements to improve prediction accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.