* 2116968
* Towards a better understanding of explicit-declarative learning in humans and non-human primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* John David Smith, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 682,612.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning and memory are crucial to
every aspect of education, intellectual functioning, and daily living.
Researchers who study memory have definitively shown that there are different
systems of memory (e.g., unconscious habit memory vs. conscious declarative
memory). This knowledge has changed society’s views of cognitive aging,
dementia, and amnesia. However, researchers who study the basic mechanisms of
learning have not participated in this systems revolution, and this is a barrier
to scientific progress. For example, there might be different systems of
learning that have different strengths, uses, brain organizations, cognitive-
developmental trajectories, and levels of preservation during cognitive aging.
But such differentiations cannot be clearly made while the dominant mode of
thinking in the learning literature preserves an emphasis on a unitary learning
system. Accordingly, this project brings to the domain of learning research the
separation between implicit-behavioral learning (i.e., learning to react
automatically, habitually, unconsciously) and explicit-declarative learning
(i.e., learning new knowledge conceptually, consciously, perhaps verbalizably).
The project uses innovative methods toward this end. These methods selectively
suppress implicit learning, defeating habit-based learning that can interfere
with explicit forms of learning, and therefore selectively fostering explicit
learning. These methods fill important gaps in the learning literature. Applying
them across humans and nonhuman primates has the potential to transform
comparative psychology by opening a new window on animals’ reflective minds, and
possibly providing illuminating insights into animal consciousness. The insights
gained will also let researchers ask what contribution the use of language
brings to explicit learning processes —an age-old question. For example: Are
human rules and hypotheses necessarily couched in language, or only conveniently
so? Is it possible to wordlessly conceive of abstract relations between things?
Is developing language why young children slowly achieve mature analogical
reasoning? Thus, this research will provide paradigms perfectly suited to future
researchers studying the earliest manifestations of explicit learning in young
children. New methods to foster explicit learning could help children with
developmental delay, learning disabilities, and autism spectrum disorder—by
teaching them basic approaches to that learning that are less language-bound or
less introspective and self-conscious. The methods could let educators focus
students’ learning effort toward the explicit/conceptual level and optimize
their success. The research will produce animal models of explicit learning to
further the neuro-scientific study of explicit cognition, revealing its brain
organization, pointing to factors that may reduce its functionality and factors
that may enhance it. Thus, the project bears on the evolution of humans’ highest
cognitive capacities—an important part of the story of human
emergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Myriad human and animal learning studies have
provided subjects with immediate, concrete, trial-by-trial reinforcement. This
approach limits scientific understanding because it allows low-level forms of
automated, habitual learning to control the learning process. In turn, this can
interfere with the operation of higher-level forms of explicit-conceptual
learning that may be more desirable. Accordingly, this project uses alternative
reinforcement environments—that is, displaced reinforcement—to surmount this
obstacle and achieve its ends. For example, one method will ask participants to
complete a block of trials before receiving any feedback. The project will show
that displaced reinforcement defeats the processes of implicit-procedural
learning, while encouraging participants to think explicitly and conceptually
about the task at hand. It will show that participants must self-supervise their
learning in this reinforcement environment, relating the summary feedback to
their self-discovered rule or strategy. Indeed, the crucial innovation of this
project is that these effects operate synergistically, for with implicit-
procedural learning selectively disabled, the investigators can observe a pivot
to some other learning strategy such as the use of the explicit-declarative
learning system. Thus, the investigators are observing conscious hypotheses and
rules, conceptual knowledge, and analogical relationships particularly enhanced.
Specifically, Experiment 1 (E1) trains humans and animals to thrive in the
altered reinforcement environments used in the research, a key preliminary
grounding later experiments. E2 shows that displaced reinforcement selectively
fosters the learning of rules based on single dimensions (e.g., big things are
A; small things are B) that is typical of pre-frontal brain regions. E3 asks
whether a hypothesis-testing form of learning is selectively preserved under
displaced reinforcement. E4 asks whether explicit learning under displaced
reinforcement features conscious rule discovery and sudden learning (so-called
“AHA experiences”). This may be a revolutionary finding about animal minds. E5
demonstrates that participants can self-supervise their own learning under
displaced reinforcement, applying their own conceptual framework. E6 lets
monkeys – for the first time, without having ever received immediate
reinforcement -- declare their own conceptual rules and category boundaries. The
later experiments demonstrate that explicit-declarative learning is distinctive
for fostering knowledge that is more generalizable and more
conceptual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.