* 2116848
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of COVID-19 on food choice and well-being
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Vania Smith-Oka, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,862.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crises force people to adjust to
novel circumstances in ways known to affect behavior, health, and well-being.
Nutritional considerations are a critical component of adjustment to crises as
individual and community circumstances change in ways that affect food
availability and other costs and benefits relevant to food choice. This is
particularly true in the context of COVID-19, which has affected not only
personal circumstances (e.g., income), but also food supply chains, costs, and
so on. This doctoral dissertation research investigates how people adjust food
choice to crisis in the context of the ever-evolving COVID-19 pandemic. It tests
anthropological theories of resilience and disaster to investigate whether and
how people change dietary habits to alleviate the stresses associated with
ongoing crisis. In addition to training a first-generation doctoral student in
anthropology, the research will be disseminated widely, including to local
communities and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research
proposes a biocultural theoretical lens to investigate 1) food access,
preferences, and choices; 2) the use of food in response to stress; and 3) the
effects of related decisions on human biology and health. The doctoral student
will conduct surveys, gather data on food consumption and diet-related
activities, and collect biological measurements (hemoglobin levels, height,
weight, body fat percentage) to achieve these research aims. The study will be
conducted in communities that have been variably affected by COVID-19 in terms
of maintenance of personal and household income and community-wide food
availability. Findings from this research will provide a broader understanding
of how crises change behavior and health via its holistic investigation of food
choice as a critical mediator of stress and health
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.