* 2116046
* Utilizing the Library System and Virtual Reality Learning Experiences To Engage Rural and LatinX Communities in Polar Research
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Diego Roman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,706,694.00

Access to STEM information is unequal, with rural and poor communities often
receiving the fewest public education science and science literacy
opportunities. Rural areas also face unique STEM teaching and technology
integration challenges. In fact, LatinX communities in rural areas are less
likely to have access to educational resources and language supports available
to LatinX communities in urban centers. This project will help address these
inequities by engaging rural librarians, bilingual science communicators, polar
scientists, and a technical team to create a series of five bilingual virtual
reality (VR) experiences to enhance STEM understanding and appreciation. Project
researchers will create a new channel for disseminating polar science, working
first with rural Latinx communities in Wisconsin to create a new network between
rural communities and university researchers. Involving rural librarians in the
co-design of instruction process will produce new ways for rural libraries to
engage their local communities and their growing Latinx populations with polar
science learning experiences. Each of the five VR experiences will focus on a
different area of research, using the captivating Arctic and Antarctic
environments as a central theme to convey science. VR is a particularly powerful
and apt approach, making it possible to visit places that most cannot experience
first-hand while also learning about the wide range of significant research
taking place in polar regions. After design, prototyping and testing are
finished, the VR experiences will be freely available for use nationally in both
rural and urban settings. Public engagement with science creates a multitude of
mutual benefits that result from a better-informed society. These benefits
include greater trust and more reasoned scrutiny of science along with increased
interest in STEM careers, many of which have higher earning potential. The
project team will partner with 51 rural libraries which are valued community
outlets valuable outlets to improve science literacy and public engagement with
science. The effects of this project will be seen with thousands of community
members who take part in the testing of prototype VR experiences during
development and scaled engagement through ongoing library programs utilizing the
final VR experiences for years to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create new informal STEM learning assessment techniques through combining prior
efforts in the areas of educational data mining for stealth assessment and
viewpoint similarity metrics through monitoring gaze direction. Results of the
project contribute to the field of educational data mining (EDM), focusing on
adopting its methods for VR learning experiences. EDM is a process of using fine
grained interaction data from a digital system to support educationally relevant
conclusions and has been applied extensively to intelligent tutors and more
recently, educational videogames. This project will continue building on
existing approaches by expanding to include the unique affordances of VR
learning media, specifically gaze. The project will focus on predicting user
quitting as well as assessing key learning goals within each experience and
triangulate these predictive models with user observations and post-experience
surveys. The eventual application of this foundational research would address
the problem in assessing a learner using measures external to the experience
itself (i.e., surveys) and instead provide new methods that instrument learners
using only data generated by their actions within the learning context. These
techniques will provide a new means for evaluating informal learning in
immersive technology settings without need for explicit tagging. The findings
from this project will enable a greater understanding of the relationship
between a userâ€™s experience and their learning outcomes, which may prove
integral in the creation of educational interventions using VR technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments.
This project is also supported by the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.