* 2116804
* Mechanisms and Variability of Tropical Cyclone Formation under the Upper-Tropospheric Influence
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Zhuo Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 437,238.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricanes and tropical storms
have a variety of different pathways to development. Significant attention has
been paid to storms developing from tropical waves crossing the very warm waters
of the tropical Atlantic Ocean. However, less attention has been paid to
tropical transition (TT) storms, which form over cooler sea surface temperatures
and under stronger winds aloft. These complex storms are nonetheless potentially
very impactful to society because they develop closer to the southeastern US
coastline and are generally less predictable. This award is for the study of
these tropical transition storms. The intended output from this study will be
improved predictive skill of TT storms which is important for protection of life
and property. The project will also support graduate students, ensuring the
training of the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical
Transition (TT) storms form due to the interaction of an upper-level trough and
a low-level disturbance outside the Main Development Region (MDR), usually in
cooler waters. Two competing influences impact TT storms; high vertical wind
shear that hinders tropical cyclone development, and quasi-geostrophic ascent
that promotes convection and tropical cyclogenesis. This project will test a set
of hypotheses centered on the dynamic, thermodynamic, and convective evolution
leading to the formation of a TT storm using observational data (track,
reanalysis, satellite) and high-resolution numerical modeling simulations using
the WRF-ARW model. The four hypotheses to be tested are: H1: Convective
evolution at the first stage of TT is largely controlled by the balanced ascent
of the 3D synoptic flow, which is affected by both the upper-level and the low-
level disturbances, H2: The interaction between an upper-level potential
vorticity (PV) anomaly and a low-level disturbance creates a pouch-like
structure (i.e., a quasi-closed Lagrangian circulation) in the lower and mid-
troposphere, H3: The formation of the pouch-like structure marks the onset of
the second stage of TT, during which the tropical cyclone formation proceeds
with the same mesoscale processes as in MDR storms and differential moistening
within the pouch plays an important role in convective organization, and H4: A
new Genesis Potential Index (GPI), which considers both the upper- and lower-
tropospheric conditions, will better represent TT storms than the current GPI
formula and can help better understand and predict the variability of TT
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.