* 2116801
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Acquisition of Phonological Processes in Heritage Language Speakers
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Ji Young Kim, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2023
* USD 16,038.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heritage bilinguals are speakers
that have acquired their first language, a minority language in the society,
simultaneously or sequentially with the majority language. The pressure of the
majority language typically results in majority-to-heritage language transfer in
these speakers' adult pronunciation systems. However, little is known about the
strength, development, and direction of language transfer as heritage speakers
gain systematic exposure to the majority language during childhood. By comparing
child heritage speakers to adult heritage speakers, this dissertation seeks to
examine the effect of age and degree of heritage language exposure on the rate
of bidirectional language transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation
project examines the production of word-external junctures in consonant-to-vowel
sequences in a heritage language. Child and adult heritage speakers, monolingual
speakers of the minority language, and monolingual speakers of the majority
language will participate in two picture-naming tasks in each language. The two
tasks will elicit sequences of function and content words, the first using real
words and the second using novel words. A background linguistic questionnaire to
examine degree of language exposure to the heritage language will also be
administered to the caregivers and the adult participants. Understanding the
acquisition of phonological processes in the heritage language will help
educators develop heritage language programs and it will bring awareness to the
importance of including phonological instruction targeting specific
pronunciation phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.