* 2116753
* Collaborative Research: Highly Ordered Nanoscale Patterns Produced by Ion Bombardment of Solid Surfaces: Theory and Experiment
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Richard Bradley, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 12/31/2024
* USD 182,220.00

When a flat solid surface is bombarded with a broad ion beam, patterns can
emerge spontaneously, including surface ripples with a wavelength as short as
one ten-thousandth of the width of a human hair. If the patterns formed were not
almost always disordered, this fascinating type of self-organization could
become a widely employed method of fabricating structures with feature sizes too
small to be produced by conventional techniques. A central goal of this
collaborative theoretical and experimental research is therefore to develop and
refine methods of producing highly ordered surface ripples by ion bombardment.
Surfaces patterns of this kind could be used in a variety of applications,
including ones in which extreme ultraviolet light must be manipulated or
analyzed. This project involves graduate, undergraduate and high school students
who are working in a field that bridges basic research and applications. In
addition to experiencing, and contributing to, an important topic in current
materials research, the students are learning to use a wide range of
theoretical, simulation and materials characterization tools that will translate
well to future careers in industry or academia. Beyond working with the
materials research communities at their home institutions, the project is
providing the students with a broader perspective through participation in the
exciting, multi-disciplinary environments at national x-ray scattering
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration brings together two
principal investigators who have individually made seminal theoretical and
experimental contributions to the field of ion beam nanopatterning, producing a
team that is uniquely positioned to advance the field. Two key strategies are
being employed in working toward the goal of producing surface ripples with an
exceptional degree of order. These strategies are also leading to important
steps forward in our understanding of the fundamental processes that take place
during ion bombardment. The first strategy is to study the onset of pattern
formation that occurs as the angle of ion incidence or the sample temperature is
varied through a threshold value. Near-threshold behavior is being examined in
three different regimes: 1) the higher energy regime in which sputtering is
important; 2) the low-energy regime in which sputtering is negligible, a largely
unexplored frontier of the field; and 3) the high-temperature regime in which
the surface remains crystalline, resulting in better quality material for
electronic/photonic applications. The equation of motion becomes simpler near
these transitions and can be rigorously derived. In addition, it has a high
degree of universality, i.e., it is to a large extent independent of the choice
of target material and ion species. Studying near-threshold behavior was the key
to making fundamental advances in the theory of phase transitions, and the same
is proving to be true for ion-induced pattern formation. Finally, and most
importantly, almost perfectly ordered ripple patterns are in certain
circumstances predicted to form close to threshold. The second central strategy
of the project is to exploit the power of real-time x-ray scattering. The
extreme sensitivity of grazing-incidence small-angle x-ray scattering to surface
disturbances makes it an ideal method to study the near-threshold behavior of
the nanopatterns and to rigorously test the theory. Moreover, the research team
is taking advantage of the increasing coherent x-ray flux available at new and
upgraded synchrotron sources to develop coherent x-ray scattering as a powerful
new approach to investigating surface dynamics at the nanoscale. Coherent
scattering gives entirely new insight, going beyond study of the average surface
evolution to measure the time-dependent fluctuations of the microstructure
around the average kinetics, enabling novel tests of the detailed theoretical
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.