* 2116856
* (HNDS-R) Hierarchical Networks of International Order and International Conflict
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Bear Braumoeller, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 06/30/2024
* USD 747,301.00

International orders have a profound impact on international conflict.
Nevertheless, the effects of order on conflict and vice-versa are complex and
poorly understood. Moreover, historical analogies that are used to aid policy
decisions are overwhelmingly drawn from relationships in the Western world. This
research takes a multidimensional approach to improving our understanding of the
relationship between international order and conflict. To shed light on the
mechanisms that connect order to conflict, the research team uses computational
network models, derived from a broad array of historical cases, that connect the
dynamics of state behavior to patterns of order at the level of the
international system. To explore the utility of those models, the team develops
new network measures of political order and systemic uncertainty and conducts
cross-national survey research into the individual-level determinants of support
for order. The project has several broader impacts: (1) it contributes to an
improved understanding of the order-conflict relationship; (2) it further
expands the geographic boundaries of the study of international order and
support for order beyond the Western world; and (3) it provides a more concrete
foundation for policy recommendations that meaningfully enhance national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research include the
development of computational network models relating international order,
domestic political order, and conflict; the extension of those models beyond the
context of the Western World, specifically to incorporate Eastern understandings
of order; the validation and calibration of those models on original, multi-
country survey data; and the development of original network measures of order
and uncertainty. These projects will give the research team a considerably
better understanding of the implications of different configurations of
international order for conflict, improve forecasts of political instability by
adding an international dimension to our collective understanding of domestic
instability, provide a better understanding of the implications for conflict of
a non-Western international order, and provide foundational knowledge to
underpin a foreign policy strategy designed to leverage international order to
produce peace and mitigate instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.