* 2116812
* Political Leaders Through Time (PLT)
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* John Gerring, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 363,384.00

Studies that seek to understand political leadership, stability and conflict
focus primarily on the last 100 years as the basis of their evidence. This
project collects data on leaders in over 2000 polities throughout the world over
two millenia to examine how geography conditions political stability. The
project has broader impact by producing scholarship that advances our
understanding of the social and political factors that are associated with
political stability and other features of a peaceful society. In addition, it
provides data that is useful shedding new light on a wide variety of other
important questions: When did political institutions in the West diverge from
those in the East? When were women chosen as leaders? Was the tenure of leaders
in the ancient world shorter, longer, or comparable to the tenure of leaders
today? Have instances of violent removal of leaders changed appreciably over
time? How has the advent of mass democracy affected the circulation of elites?
How do geographical features of polities influence these patterns?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social-science studies of political leaders focus mostly
on the contemporary era. “Political Leaders through Time” (PLT) encompasses two
millennia, over 2,000 polities, nearly 5,000 polity-centuries, and more than
70,000 leaders, each of which is coded across twenty-four attributes. The
substantive focus of the PLT centers on the question of political order. It is
hypothesized that political stability may be conditioned by geographic features.
Additionally, the project provides a first-of-its-kind gazetteer of historical
states complemented by GIS polygons to map their locations through time. The PLT
allows for a systematic and global analysis of many other questions that have
heretofore been examined only in the modern era or for a single region (e.g.,
Europe). As such, the PLT offers a massive expansion of our knowledge about
leaders and leadership transitions through time and across the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.