* 2116526
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of Healthcare Reform on Healthcare Service Delivery for Vulnerable Populations
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Sarah Phillips, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 21,647.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Public health systems are always embedded in a
particular social context. Studies have demonstrated that how citizens interact
with and respond to public health campaigns often depends on the quality of
citizens’ relationship to the state. However, the question of how marginalized
communities interact with the public health systems remains understudied. The
research supported by this award uses observations, interviews, and media
analysis to investigate how vulnerable populations receive public healthcare
services in the context of an ambitious healthcare reform. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project will
enhance scientific understandings of how public health strategies translate and
are adjusted and modified in different local contexts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will take place over 12 months in a context where a previously
discontinued public healthcare service has been resumed. Firstly, the research
asks about the cultural ideas that inform public health workers’ delivery of HIV
services to vulnerable groups. Secondly, the research explores how interactions
with a reformed public health system impact the vulnerable community’s feeling
of belonging. The researcher will work across two different settings: a local
public health center and among the larger vulnerable community that it services.
Data will be collected through detailed observation, and interviews with health
workers and vulnerable members of the local population. This research
contributes to theories of state care and state-citizens relations. In the
fields of political anthropology and medical anthropology, the project advances
theoretical understanding of the formation of political subjectivity among
marginalized populations and how everyday bureaucratic interactions shape
citizens’ ideas of the state. Finally, findings from this research will produce
multi-perspective data that will aid policymakers, educators, and public health
workers to develop better policies and programs that anticipate the effects of
local cultural factors on the delivery of healthcare
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.