* 2116395
* MRI: Acquisition of an NMR console and probe to support research and education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wendy Strangman, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of North Carolina at
Wilmington (UNCW) is upgrading the electronics of a console for a 500 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer and is equipping it with a modern
probe to support chemistry research at UNCW. This spectrometer allows research
in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of chemically and
biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as
collaborators from regional colleges such as those from the University of North
Carolina at Pembroke that serves a distinctly diverse student body. Students
from the Pembrokeâ€™s Research Initiative for Scientific Enhancement (RISE)
Program whose goal is to create a more diverse research workforce are users of
this instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
the development of methodologies to facilitate the structure elucidation of
small and medium-sized molecules. The instrumentation is also used to study the
chemical ecology and for structurally determining natural products from cultured
microbes and harmful algal blooms. The instrument also serves researchers
evaluating medicinal plant extracts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.