* 2116624
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effecting Changes While Providing Reproductive Health Care in Diverse Organizational Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Lauren Marsh, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 01/31/2024
* USD 24,405.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
project examines variation in caregiving attitudes and practices, the resulting
impacts on pregnancy outcomes, and caregivers’ attempts to improve outcomes in
general while navigating differential institutional conventions. Caregivers face
tradeoffs between individualized care and broader organizational priorities, and
this research investigates how caregivers balance those tradeoffs while
effecting organizational change. This research valuably contributes to
scholarship on the practice of health care amid divergent economic, ethical, and
institutional challenges. By focusing on multiple comparable institutions, the
research helps to characterize individuals’ contributions to organizational
change. The results from the study help to guide the implementation of health
care in diverse contexts. This study contributes to the training of a graduate
student in scientific methodology and analytical approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how caregivers provide support and
healthcare for pregnant and post-partum women in diverse organizational settings
with limited infrastructure and access to resources, particularly prisons. The
investigation focuses on tradeoffs imposed by the caregivers’ concurrent
attempts to effect positive organizational change while maintaining high
standards of health care. Using a combination of methods, including
observational approaches, interviews with a diverse sample of stakeholders,
focus groups, and an analysis of social media content, the investigators examine
how caregivers navigate these tradeoffs in multiple organizational settings.
This comparative approach contributes to scholarship on the multifaceted factors
that shape how healthcare providers advance and implement improvements to the
systems in which they work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.