* 2116406
* The Dynamics of Illicit Governance
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Javier Osorio, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 526,070.00

The Dynamics of Illicit Governance&lt;br/&gt;PI: Javier Osorio, University of
Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Increasingly armed
actors, such as criminal groups, insurgents, and paramilitaries, not only engage
in violence but also provide governance at the local level in some countries.
This project therefore seeks to explain why, which, and where organized criminal
groups develop illicit governance structures over local economic, social, and
political activities. To examine illicit governance structures, the project will
use online-expert surveys to collect data as well as comparative subnational
fieldwork. The findings of this project will contribute to U.S. national
security by advancing an understanding of the causes of illicit governance in
countries where the U.S. seeks to support national governments, maintain
political stability, and contain civil conflicts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projectâ€™s analytical framework explains how the degree of labor/capital
intensity of different illicit markets and their territorial
concentration/diffusion shape the dynamics of violence and illicit governance.
This framework also takes into consideration criminal-state relationships and
interactions between rival criminal groups. To empirically examine illicit
governance structures, the project will utilize an online-expert survey to
collect data from hundreds of security experts. Data collected from the expert
surveys and other sources will then be statistically analyzed in order to test
the empirical implications of the theoretical framework. The quantitative
analyses will employ a variety of quasi-experimental identification strategies
to strengthen causal inference. Comparative subnational qualitative case
research will be conducted to illustrate and assess causal mechanisms suggested
by the statistical results. The findings of this project will advance scholarly
literatures in areas such as failed states, non-state actor governance in
conflict-affected countries, criminal organizations and corruption, and
democratic back-sliding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.