* 2116298
* NSF Center for the Chemistry of Molecularly Optimized Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2026
* USD 8,000,000.00

The NSF Center for the Chemistry of Molecularly Optimized Networks (MONET)
strives to create the fundamental knowledge and uncover generalizable design
principles that connect the chemical structure and properties of the individual
molecular components of a polymer network to the function and properties of
network-based materials. Examples of network materials include automobile tires,
biomedical implants and structural materials. The long-term innovation potential
of this fundamental research includes cost- and time-efficient optimization of
network composition and dramatic improvements in network durability for tough,
longer-lived materials that reduce waste. The multi-institutional and
collaborative team of researchers promotes innovation by developing open-source
tools for polymer chemistry informatics, creating knowledge that addresses
industrial bottlenecks, and pursuing technology transfer and intellectual
property. These efforts are demonstrated by industrial partnerships, a robust
patent portfolio, spin-off companies, and the adoption of newly developed data
tools by industrial and academic users worldwide. MONET-supported graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers access student-centered professional
development opportunities in scientific leadership, informal science
communication, innovation, and interdisciplinary and collaborative project
management. They promote broader participation in the sciences by developing,
deploying, and assessing mechanisms for low-cost, scalable, and distributed
research participation. In partnership with performance artists, key concepts
from MONET's research will be shared with the public through artistic
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Center for the Chemistry of
Molecularly Optimized Networks (MONET) incorporates experts in polymer
chemistry, synthetic methods, photochemistry, multi-scale modeling, and
bioconjugation to develop polymer network strands and junctions that exhibit new
combinations of structural activity and chemical reactivity for enhanced
operational performance and improved end-of-life value. MONET's research efforts
are organized into three intertwined research thrusts: Thrust 1 focuses on the
chemical reactivity and conformational changes of polymer strands within a
permanently fixed network structure, and how that strand chemistry is manifested
in the systems-level chemical behavior of polymer networks; Thrust 2 seeks to
extend the reactivity of chemically active junctions in order to understand the
fundamentals of chemical reactivity in the dynamic structural environment of a
polymer network, and to identify minimal chemical interventions that result in
maximum network response; and Thrust 3 develops, deploys, and uses polymer data
tools that serve the community and ensure that data-intensive methods can be
integrated into the centerâ€™s research agenda. Center members emphasize research
translation through a combination of open-source tool development and the
protection of intellectual property in their innovation efforts. The center
trains and develops a diverse cohort of chemists that works collaboratively and
leverages one another's expertise. MONET partners with performance artists to
encourage interest in the physical sciences and engage the public in the
challenges and the opportunities for molecularly optimized networks. MONET works
to advance data use and reuse by creating and utilizing tools and databases that
lower the barriers to sharing and comparing primary
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.