* 2116265
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Throughput Small Angle X-ray Scattering Instrument for Data-Driven Materials Design
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christine Luscombe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 07/31/2024
* USD 547,830.00

Nontechnical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award is to acquire a high-throughput small angle x-ray scattering (HT-
SAXS) instrument to accelerate the discovery of a wide range of nanostructured
materials. Nanostructured materials are essential elements for the development
of new technologies in healthcare, clean energy, and environmental
sustainability among many others. The HT-SAXS instrument is especially
configured to use x-rays to non-destructively analyze material structures over a
broad range of size scales. This precise measurement of structure is critical to
the design of materials that have specific properties (e.g. mechanical,
electronic, optical) to meet the needs of their target end-use applications. The
instrument is also uniquely configured to analyze a broad range of materials
(e.g. polymers, gels, proteins, particles and composites) very quickly and
automatically, through the use of robotic sample handling features, so that it
can operate efficiently and autonomously to enable the execution of high-
throughput experiments. In addition, acquisition of this instrument will see
implementation of advanced data science and artificial intelligence algorithms
for accelerated materials design. This HT-SAXS instrument enables a large and
diverse group of researchers and students, distributed across several pacific
northwest research institutions, to openly access state of the art x-ray
instrumentation to meet critical needs for research, education and workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
HT-SAXS instrument seamlessly integrates Bonse-Hart optics for Ultra-SAXS
(USAXS), pinhole SAXS and wide-angle x-ray scattering (WAXS) to analyze
nanomaterials with structural features ranging from 0.1 nm to 5,000 nm. It uses
motorized collimation optics, detector motion and autonomous sample-changing
capabilities to enable its use in data-driven materials design problems where
statistical design of experiments, advanced data visualization and knowledge
extraction via machine learning is facilitated. the instrument's grazing
incidence small angle scattering cell is used for the analysis of conjugated
polymers, molecules and blends with commodity polymers to produce materials with
optimized optoelectronic properties. The HT-SAXS instrument enables and
accelerates numerous data-driven materials research projects including colloidal
systems such as emulsions and nanocrystals as well as for block-copolymers,
polymer blends and cyclic bottle-brush polymers, de-novo designer proteins,
organic frameworks, bio-composite plastics, as well as educational
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.