* 2116151
* Scripps Institution of Oceanography - Oceanographic Equipment
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,781,956.00

Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO) requests funds for oceanographic
instrumentation that is needed to carry out NSF-supported scientific research.
Working within the collaborative framework of the University-National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), the proposed instrumentation will be
maintained by the SIO ship operations department for use by NSF-supported
scientists from institutions nationwide who require these seagoing facilities.
Instrumentation is requested to support the portable seismic capabilities of the
Academic Research Fleet (ARF). In addition, new instrumentation is requested to
support hydrographic analysis support for the Oceanographic Data Facility (ODF),
a shared use support facility for Physical, Biological and Chemical
oceanography. With this proposal, SIO provides technical descriptions and
rationale for the acquisition of the following Oceanographic Instrumentation:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Portable Seismic Air Compressors
$1,686,195&lt;br/&gt;Cyberinfrastructure (CI), Ship Operations and Oceanographic
Technical Services $156,946&lt;br/&gt;Highly Purified Water (HPW) Systems R/V
Roger Revelle and R/V Sally Ride $17,847&lt;br/&gt;Nutrient Autoanalyzer
$95,761&lt;br/&gt;Kongsberg APOS USBL Modem Upgrade R/V Roger Revelle and R/V
Sally Ride $13,629&lt;br/&gt; $1,970,378&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts
&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review
Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure
support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in
support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually
undergo separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The
acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-
funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.