* 2116070
* Ice Worlds: A Giant Screen Film and Outreach Project
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Karen Elinich, Giant Screen Films
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,786,215.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ice Worlds media project will inspire millions of
children and adults to gain new knowledge about polar environments, the planet’s
climate, and humanity’s place within Earth’s complex systems—supporting an
informed, STEM literate citizenry. Featuring the NSF-funded THOR expedition to
Thwaites glacier, along with contributions of many NSF-supported researchers
worldwide, Ice Worlds will share the importance of investments in STEM with
audiences in giant screen theaters, on television, online, and in other informal
settings. Primary project deliverables include a giant screen film, a filmmaking
workshop for Native American middle school students that will result in a
documentary, a climate storytelling professional development program for
informal educators, and a knowledge-building summative evaluation. The project’s
largest target audience is middle school learners (ages 11-14); specific
activities are designed for Native American youth and informal science
practitioners. Innovative outreach will engage youth underserved in science
inspiring a new generation of scientists and investigative thinkers. The
project’s professional development programs will build the capacity of informal
educators to engage communities and communicate science. The Ice Worlds project
is a collaboration among media producers Giant Screen Films, Natural History New
Zealand, PBS, and Academy Award nominated film directors (Yes/No Productions).
Additional collaborators include Northwestern University, The American Indian
Science and Engineering Society, the Native American Journalism Association, a
group of museum and science center partners, and a team of advisors including
scientific and Indigenous experts associated with the NSF-funded Study of
Environmental Arctic Change initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project are: 1) to increase public understanding of the processes and
consequences of environmental change in polar ecosystems, 2) to explore the
effectiveness of the giant screen format to impart knowledge, inspire motivation
and caring for nature, 3) to improve middle schoolers’ interest, confidence and
engagement in STEM topics and pursuits—broadly and through a specific program
for Native American youth, and 4) to build informal educators’ capacity to share
stories of climate change in their communities. The main evaluation questions
are 1) to what extent does the Ice World film affect learning, engagement, and
motivation around STEM pursuits and environmental problem solving 2) what is the
added value of companion media for youth’s giant screen learning over short and
longer term, and 3) what are the impacts of the culturally based Native American
youth workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evaluation work will involve a Native
American youth advisory panel and a panel of science center practitioners in the
giant screen film’s development and evaluation process. Formative evaluation of
the film will involve recruiting youth from diverse backgrounds, including
representation of Native youth, to see the film in the giant screen theater of a
partner site. Post viewing surveys and group discussions will explore their
experience of the film with respect to engagement, learning, evoking spatial
presence, and motivational impact. A summative evaluation of the completed film
will assess its immediate and longer term impacts. Statistical analyses will be
conducted on all quantitative data generated from the evaluation, including a
comparison of pre and post knowledge scores. An evaluation of the Tribal Youth
Media program will include a significant period of formative evaluation and
community engagement to align activities to the needs and interests of
participating students. Culturally appropriate measures, qualitative methods and
frameworks will be used to assess the learning impacts. Data will be analyzed to
determine learning impacts of the workshop on youth participants as well as
mentors and other stakeholder participants. Evaluation of the community climate
storytelling professional development component will include lessons learned and
recommendations for implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.