* 2116165
* Topics in Information Economics: Deception, Damage, and Privacy
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joel Sobel, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2024
* USD 254,000.00

This research project will consist of two studies. The first study will
investigate the relationship between deceptive practices and negative
consequences. Public policy has a role in protecting consumers from false and
misleading claims. What constitutes deceptive behavior depends on the
circumstances. The project will introduce different definitions of deception. In
each case, it will identify when deception leads to a reduction in consumer well
being. The project will lead to a better understanding of the costs of deceptive
behavior and inform policies that limit deceptive practices. The study will
instruct policy makers to use the context – the characteristics of the decision
problem – to determine which practices are deceptive and to identify which
behavior should be classified as deceptive. The second study will present a
framework to study the feasibility of policies that safeguard individuals’
personal information and the welfare consequences of these policies. We now have
the ability to collect, store, and analyze vast quantities of information about
individual behavior. Consumers appear to be willing to provide information to
these firms voluntarily, but there is widespread concern that they do not
receive proper compensation for the information they provide. The study will
develop the idea that interdependence of information – the property that
information provided by one person may reveal information about another – could
explain why people may voluntarily disclose private information without
compensation. The study will identify when it is impossible to protect private
information and suggest ways in which to redistribute the benefits from sharing
information when full privacy protection is not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of damage and deception builds on
standard models of strategic communication. A speaker deceives an audience if
communication induces in- correct beliefs about the state of the world. A
speaker damages an audience if these incorrect beliefs lead the audience to make
suboptimal decisions. Different definitions of incorrect beliefs will lead to
different definitions of deception. For each definition, the research will
characterize those preferences of the audience for which deception is damaging.
The study of privacy will use the theory of mechanism design to determine
whether a consumer will provide information to an information-collecting
platform or opt out. Agents who opt out do not provide information to the
platform, but they cannot suppress information supplied by others. In this
environment, there will be a distinction between mechanisms that preserve
privacy in the sense that individuals control who can observe their personal
information from mechanisms that induce full participation (no individuals opt
out). Mechanisms that induce full participation but do not preserve privacy are
common. Studying these environments will inform policies that better compensate
individuals who contribute information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.