* 2116197
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in Socio-Environmental System Response to Glacial Recession
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Sofia Lana, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 8,316.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid glacier recession presents
a unique opportunity to explore how environmental forces shape human actions
while being shaped by them in return. While research on increasing environmental
variability justifiably continues to focus on understanding the physical
characteristics of glacier retreat, not enough research addresses the impacts of
glacial retreat on evolving, socially created landscapes built around glaciers.
As a result, resiliency and climate adaptation policies may fail because they
ignore the complex social relationships and historical particularities that
shaped societies in glacial environments to begin with and pay insufficient
attention to how human relationships with both other humans and their
environment evolve as glaciers melt. This doctoral dissertation research project
asks how human and human-environmental relations influence the formation of
transforming landscapes and livelihoods. In addition to providing funding for
the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, the project results will be
disseminated to organizational stakeholders that can optimize climate adaptation
policies. This project also broadens the participation of groups
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This comparative research
project, conducted in two melting glacial valleys, examines how unevenly
situated stakeholders adapt to, circumvent or exploit glacial melt. Pilot
research revealed a glacial valley where stakeholders, including indigenous and
other local communities, scientists, miners and policymakers, were more
concerned with claiming rights to newly accessible land and resources than with
impending water scarcity. This points to a potential gap between climate
adaptation policies, focused on vulnerability, and actual lived experiences of
environmental change. Via in-depth and semi-structured interviews and mobile
observational elicitation techniques, this project explores variation in the
ways which climate change impacts stakeholdersâ€™ present and immediate future,
providing insights into the potential range of human responses to glacial melt
at a global level. Results from the research improve scientific understanding of
the transformation of human-environmental systems in response to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.