* 2116825
* Understanding Social Stigma, Stigma Resistance and the Mental Illness Identity
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Kristen Marcussen, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 213,000.00

This project addresses social stigma and discrimination associated with mental
illness by focusing on the ways that individuals with mental health concerns
internalize negative stereotypes. In the first phase of the project, how
perceived feedback from others relates to self-views is examined. Three sources
of perceived feedback are considered: others in general (societal views), close
family and friends (significant others), and others with mental illness (similar
others). In the second phase, the ways in which individuals resist social stigma
by using different strategies to reduce discrepancies between self-views and
perceived feedback are investigated. The methodological approach advances how
social scientists measure identity and stigma. By identifying the conditions
under which stigma resistance strategies help to reduce stigma’s damaging
effects, this study has implications for improving the psychological well-being
and recovery of individuals with mental illness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses a probability sample of 2000 adults, collected via a web-based
panel platform that produces a nationally representative sample reflecting
demographic patterns in the U.S. The sample includes individuals with diagnosed
and undiagnosed mental health concerns. This sampling strategy allows variation
in severity of mental illness symptoms and stability of self-views related to
the mental illness identity and at the same time allows for generalizability of
identity and stigma processes across social groups. Respondents report on a
range of attributes specifically associated with mental illness, as well an
array of cognitive and behavioral strategies for combating stigma. Data analysis
includes a comprehensive assessment of the proposed measures of identity and
stigma. An integrated model of the mental illness identity that includes the
role of stigma resistance is tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.