* 2116140
* MRI: Acquisition of a CytoViva enhanced microscope with hyperspectral imaging capability for multidisciplinary research and education in nanotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Norton, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 267,658.00

Nanoscience and technology are playing an increasing role in fundamental
research related to the engineering (e.g., mechanical, biomedical) and
scientific (e.g., chemistry, biology) disciplines. To be able to observe and
control phenomena at nanoscale, researchers need to be equipped with appropriate
tools. This award will facilitate the acquisition of a specialized microscope
used to visualize samples at very small dimensions. Students and faculty at
Marshall University will use this microscope to gain fundamental knowledge in a
range of important research projects. These include investigating calcium
deposit in blood vessels, detecting toxic nanoparticles in human cells, water
treatment to remove contamination, and in pharmaceutical manufacturing. This
cutting-edge instrument will significantly advance the academic careers and
research output of at least five faculty members. More than 100 mostly
underrepresented students will be trained, under faculty mentorship, in modern
engineering and scientific disciplines both during lectures, laboratory modules,
and demonstrations. The incorporation of nanoscience and technology in the
undergraduate and graduate curriculum will help training the future workforce,
especially in the growing biotechnology arena in West
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award enables Marshall University to
purchase a CytoViva enhanced, high signal-to-noise darkfield optical microscope
with an integrated hyperspectral imaging system. This instrument will be used to
address fundamental knowledge gaps in highly multidisciplinary nanoscience and
nanotechnology research projects at the university. The microscope produces a
very high signal-to-noise ratio, enabling scatter detection of nanoscale
materials at up to ten times greater than standard darkfield optics. The
technology can image label-free nanoparticles and requires no sample
preparation. Label-free nanoscale materials can then be spectrally identified
based on their unique spectral properties within their target environment. The
microscope will enable Marshall faculty in biomedical and mechanical science and
engineering to accelerate their research contributions and improve teaching
through innovative laboratory demonstrations and the integration of research and
pedagogy. Researchers will use the instrument’s capability to examine phenomena
such as cell differentiation, understanding the environmental exposure to silver
nanoparticles, label-free quantitation of short nucleic acids using Surface
immobilized plasmonic sensors for RNA, nanoparticle aggregation in water
treatment, and Brownian motion and aggregation of
nanofluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.