* 2116150
* Financing the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Anne Ruderman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,952.00

This project uses a unique historical Trans-Atlantic slave trade to test an
important economic theory---how the financing or lack thereof shape the
trajectory of an industry. The project uses ship-level data to analyze investor
behavior in the transatlantic slave trade. How the slave trade was financed---
who, how, structure, and how these changed over time---have not been explored in
part because of lack of appropriate data. Based on rich sources of ship-level
data and archival records, it will create the first transnational investor-based
dataset of the slave trade. The large detailed and sophisticated nature of these
micro-level data allow the researchers to analyze economy wide patterns of
investment in the trade. The macro-comparative approach provides a first
comprehensive transnational lens on this global business. The project pays
attention to how the trading environment on the African coast impacted
investment decisions. The micro-level dataset could be used to assess long-term
inter-generational wealth transfers at the individual and family level generated
by the slave trade. The results of this research can guide financial policies to
increase the efficiency of the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will collect ship-level micro data on the Trans-Atlantic slave trade and
use it to answer questions about comparative risk-management practices,
nationality of investors, principal-agent problems, reinvestment patterns,
concentration of investor, female participation in the slave trade, and the role
of families in early modern commerce. The project will build on existing public
Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database, by cleaning investor names in the original
database, and adding new investor-related data. This data will not only allow
the PIs to study aspects of financing that were critical to the success of the
Trans-Atlantic slave trade, it will also allow other researchers to study the
financial aspects of the slave trade. The results of this research could answer
questions such as whether the way the trans-Atlantic slave trade was financed
contributed to the development of modern fiancé and whether it had any impact on
inter-generational wealth distribution in contemporary
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.