* 2116981
* A Moral Foundations Approach to How Jurors Weigh Aggravating Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jamie Hughes, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 340,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Capital jurors who find a defendant guilty are
subsequently tasked with making the decision on whether that person should live
or die. This decision is arguably the toughest moral decision to make, and
capital jurors have to make the decision and develop a justification for that
decision. It is currently unclear what goes into this decision-making process
and how capital jurors weigh different evidence that involves aggravating and
mitigating circumstances. Though most research to date has assumed jurors'
uniform interpretation of evidence, most jurors probably weigh evidence
differently based on their own values, beliefs, and experiences. By assessing
jurors'own moral beliefs and by mapping moral beliefs onto their interpretation
of evidence and ultimately their death penalty recommendations, the current
research provides a much more precise way of thinking about how people actually
judge evidence. This research assesses both the inherent value of the evidence
and the subjective value of the juror's appraisal of that evidence to better
explain how and why jurors come to very different verdicts across similar cases
and similar verdicts across very different cases. This research will extend
research on moral decision-making and help address and explain some of the
variability in evidence evaluation in the death penalty sentencing phase of
capital trials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current project applies moral
foundations theory to mock jurors' moral evaluations of aggravating and
mitigating evidence presented in death penalty trial vignettes to determine
which aggravators represent more severe moral violations and subsequently impact
death sentences, and if the influence of the aggravators on death sentences is
contingent upon the jurors' moral beliefs and values. This is accomplished by
using experimental designs and a multi-study approach to identify and isolate
particular moral mechanisms triggered by the presentation of specific
aggravators in the trial's sentencing phase. Each subsequent experiment extends
the prior experiment by varying aspects of the defendant, evidence, and
circumstances of the crime. This project provides the first experimental test of
some of the underlying assumptions of moral inferences embedded in jurors'
evaluations of aggravators and mitigators. Though moral justifications underlie
the use of the death penalty, a proper theoretical moral framework has yet to be
applied to jurors' evaluations of evidence during the sentencing phase of a
capital trial, and this project fills this gap. Findings will be used to advance
theory, and provide recommendations for attorneys and judges involved in capital
trials. This project also contributes to the development of research
opportunities at minority serving institutions through a collaborative research
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.