* 2116928
* The Anatomy of Firm Exit: Theory and Facts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gideon Bornstein, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 233,729.00

Firm exit is a significant contributor to overall job destruction. In addition
to the jobs lost, firm exit permanently destroys intangible capital, such as
customer-firm relationships and brand reputation. Yet, the underlying drivers of
firm exit remain relatively unexplored. This project will study which firm
characteristics best predict firm exit, with a renewed focus on financial
health. The goal is to determine which firms fail due to lack of long-run
sustainability of the business activity (solvency) versus temporary restricted
access to funding (illiquidity). The main hypothesis is that the latter is
particularly salient in times of crises. Providing a theory that explains the
type of market imperfection behind this pattern is crucial in order to design
effective policy interventions. The proposed framework will allow researchers to
assess whether policy responses to COVID-19 were adequate and suggest potential
improvements in addressing future downturns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part
of the project will study analytically the effect of financial distress on firm
exit. The PIs propose a two-period model of firm dynamics with financial
frictions. Firms are able to borrow funds from financial intermediaries using
non-state-contingent debt to cover fixed operating costs. Firms may choose to
default on their existing debt obligations. If they do so, financial
intermediaries can take over and operate the firm, but at a fraction of its
initial productivity. As a result of the default option, firms face an
endogenous borrowing limit, giving rise to inefficient firm exit. While
inefficient firm exit or the level of financial frictions cannot be directly
measured in the data, the model provides a mapping between inefficient firm exit
and the conditional covariance of a firm’s propensity to exit with its debt
holdings. The second part of the project aims to shed light empirically on the
key drivers of firm exit. Using firm-level data that includes detailed financial
information, the PIs will characterize the sensitivity of firms’ propensity to
exit to financial characteristics, and document how this sensitivity varies over
the business cycle. The goal is two-fold. First, testing for the presence of
inefficient firm exit in the lens of the analytical model. Second, providing
moments to calibrate a quantitative version of the model. The third part of the
project quantifies the degree of inefficient firm exit over the business cycle.
The analysis will be based on an infinite-horizon model with aggregate
fluctuations and endogenous firm entry and exit. The PIs will use the
quantitative model to show how the welfare losses due to inefficient firm exit
depend on the length and depth of recessions and on the magnitude of entry
costs. Finally, the PIs will study the effectiveness of different policies aimed
at alleviating firm exit inefficiencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.