* 2116580
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Biocultural Production of Resilience
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jason DeCaro, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 12,696.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;What allows some people to
navigate adversity better than others and how can these factors be used to
improve human wellbeing? Answers to this question have important implications
for an array of disciplines, including anthropology, psychiatry, human
development, public health, and disaster management. This doctoral dissertation
project aims to provide greater clarity on this matter both to improve broad
scientific understanding of human adaptation and to inform policy and programs
aimed at the promotion of human wellbeing, especially in the face of hardships
that affect people around the globe, such as political instability, economic
difficulties, and interpersonal conflict. In addition to providing scientific
training for a graduate student, this project is characterized by cooperative
international partnerships which both broaden the scientific participation of
underrepresented groups and allow for the insights and data produced to go
directly into the hands of those who shape policy and programs that impact
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project examines
differences in resilience among mothers and children living in the context of
intense political and socioeconomic hardship, comparing outcomes before and
after a series of community-wide adverse events. Resilience is best understood
as better-than-expected outcomes in the face of adversity. This research seeks
to identify the types of resources, both material and abstract, that help women
and children more successfully navigate difficult circumstances, as well as
explore transgenerational factors that contribute to resilience. A combination
of qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to assess changes in the
mental and physical health of women and children over time, examine the
relationship between maternal and child resilience, and explore the role of
varying philosophies of struggle in fostering
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.