* 2116967
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Advance Research and Student Research Training at the University of Scranton
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Fennie, University of Scranton
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 362,773.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation program. The
University of Scranton is acquiring a 400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectrometer that has the capabilities to perform both routine analysis and more
complex experiments that helps elucidate molecular structures of chemical
compounds. The instrument supports the research of Professor Michael Fennie and
colleagues Arthur Catino and Nicholas Sizemore at the University of Scranton and
several collaborators at other colleges and universities in the Scranton region.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching
as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students
in chemistry. This instrument is a regional resource in the Scranton area, with
users coming from local industry and high school science classes, in addition to
other colleges in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the development of methodologies to facilitate the structure
elucidation of small and medium-sized molecules. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as catalysis, biophysical structural
analysis, development of synthetic methodology, synthesis of both natural and
synthetic products and organometallic chemistry. In general, NMR spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structures of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.