* 2116224
* Collaborative Research: Charismatic Politicians, Weak Parties, and the Disruption of Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Rocio Titiunik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,795.00

Democracy is facing may challenges around the world, from the erosion of long-
held democratic norms in mature democracies like the United States, to renewed
party system upheaval in Latin America and Eastern Europe, to the full-blown
autocratic reversal in countries like Turkey or Thailand. This project studies
how the obstacles that parties face in controlling their politicians interact
with electoral rules, contextual conditions, and voter pressures to produce two
phenomena that contribute to the erosion of democracy. This project develops
general theoretical arguments, collects data on parties and politicians from
multiple countries, proposes new strategies to measure party system instability,
politicians’ performance, and candidates’ charisma, and summarizes the findings
in general policy recommendations. In contributing to the understanding of the
causes behind democratic backsliding, the project will identify policies and
institutional arrangements that are most conducive to stable political parties
and healthy democracies, two key components of national prosperity and
international peace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program integrates three
key components: theory development, empirical analysis and methodological
innovation. The project develops a series of formal theoretical models that
examine the understudied strategic interactions between political parties as
longer-lived entities and their shorter-sighted individual candidates, under the
premise that these interactions can help explain a variety of forms of
democratic disruption. The project develops new methodologies to capture hard-
to-measure concepts of politician charisma, incumbent performance, and party
strength. Using a series of quasi-experimental approaches and natural
experiments, a rich set of novel empirical implications derived from the formal
models are tested with data from multiple countries. The analyses both validate
the theories and produce systematic empirical evidence to inform scholarly and
policy debates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.