* 2116209
* Collaborative Research: 3 Myr of Laurentide Ice Sheet History Inferred from Cosmogenic Nuclides in Ice-Rafted Debris
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Paul Bierman, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* David Sutherland
* 07/31/2024
* USD 88,394.00

The Laurentide Ice Sheet over North America caused large changes in climate and
sea level as it grew and shrank over ice age cycles during the past three
million years, but little is known about the ice sheet’s detailed history
throughout this interval. This project will determine how big the ice sheet was
through time using chemical markers in layers of sand on the seafloor that
melted out of icebergs drifting from North America. This method provides a new
way to learn about past changes in the Laurentide Ice Sheet and test ideas for
how climate change and ice sheets affect each other. The results should help
with predictions of sea-level rise far into the future due to global warming and
melting polar ice sheets. This project will also educate and involve a wide
range of people in climate science in several ways. Videos about the research
will be sent to Boston Public Schools through the BoSTEM organization to help
students in the area learn about careers in science. The researchers will
participate in activities through the McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science
Learning at Framingham State University to teach middle and high school students
and teachers about climate change. College students will help with the research
during summers through the Integrated Science for Society NSF Research
Experience for Undergraduates at Boston College, which tries to find students
from underrepresented minority groups or who are the first in their family to go
to college and that do not have research possibilities at their school. Lastly,
the project will support a female Ph.D. student already at Boston College and an
M.S. student at the University of Vermont. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Laurentide
Ice Sheet over North America was one of the largest drivers of climate and sea
level over the ice age cycles of the past three million years, but its history
over this interval is shrouded in uncertainty largely due to limitations of
conventional geologic records. This project will take a new approach, measuring
the concentrations of rare chemicals in quartz sand layers from ocean sediment
cores that melted out of drifting North American icebergs. The chemistry of the
sand reflects the history of North American ice sheet cover because the
chemicals accumulate in land surfaces exposed to the atmosphere but
radioactively decay away when the surfaces are buried by ice. Four sediment
cores will be analyzed to reconstruct long-term Laurentide Ice Sheet evolution,
and analyses of sand samples collected across eastern Canada will show how their
chemistry records ice sheet variations over the most recent ice age cycle.
Together with similar reconstructions produced over the past five years from
Greenland and Antarctica, these records will provide a comprehensive picture of
how these three ice sheets varied in the past and contributed to global sea
level. The results will offer much-needed constraints to test theories and
models of paleo-ice sheet change, useful for improving long-term future
projections of ice sheets on Earth today. This project will increase literacy
and diversity in climate science in multiple ways. “Science Bites” videos about
the research will be distributed to Boston Public Schools through BoSTEM to
demystify careers in science. Participation in ongoing efforts through the
McAuliffe Center for Integrated Science Learning at Framingham State University
will help educate middle and high school teachers and students on climate
change. This project will support an existing female Ph.D. student at Boston
College and an M.S. student at the University of Vermont. Summer undergraduate
research assistants will be recruited through the Integrated Science for Society
NSF REU at Boston College, which seeks to attract underrepresented minority and
first-generation college students from schools with limited research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.