* 2116551
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Volatility Shocks, Financial Frictions, and Labor Force Reallocation
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Yan Bai, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While it has been acknowledged
that volatility shocks (increasing uncertainty) can raise firms’ bankruptcy
risks and generate recessions, general assumption is that labor force is
perfectly insured from these bankruptcies. This assumption deviates from the
notion that labor force is averse to financially distressed firms. This project
will focus on this aspect by considering that labor force is aware of firms’
bankruptcy risks and require higher wages to compensate for expected losses.
Within this framework, a positive volatility shock amplifies the compensating
wage differentials across firms with different leverage, driving labor force
reallocation from highly leveraged firms to less leveraged firms. This project
will develop a model and using data on labor force; the research will test the
hypothesized effect of volatility shocks on labor force reallocation. The
project will explore the corresponding welfare implications, which will have
potential labor market policy implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will use employer-employee matched data to show new empirical facts of how the
relationship between volatility and labor market outcomes depends on firms’
financial conditions. The project will build on the hypothesis that higher
volatility increases firms’ bankruptcy risks. Labor force is averse to firms’
bankruptcy risks. Thus, it is harder for highly leveraged firms to hire
workforce, which will affect labor wages and employment. Labor force will
reallocate to less leverage firms, implying the allocation of labor force across
firms deviates from the optimal level. The mechanism considered in the project
will be useful in explaining why the labor market was adversely affected during
the financial crisis. The employer-employee matched data will be helpful in
controlling the characteristics of firms and workforce. The project will explore
the role of compensating wage differentials within the context of firms’
financial conditions. The research will further shed light on the role of firm
heterogeneity over business cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.