* 2116976
* MRI: Acquisition of a Flow Cytometer, a Multi-User Resource at Appalachian State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Maryam Ahmed, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 264,868.00

This award to Appalachian State University is to purchase a flow cytometer to
support the expansion of research, training and educational activities across
campus. In addition to facilitating research activities by various PIs, the flow
cytometer will be used to train undergraduate and Master's level graduate
students in completing their independent research and thesis projects. The
instrument will also be used to teach immunology labs and may be incorporated in
existing and new undergraduate and graduate courses serving traditional and
underrepresented students from multiple disciplines, such as cell biology and
biochemistry. In addition to serving as a multi-user equipment for all
departments at Appalachian State University, the instrument will be utilized for
outreach purposes for surrounding Appalachian communities, including training
high school students in established summer programs such as Summer Ventures and
Future Scientists and Doctors. The projects completed using the flow cytometer
are critical to the broader efforts of the College of Arts and Sciences and the
university to improve research capabilities and scientific literacy by providing
a well-equipped, integrated research and educational environment to our
students. Research supported by this award will also advance the Universityâ€™s
commitment to sustainability by developing strategies to stabilize antibodies at
room temperature, reducing the environmental impact of refrigeration typically
required for storage and transportation. Furthermore, the projects proposed as
part of this award have the potential to offer broader insights into reducing
malnutrition and health disparities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will
support multiple faculty members across campus in projects relating to
immunology, biochemistry, bioenergetics, endocrinology, and genetics.
Specifically, we will first look at how deficiency in zinc and iron influence
the way cells grow and divide when exposed to various parasites and viruses. We
will also investigate how natural plant products can compensate for nutrient
deficiency and promote cell growth. The second project will investigate how
vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) interacts with host immune cells which has
relevance for understanding how to design more effective, and targeted, anti-
viral therapeutics. The third project involves screening conditions required for
a protein from tardigrades to stabilize other proteins so that they can be
transported without refrigeration. Other projects will investigate inflammation,
cell cycle and development, and plant population genetics. All these projects
will enhance collaborations in research among faculty at Appalachian State
University and offer opportunities for expansion of integrative and
interdisciplinary research relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.