* 2116353
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Dimensional Nano-Characterization System Based on a Scanning Probe Microscope for Multidisciplinary Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Hettinger, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 335,900.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A scanning probe microscope (SPM) is a
scientific instrument that uses a sharp probe to measure surface and interface
properties in nanometer and sub-nanometer spatial resolution. The SPM system
acquired through this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award has significant
impact on the research, education, and training infrastructure at Rowan
University and its surrounding area in southern New Jersey. First, this
instrument enables collaborative materials research among faculty members,
undergraduate and graduate students, and regional industrial participants to
conduct ground-breaking research. It allows the establishment of inter- and
intra-institutional research collaborations. Second, this instrument helps grow
several programs, such as the Materials Science &amp; Engineering program, by
providing ample opportunities for both undergraduate and graduate students to
work on their research projects, coursework, or thesis projects, directly
impacting the training of a technical workforce for the region. Third, this
instrument is used by many researchers including women and underrepresented
minority faculty and students through established university and college
programs. This provides better experience, stronger training, and more
opportunities for researchers from groups typically underrepresented in science
and engineering. Finally, this instrument serves the local needs in advanced
materials research and training, resulting in increased interactions with local
industries and stronger impact on the economic growth in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The acquired SPM
system combines ultrahigh-resolution imaging, nanoelectrical measurement,
nanomechanical characterization, and nanoelectrochemical analysis for the
research of various material systems in air, fluid, electrical field, or
chemically reactive environment. With these advanced features, the instrument
enables research projects in five key research areas: (1) surface morphology and
nanomaterials research; (2) functional materials, flexible electronics and
sensors; (3) electrochemistry, energy materials and devices, and protective
coatings; (4) biological and biomedical materials, life sciences; and (5)
additive manufacturing, construction and structural
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.