* 2116275
* Compact Isotopic Raman Multigas Trace Detection System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Andreas Muller, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 290,842.00

Spontaneous Raman scattering is a simple and well-studied process that is
ideally suited for chemical analysis. However, while routinely implemented in
commercial systems to identify molecular species in solids and liquids, few
solutions exist for the measurement of gases, due in part to the need for a
powerful and spectrally pure laser source. Yet, a compact and inexpensive
portable chemical gas analyzer would find a plethora of applications in
industrial process control, medical diagnostics and hazards detection. The
present project is exploring solutions to bring gaseous spontaneous Raman
scattering to a level of maturity that could allow it to be used in consumer-
level devices. Implemented with an ordinary laser diode in conjunction with an
engineered multi-pass beam geometry that simultaneously defines the laser’s
spectral purity via feedback, the technique investigated can detect trace
chemicals including isotopologues, i.e., molecules that differ only by their
isotopic composition. These efforts are focusing on practically relevant
measurements such as atmospheric and breath detection that could pave the way
for the realization of versatile and widely deployable “artificial noses”. The
project entails training graduate and undergraduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment of photonics and quantum physics research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its inherent simplicity and versatility,
spontaneous Raman scattering is ideally suited for chemical gas analysis.
However, with a small scattering cross-section, the process typically requires
an enhancement method, of which the most famous example is probably surface
enhanced Raman scattering. Recent years have seen a resurgence of approaches
such as cavity, capillary, hollow core fiber, and Purcell-enhanced Raman
scattering, some of which have demonstrated gas sensing capabilities in the
parts-per-million concentration range. The primary goal of the proposed work is
to develop a novel method expected to offer dramatic improvements, in
particular, detection limits in the parts-per-billion range, while employing a
low-cost compact design with all components operating at room temperature. The
novel approach is based on a multi-pass cavity integrated as part of an external
cavity diode laser that is multimode and efficient. The project explores methods
of producing an engineered electromagnetic environment that optimizes the degree
to which Raman scattered photons are collected. It aims at understanding how an
optical cavity can be utilized most effectively to enhance the rate of
spontaneous Raman scattering for the benefit of trace detection. The project has
implications for cavity quantum electrodynamics research and general metrology
science as well as a diverse range of applications in isotopologue trace gas
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.