* 2116974
* The Effects of COVID-19 on Intimate Partner Homicide Incidence and Risk
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jill Messing, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 279,606.00

In addition to the great physical risk posed by COVID-19, the pandemic rapidly
transformed our social world. In March 2020, in an effort to curb virus spread,
U.S. jurisdictions began to issue stay-at-home policies that asked individuals
with non-essential jobs to shelter in place. Although the intent of this effort
was to decrease the virus' spread, it may have also resulted in increased
exposure to violence in the home, including to intimate partner homicide. By
contrast, risk of homicides that typically occur outside the home, such as those
perpetrated by strangers or acquaintances, may have decreased due to lessened
exposure to the greater community. This study aims to investigate whether stay-
at-home policies differentially affected homicide rates, with an in-depth look
at how intimate partner homicide and intimate partner violence-related homicide
risk was affected by the pandemic. Our theoretical model suggests that, for
victims of intimate partner violence and their children, isolating at home could
elevate homicide risk simply by increasing the time spent alone with an abusive
partner. Additional risk for intimate partner homicide may have also been
exacerbated during this time, including firearm acquisition, increased alcohol
consumption, and loss of employment. We selected two states for this study, New
Jersey (NJ) and Arizona (AZ), as they present an excellent opportunity for
comparison. AZ experienced its first surge of the virus later with stay-at-home
policies enacted at different times, for shorter periods, and in a less
restrictive manner than stay-at-home policies in NJ. This study will contribute
to our understanding of the total costs of COVID-19 to our communities and to
our most vulnerable groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
better understand how COVID-19 stay-at-home policies affected homicide risk. The
first aim is to understand if the trends in the rates of intimate partner
homicide and intimate partner violence-related homicide changed as stay-at-home
policies were enacted and to compare these trends with those of other familial
and non-domestic homicide. Case file information will be collected from law
enforcement and medical examiners to get an accurate count of homicides that
occurred in 2020, building upon data previously collected by this research team
in AZ and NJ from 2016 to 2019. The second aim is to understand individual-level
risk of homicide through qualitative interviews with the next-of-kin of homicide
victims who were killed in 2020. During case file data collection, next-of-kin
of victims of intimate partner homicide and intimate partner violence-related
homicide will be identified and asked to participate in qualitative interviews
that explore how COVID-19 and its related policies affected individual-level
lethality risk. It is likely that future pandemics will arise, and it is
imperative to understand population-level and individual-level risks for
intimate partner homicide and intimate partner violence-related homicide in
order to develop appropriate theory and prevention interventions, such as
protocols for police response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.