* 2116754
* MRI: Acquisition of a Time-of-Fight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jocelyn Alcantara-Garcia, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 756,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
provides support for the acquisition of a state-of-the-art instrument for time-
of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS). This is a critical
technique needed to understand surface composition and reactivity across
chemistry, materials science, environmental science, chemical engineering,
conservation science, and physics. The ToF-SIMS method is an extremely sensitive
surface analytical technique that uses a pulsed ion beam to remove the outmost
monolayers of the sample. The species that are removed from these atomic
monolayers (secondary ions) are accelerated and their masses (or more precisely
mass-to-charge ratios) are determined by the exact time at which they reach the
detector (hence time-of-flight). In a broader sense, the acquisition of this
instrument supports collaboration efforts among the different colleges at the
University of Delaware, industrial companies in the state of Delaware, and the
Winterthur Museum. The instrument is used by students in graduate and advanced
undergraduate research, graduate courses, the Art Conservation Program, and
students in several research experience for undergraduate programs at the
University of Delaware, including research experience specifically designed for
students with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;In general, there are three ToF-SIMS operational modes:
surface spectroscopy with better than 0.0001 amu resolution that enables
molecular identification and isotopic content in the parts-per-million range;
surface imaging with better than 100 nm spatial resolution, ~3000x smaller than
the diameter of a human hair; and depth profiling - when combined with a second
ablation beam (generally, ions of oxygen and cesium) to achieve vertical
resolution of less than 1 nanometer. The acquired instrument satisfies all these
criteria. These capabilities directly affect a large number of current and
future research directions at the University of Delaware. The research areas
include atomic-precision deposition and etching, nanotechnology and
nanomaterials, efficient solar-cell design, heterogeneous, thermal, and
electrocatalysis, cultural heritage investigations, research in microplastics
and biomedical interfaces, and many other efforts. ToF-SIMS provides a powerful
method with atomic precision, surface-sensitivity, high depth resolution, and
imaging capabilities to answer critical questions and to define further research
and discovery directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.