* 2116344
* Collaborative Research: Variation in Exceptive Structures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* maria polinsky, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2025
* USD 278,985.00

All languages are able to express universal statements, even though we realize
that they are seldom literally true. Consequently, languages also have means of
expressing exceptions to such generalizations, via exceptive constructions.
English examples include "Everybody but Sandy laughed" and "Everybody laughed
except Sandy". Linguistic means of expressing exclusion have received modest
attention from philosophers of language and semanticists, whose focus has been
primarily on English. Beyond that small body of work, little is known about
exceptive constructions across the world's languages: how they are built, what
their distribution is within individual languages and across languages, and how
they compare to other constructions expressing comparison or contrast. This
research project fills this gap as the first cross-linguistic investigation of
lexical, morphological, and syntactic properties of the construction.
Understanding exceptive constructions allows linguists to create better theories
of language structure and to predict the range of variation in natural
languages; it helps computer scientists build better parsing models; it gives
language educators new dimensions that should be emphasized in language
teaching, and it provides cultural anthropologists with additional tools to
study societal (dis)similarities in the concept of exclusion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project employs methodologies from
linguistic typology, theoretical syntax, and formal semantics to carry out in-
depth investigations of exceptive constructions in a wide range of the world's
languages. The project aims for maximum linguistic coverage by using sampling
techniques of modern linguistic typology. Theoretically, the project addresses a
range of questions that arise from the empirical findings. In particular, it
analyzes the contrast between free and connected exceptives, phrasal and clausal
exceptives, and coordinated and subordinated exceptives. The project develops
diagnostics that reliably identify the different types of exceptives and
identifies independent linguistic properties that correlate with these different
types of exceptives in a language. Therefore, it allows researchers to predict
the type of exceptive constructions in an individual language. Beyond developing
a picture of exceptive structure cross-linguistically, the project has notable
implications for current theories of ellipsis. The project provides data on low-
resource and endangered languages and highlights the importance of linguistic
diversity for a complete understanding of the human language
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.