* 2116802
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Role of Prior Knowledge in Consolidation of Novel Phonotactic Patterns for Speech Production
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Matthew Goldrick, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 11,014.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning a new language opens up a
myriad of opportunities for cross-cultural communication, which is critical to
remaining competitive in today's globally networked information economy. But
language learning is difficult, especially for adults, who must integrate new
language experience with the language knowledge they already have. Previous
research has found that sleep-based consolidation - an improvement in what you
can recall as a result of sleep - is critical to this integration. In fact, we
must sleep before novel phonotactics - language-specific generalizations about
how sounds can be ordered within syllables and words - become ingrained in
speech processing (specifically, unconsciously shaping the errors we make while
speaking). This project asks what role prior knowledge plays in this process:
Can knowing similar phonotactics boost the effectiveness of sleep-based
consolidation for learning novel phonotactics? The findings of this research can
inform the design of curricula and interventions to make language learning more
effective, and can also shed light on how our brain changes as we learn. The
project also includes the training of an undergraduate student as a research
assistant and involves outreach about language learning to inform the larger
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to clarify the role of prior
knowledge in consolidating second-order phonotactic generalizations for speech
production, by analyzing errors made in multi-day tongue-twister experiments
that manipulate the structural similarity of novel second-order phonotactic
generalizations with respect to previously-learned phonotactic generalizations.
Structural similarity is operationalized in terms of syllabic positions involved
in each generalization (onset-vowel, vowel-coda). Two sources of prior knowledge
are considered: participants' native language and pre-training using the
experimental tongue-twister task. Activity monitors estimating time spent in
slow-wave sleep are used to link consolidation effects observed in this study to
those observed in studies in other cognitive and linguistic domains. To control
for temporal-order differences between onset-vowel vs. vowel-coda
generalizations, a non-linguistic button-pressing task tests for the absence of
differences in learning start-middle vs. middle-end patterns. The project also
includes the training of an undergraduate student as a research assistant and
involves outreach about language learning to inform the larger
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.