* 2116942
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating differential data collection among migrants, aid workers, and officials
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,09/30/2023
* A. Cymene Howe, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 09/30/2023
* USD 22,420.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political and environmental
turmoil have led to the displacement of individuals from their homes.
Documenting mobile populations facilitates efforts to ameliorate the effects of
displacement. Documentation of mobile populations is also challenging as
individuals move through various temporary facilities and housing arrangements
while en route. Moreover, the traits of individuals – both migrants and those
with whom migrants interact – affect how migrant characteristics and movements
are documented, creating poorly understood variation in the process of
documentation. This doctoral dissertation research uses theory from governance
and cultural anthropology to understand how the intersections of individual
attributes affect migrant interactions with aid workers and government
officials. In addition to supporting the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis,
the project enhances scientific understandings by broadly disseminating its
findings to relevant stakeholders and policy makers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research project investigates how
different data collection technologies are employed by aid workers and
government officials as they interact with heterogeneous migrants. The doctoral
student uses ethnographic and archival methods to answer research questions
focusing on how aid workers and government officials understand and use data
collection technologies, and how individual characteristics of the workers,
officials, and migrants affect the use of different technologies. These findings
offer guidance to humanitarian actors, agencies, and policy makers interested in
better understanding which data collection strategies and associated practices
are most effective in achieving positive outcomes for individuals and
communities affected by migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.