* 2116949
* Employer and Employee Behaviors, Experiences, and Perceptions of the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Katherine Carman, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 301,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than a year after its discovery, COVID-19
continues to have a profound effect on our society. Its impacts extend far
beyond the direct physical health effects: the consequences of school and work
closures affect labor supply and demand, financial health, mental health, and
the global economy. Even as vaccines have become available, economic recovery is
likely to be uneven, with larger impacts among those who are already financially
and psychologically vulnerable, including working parents and service sector
workers who already bear the greatest burden of unstable employment and low
wages. This project will collect new data on the experiences of working
Americans for the period 2021 - mid-2022 to shed light on what factors are
associated with the economic and mental health outcomes in the later stages of
the COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed data
collection is to trace the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic and differential
policy responses on mental health and labor market outcomes in order to enhance
the understanding of the links between employment, working conditions, financial
well-being, and mental health. The project is aimed to collect longitudinal
survey data in the RAND American Life Panel (ALP), a nationally representative,
probability-based panel of U.S. adult participants who are regularly interviewed
over the internet. The proposed data collection will enable analysis of the
impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and policy response by industry, occupation, and
location on individuals’ employment, earnings, and productivity, as well as
their financial well-being and mental health. Standard surveys do not capture
sufficient information about employers’ accommodations, employees’ adaptive
behaviors, or individual-level links between employment outcomes, financial
well-being, and psychological distress to address these questions. The proposed
data collection will build on prior NSF-funded surveys examining American
workers’ experiences during the first year and a half of the pandemic. Moreover,
the proposed data collection will build on prior work examining a comprehensive
set of American working conditions prior to the pandemic using data that are
harmonized to a large, long-running survey of working conditions in Europe that
continued into the pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.