* 2116686
* Nuclear Physics from Multi-Messenger Mergers (NP3M)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Charles Horowitz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2026
* USD 3,250,000.00

The goal of the Nuclear Physics from Multi-Messenger Mergers (NP3M) Focus
Research Hub is to create a national effort in nuclear physics and astrophysical
simulations to systematically probe the properties of hot and dense strongly
interacting matter with multi-messenger observations of neutron stars. Neutron
star mergers probe the nature of matter at densities and temperatures far beyond
those present in atomic nuclei. The NP3M Hub will form a new interdisciplinary
collaboration across nuclear physics, astrophysics, and gravitational-wave
physics to drive the coordinated advances in each of these sub-fields needed to
interpret observations. The NP3M Hub will develop theoretical models of dense
and hot matter to connect multi-messenger observations of neutron stars to the
underlying merger dynamics by means of numerical simulations. Hub members will
lead a coordinated effort to study the impact of theoretical uncertainties in
the nuclear physics and the numerical modeling on the prediction of multi-
messenger signals from merging neutron stars (end-to-end). They will lead a
parallel effort to back propagate observational constraints to nuclear physics,
connecting astronomical observations with laboratory
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nuclear Physics of Multi-Messenger Mergers
(NP3M) collaboration is comprised of researchers across the US and aims to
understand how atomic nuclei and the interactions between neutrons and protons
impact the merger of two neutron stars. The evolution of neutron stars, the
compact stellar objects which are the final stage in the evolution of stars
between about 8 and 20 times the mass of the sun, is controlled by nuclear
physics. Some neutron stars in our universe are created in pairs, and these
pairs of neutron stars eventually merge in a cataclysmic event which emits
gravitational waves, neutrinos, and photons, creating either a more massive
neutron star or a black hole. These mergers are the likely origin of a
significant fraction of the atomic nuclei heavier than iron which are present on
earth. This grant supports the training of early-career scientists who will work
on different aspects of this problem. The NP3M hub will create pages and videos
that discuss how any new discoveries in multi-messenger astronomy impact nuclear
astrophysics. The hub will develop a curriculum on nuclear physics and multi-
messenger astronomy for K-12 educators, and host two summer schools that will
educate students in hub-related science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of "Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics", one of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF
Investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.