* 2116026
* Modeling Zoos and Aquariums as Inclusive Communities of Science: Developing a framework of inclusive practices for broadening the participation of autistic individuals
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Kelly Riedinger, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 513,660.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Zoos and aquariums have been
offering programming, events, and visit accommodations to autistic individuals
for several years. While these efforts can provide great experiences, they are
focused more on accommodation and the outward-facing guest experience than
inclusion. Lack of inclusion features in design, programming, and representation
amongst zoo and aquarium representatives, ultimately limits full inclusion and
adds to a sense in autistic individuals of not belonging and not being welcomed.
To develop a fully inclusive experience for autistic individuals, this project
will develop an evidence-based framework of inclusive practices for zoos and
aquariums and build a community of practice around inclusion broadly. The
project brings together researchers from Oregon State University, Vanderbilt
Kennedy Center’s Treatment and Research Institute for Autism Spectrum Disorders,
and the Association of Zoos and Aquariums. Researchers will create and
investigate the extent and ways in which a research-informed framework and
associated tools (i.e. case studies, discussion guides, self-guided audits,
etc.) and strategies support science learning for autistic individuals, and help
practitioners expand access and inclusion of autistic audiences beyond special
events or the general visit experience by applying inclusive practices for
programs, exhibit development, internships, volunteer opportunities, and
employment. To maximize impact, the project will develop and expand a network of
early adopters to build a community of practice around inclusive practices to
develop fully inclusive zoo and aquarium experiences for all
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate 4 research
questions: (1) In what ways and to what extent are zoos and aquariums currently
addressing access and inclusion for autistic individuals? (2) How do staff in
zoos and aquariums perceive their and their institution’s willingness and
ability to address access and inclusion for autistic individuals? (3) What is a
framework of evidence-based practices across the zoo and aquarium experience
that is inclusive for autistic individuals, and what associated tools and
strategies are needed to make the framework useful for early adopters? And (4)
to what extent and in what ways does a research informed framework with
associated tools and strategies engage, support, and enhance an existing
community of practitioners already dedicated to addressing autistic audiences
and promote inclusive practices at zoos and aquariums for autistic people? The
project is designed as two phases: (1) the research and development of a
framework of inclusive practices and tools for supporting autistic individuals
and (2) expanding a network of early adopters to build a community of practice
around inclusive practices and an overall strategy of implementation. The
framework will be informed through a state of the field study across the
zoo/aquarium field that includes a landscape study and needs assessment as well
as a review of literature that synthesizes existing research across disciplines
for developing inclusive practices for autistic individuals in zoos and
aquariums. The team will also conduct online surveys and focus groups to gather
input from various stakeholders including zoo and aquarium employees and
practitioners, autistic individuals, and their social groups (e.g., family
members, peers, advocacy organizations). The second phase of the study will
focus on sharing the framework and tools with practitioners across the
zoo/aquarium field for feedback and reflection to develop an overall strategy
for broader implementation and expanding the existing network of zoo and
aquarium professionals to build a community of practice dedicated to the
comprehensive inclusion of autistic individuals across the full zoo and aquarium
experience. The results will be disseminated through conference presentations,
scholarly publications, online discussion forums, and collaborative partners’
websites. The project represents one of the first of its kind on autistic
audiences within the zoo and aquarium context and is the first to look at the
full experience of autistic patrons to zoos and aquariums across
programs/events, exhibits, volunteering, internship, and employment
opportunities. A process evaluation conducted as part of the project will
explore how the approach taken in this project may be more broadly applied in
understanding and advancing inclusion for other audiences historically
underserved or marginalized by zoos and aquariums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Research in Service to Practice project is supported by the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal environments. informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.