* 2116187
* Supporting College Instructors in Improving College Algebra Teaching and Student Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Priya Prasad, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 486,291.00

This project at the University of Texas San Antonio (UTSA) aims to improve
teaching and learning in college algebra through the development of a
collaborative faculty development program. For many STEM major pathways, college
algebra courses remain a major obstacle for timely degree completion and
success. Three objectives will guide the project team. First is to allow
instructors to collaborate and observe each other’s teaching. Second is to
provide resources (including time) to help instructors learn about evidence-
based, student-centered instructional practices. Third is to support long-term
transformation implementing a research-supported model for course improvement.
Through their experiences, faculty will gain facility with student-centered
mathematics teaching practices that will result in improved student success
outcomes. The project will impact about 1600 potential STEM students at UTSA per
year, better preparing them for subsequent mathematics courses required by STEM
degree programs and will build a community of instructors dedicated to the
continued improvement of the college. Project research and evaluation will
facilitate a deeper understanding of how instructors’ mindset and teaching
practices are impacted by the faculty development efforts, while also examining
impacts on student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Instructional transformation
at the post-secondary level is difficult to catalyze. Much is known about the
effectiveness of student-centered learning in college mathematics, but not much
is understood about how instructors at the college level incorporate these ideas
and strategies into their classrooms. This project proposes to implement
Continuous Improvement (CI), a proven instructional improvement framework, to
encourage instructors to include more student-centered learning in their
classrooms. The CI framework has previously been studied with elementary
mathematics content courses for prospective teachers; this project proposes to
implement it in college algebra, which is a new context for this model. The
investigators will observe and document how instructors’ thinking about
instruction and classroom practices change throughout the grant cycle. Major
data sources include observations of instructors’ classrooms, interviews and
instructional team meetings, which will help build understanding of the
potential opportunities and barriers that college instructors face when
incorporating student-centered teaching strategies. The project will then
connect instructor change to student learning outcomes, including: 1) growth in
conceptual algebra knowledge; 2) pass/fail rates in college algebra; and 3)
outcomes of college algebra students in subsequent mathematics courses. The
results have the potential to strengthen the field’s understanding of how
shifting to student-centered instruction can result in improved student learning
and success outcomes in STEM. The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education:
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.