* 2116630
* Research towards a better understanding of logit type models with fixed effects
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bo Honore, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 211,507.00

Many activities exhibit persistence. For example, individuals tend to choose the
same insurance plan year after year, a firm that exports to a particular country
one year might be more likely to export to that country the next year, and a
smoker is more likely to smoke in the future than a-non-smoker. Two natural
explanations for such persistence are that the event itself causes the event to
be more likely in the future, or that there are persistent characteristics of
the person or firm which lead to persistence in the activity. These two
explanations can have very different policy implications. This project will
investigate when it is possible to distinguish between the two explanations and
to develop tools for doing so. The research will be mainly theoretical, but it
will also develop practical tools for implementing the methods that will be
developed. The results of this research project will aid in making informed and
appropriate policy and business decisions, thus improving the functioning of the
economy. The results will therefore increase the performance of the US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate identification and
estimation of a variety of discrete outcome panel data models with fixed effects
when the panel data set consists of a small number of time periods for each
individual. A recent paper co-authored by the PI developed an approach for
searching for moment conditions in simple dynamic, binary-outcome logit models.
This project will apply the same general approach to construct moment conditions
for a number of other models. In the cases where it is possible to construct
such moment conditions, these will be used to construct an estimator and tests
of the model parameters. The results of this research project will aid in making
informed and appropriate policy and business decisions, thus improving the
functioning of the economy. The results will therefore increase the performance
of the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.