* 2116779
* Structural and Individual Predictors of Variation in Cesarean Incisions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Vania Smith-Oka, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 05/31/2024
* USD 164,297.00

The rise in cesarean rates has prompted significant research to understand the
factors driving this increase as well as associated outcomes for mothers and
neonates. Less attention has been paid to incision techniques, which are
variable and likely correlated with structural factors such as hospital size, as
well as individual factors and circumstances surrounding birth. This research
uses medical and cognitive anthropological theories and methods to test the
relative importance of structural versus individual factors in performing
cesarean incision techniques, answering fundamental questions about the nature
of decision-making in constrained medical settings and beyond. The project
trains an anthropology graduate student as well as undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in data collection and analysis and involves
collaborations with care providers. Results from this research will be
disseminated widely to academic and non-academic audiences and to diverse
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers conduct ethnographic
research in diverse hospital settings to gain a broad understanding of how, why,
and when different cesarean incisions are used. Two interrelated hypotheses
guide this research: (1) doctors working in hospitals in resource-poor settings
will perform more vertical incisions, and (2) patients’ physical characteristics
and social backgrounds will be associated with incision type. The project uses
analysis of hospital data, as well as interviews, observation, and cognitive
anthropology methods and analysis to test these hypotheses. In doing so, it
operationalizes the dynamic nature of decision-making and has the potential to
transform academic knowledge of obstetric care and reproductive decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.