* 2116778
* The Consequences of Violence During Social Movements
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Carwil Bjork-James, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2024
* USD 174,095.00

Governments react in varying ways during social movements. This project focuses
on the interactions among social movements, violence against protestors, and
political change in emerging democratic societies. Specifically, the project
examines how lethal violence influences the trajectory and success of social
movements. Conversely, it also asks, how does a society place limits upon the
scale of political violence? The researchers examine the extent to which
violence against non-violent protestors may contribute to the escalation of
protests. These questions of political culture, human rights, and social change
are significant to researchers, human rights advocates, and state policy makers.
The project contributes to the training of two doctoral students and several
undergraduates, increases dialogue between local and foreign social scientists,
and documents the history and losses of predominantly indigenous and working-
class people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on theory from political
anthropology, this project examines the interplay between organized protest and
sanctioned violence in the advancement of human rights and equity. The
researchers use media, scholarly, and archival sources to complete a database of
approximately six hundred deaths in political conflict, including information
about the cause, manner, and responsibility for each death, social movement
context, and the role of the state. By compiling detailed information on
political violence into an accessible form, the project facilitates further
research on political violence, social movements, and regional history. Using
this dataset, researchers examine the paradox of repression, namely that
violence by state and national authorities can either quell an ongoing
mobilization or backfire into catalyzing the movement further, while testing the
hypothesis that nonviolent movements are uniquely placed to benefit from
backfire. Combining quantitative analysis with case-based investigation, the
dataset is also used to characterize the outcomes of combative but unarmed
protest tactics, and to compare the importance of presidential policy versus
quantity or form of protest in determining the prevalence of violence against
protestors. In addition, the researchers collect qualitative data, primarily in
the form of oral history interviews with movement participants and state
officials, which are focused on topics such as movement persistence, state
decisions to inflict and respond to violence, and the role of death and loss in
transformative political change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.