* 2116189
* Collaborative Research: U.S. Institutions after COVID-19: Trust, Accountability, and Public Perceptions
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 11/30/2023
* USD 80,255.00

COVID-19 upended social, economic, and political systems throughout the world.
The United States has faced particular challenges due to its heterogeneity and
federal nature. The COVID States project is a large-scale data collection that
includes over-time data from diverse state-level samples. The project tracks
state-level post-pandemic recovery, studying topics such as trust in
institutions, information acquisition and impact, accountability, and economic
inequality. It also documents how federal and state policies affect the populace
when it comes to these topics. Further, the COVID States project provides access
to researchers from all backgrounds, types of academic institutions, and career
stages through a competition for survey module time and provides a user-friendly
website with data trackers for use by researchers, students, journalists,
policymakers, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID States project
conducts over-time state-level surveys from all 50 states and D.C. Each survey
includes up to 30,000 total respondents, using quota sampling by state. This
allows for generalizable inferences at the state and national levels. Post-
pandemic data provide an unprecedented opportunity for novel over-time and
across-space research designs. The project over-samples demographic minority
respondents to facilitate study of heterogeneous social groups. This includes
data on trust in political figures and institutions, knowledge and information,
political evaluations, behavioral adaptation, physical health, economic well-
being, mental health, and more. It also contains detailed social network
batteries that allow for the study of inter-household and inter-group
transmission of health and information. This is complemented by Twitter data
from survey respondents who allow it. This enables the project to identify
information sharing and study political discourse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.