* 2116693
* Collaborative Research: Militias and Paramilitaries in Militarized Interstate Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Miller, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,504.00

NSF Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID:
2116678/2116693/2116746&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Alabama
Tuscaloosa/Clemson University/University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Douglas Gibler/Steven Miller/Jessica Braithwaite&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Program: Security and Preparedness&lt;br/&gt;Title: Collaborative Research:
Ghosts in the Machine: Militias and Paramilitaries in Militarized Interstate
Conflicts&lt;br/&gt;New Title: Collaborative Research: Militias and
Paramilitaries in Militarized Interstate Conflicts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will determine when non-state actors such as militias and paramilitaries
influence the duration, severity, and outcomes of militarized interstate
conflicts. These actors have been increasingly active in interstate conflicts
since the end of the Cold War. The project will produce a new data set on the
involvement of militias and paramilitary actors in militarized interstate
conflicts. The project will provide systematic evidence on the impact of these
non-state actors on conflict behavior based on empirical analyses of this new
dataset. The results of this project will contribute to improving our
understanding of when and how domestic actors such as militias and
paramilitaries influence the decisions of states in international disputes that
can lead to escalation and war. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
and test theory on the actions that militias and paramilitaries undertake that
contribute to the escalation and duration of militarized interstate conflicts. A
new and comprehensive dataset on the organizational structure and event-level
military actions of militias and paramilitaries in militarized interstate
conflicts will be collected for the period 1816 to 2017. Statistical analyses of
the new data set will be conducted to test theoretical propositions. The results
of the project will advance basic research on the domestic sources of
international conflict and war, the strategic use of non-state actors by state
leaders to coerce and confront international adversaries, and whether states can
effectively control these militias and paramilitaries in wartime and in the
termination of armed conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.