* 2116534
* NSF/MCB-BSF The virtues of lanthanides and fluorine for tracking in-cell protein conformation: a marriage of NMR and EPR
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2025
* Angela Gronenborn, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,050,082.00

The goal of this project is to develop experimental tools for understanding the
structures of proteins inside living cells while the proteins carry out their
functions. The tools to be developed will measure distances within and between
proteins using a combination of in-cell nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy, two
powerful approaches for tracking the structure and movement of a protein.
Development of these approaches for making measurements inside live cells will
have broad application as we expect to obtain 1) benchmark data for in-cell NMR
and EPR that can be used by other practitioners of these methodologies
(biochemists, biophysicist) and 2) biological insight that may open new
strategies for understanding protein function in cells and when bound by drugs.
As such, the proposed research will impact several areas of science and
engineering, including physical chemistry, structural biochemistry, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, biotechnology, and pharmacology. The proposed innovative
research program will provide unique training for students at all levels in
state-of-the-art experimental methods. Importantly, a program within this
project will empower emerging female scientists in magnetic resonance and
provide a framework for populating the next generation of females in leadership
roles in the global STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biophysical analyses of
biomolecular structure and properties is typically performed on the isolated
biomolecule, removed from its native environment, such as the cell. By
necessity, such analyses ignore or grossly simplify cellular influences.
Although this strategy has provided and continues to provide indispensable
information on molecular structure, it leaves open many questions about how that
information relates to interactions and function within the cell, where
innumerable organelles and molecular machines engage in an intricate dance,
spatially and temporally, interacting and changing shape as they perform their
tasks. The main objective of this project is to begin addressing these open
questions by developing an integrated 19F NMR/EPR approach that informs on the
structures of proteins in their native cellular environments. Specifically, the
program will establish a combined 19F-PRE (paramagnetic relaxation enhancement)
and 19F-PCS (pseudo contact shift) NMR approach to measure distances in the
range of 5-50 Å and a combined Gd(III)-Gd(III) DEER (double electron-electron
resonance) and Gd(III)-19F ENDOR/ED-NMR (electron nuclear double
resonance/electron-electron double resonance (ELDOR)-detected NMR) approach to
measure distances in the 5-80 Å range. Together, the united methodology will
provide complementary information that is inaccessible when using either
approach alone and will permit a more complete characterization of structure and
intra- or intermolecular interactions in the context of function. This project
is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.