* 2116342
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Patient-Led Research Practices in Complex Chronic Illness Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Annika Nilsson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 18,191.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open sources have become an
important resource of health information, particularly for people living with
illnesses that may not be well understood. For these patients, for whom
diagnosis and treatment processes may take a great deal of time and involve
protracted experiences of medical uncertainty, new forms of digital media can be
a crucial resource for accessing information and peer support. In some cases,
informal patient research has succeeded in generating clinically important
insights about emerging and uncertain illnesses. In addition to providing
training for a graduate student in scientific methods of data collection and
analysis, the findings and data would be disseminated to improve the public's
understanding of science and the scientific method, with important implications
for improving clinical practice and patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation project uses ethnographic methods to examine how people
living with medically underdetermined chronic illnesses use online tools and
forums to connect with peers, develop strategies for manage their symptoms, and
conduct informal research about their conditions. This research investigates
three main questions. How do online communities help patients navigate ambiguity
and uncertainty with respect to their health? How do they collaboratively find
and produce information about their conditions? In what ways do these practices
impact the trajectories of their illnesses? This project use observational
research in online groups for complex chronic illness patients, interviews with
group participants, and narrative analysis of media produced by complex chronic
illness patients. Analysis illuminate the ways in which participants use digital
technologies to collaboratively develop new conceptual frameworks for
understanding medically uncertain illnesses. This research anticipates producing
data of interest to clinicians and public health practitioners about patient
experiences of medical uncertainty. It will also have implications for social
scientists with respect to the role of the internet in emerging cultural
practices of knowledge production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.