* 2116297
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The political economy of migration, labor, and documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rosalind Morris, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 8,383.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regularized bureaucratic
strategies are demonstrated to prevent migrants with legal status from lapsing
into illegal status. This can also adversely impact communities whose
livelihoods depend on migrant labor. This doctoral dissertation research asks
how individuals negotiate securing documentation to support their claims in
changing political contexts. It focuses directly on the continuum of documents
that support claims of national identity in an attempt to move beyond binary
characterizations of legal status. This project trains a graduate student in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis. The results will
be widely disseminated to academic and non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates theory in legal
anthropology, the anthropology of bureaucracy and political economy to
investigate three research questions: 1) How does paperwork relate to legal
status? 2) What strategies do migrants pursue to secure documentation and how is
this adjudicated by government officials? 3) What are the consequences of
documentation on migrantsâ€™ lived experiences? The student investigator uses
participant observation, interviews, and archival research in multiple settings
where processes of documentation unfold to characterize the effects of different
forms of documents on legal status and lived experiences. The work informs
efforts to regularize documentation processes to benefit communities and
individuals impacted by labor migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.