* 2116886
* I-Corps: In Silico Prediction of Cancer Drug Susceptibility
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Mohsin Jafri, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of computational method that will accurately predict whether a
particular genetic variant is susceptible to a particular cancer treatment drug.
Drug resistance is the main reason a cancer drug treatment regimen fails to cure
a patient’s cancer. With drug resistance occurring in 30-85% of cancers, it
accounts for a major part of the approximately $200 billion spent on cancer care
in 2020 in the United States. This proposed technology may help to improve the
diagnosis and treatment of cancer patients by avoiding rounds of failed
chemotherapy by tailoring treatment to the genetic profile of the cancer. By
determining the correct drug treatment based on the genetic profile of the
cancer, the chances of patient survival may increase, the treatment time may
decrease, and the overall cost of treatment may decrease. In addition, the
proposed technology may be applicable to the diagnosis and treatment of rare
genetic diseases and other personalized medicine applications by identifying
variants that lead to the disease phenotype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a computational method that uses machine
learning applied to feature sets derived from molecular simulation to predict
the functional consequences of genetic variation. Depending upon the cancer
type, cancer drug treatments fail 30-85% of the time because of drug resistant
genetic variants. However, only a small number of these variants have been
linked to a specific drug treatment. To address this problem, a method was
developed that leverages machine learning applied to features of all atom
molecular dynamics simulations to predict the specific functional effect and the
disruptive severity of genetic variants. This technology may be applied to data
extracted from the molecular simulation of the proteins that are cancer drug
targets and used to predict the susceptibility of a particular genetic variant
of the protein to a specific cancer drug. The proposed technology was used to
quantitatively predict cancer drug resistance caused by variants of the oncogene
BCL-2 to specific drugs such as Venetoclax. Specifically, the technology was
shown to determine which cancer drug will work on which genetic variant leading
to targeted therapy tailored to the cancer patient’s genetic profile. In
addition, the proposed technology may be used to quantitatively classify newly
found or unclassified variants as cancer causing or benign creating the
potential of early and more accurate cancer variant
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.