* 2116570
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of forest habitat modification on hunting and prey abundance
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Sean Downey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 12/31/2023
* USD 31,500.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The worldâ€™s rainforest ecosystems
are hotspots of global biodiversity and have extensive histories of occupation
by Indigenous peoples as locations for customary agriculture and subsistence
foraging and hunting. With these reservoirs of biodiversity now showing signs of
decline, we require a better understanding of how human-influenced forests can
both support Indigenous livelihoods and sustain diverse floral and faunal
communities. While human use and modification of rainforests has historically
been thought of as a potential driver of species loss, recent research suggests
that forest mosaics created by human activities harbor a substantial degree of
habitat diversity and novel foraging opportunities that may benefit animal and
plant communities. The purpose of this doctoral dissertation project is to study
the relationship between customary agricultural practices and subsistence
hunting to understand how these practices impact local faunal and floral
diversity in a neotropical rainforest. In addition to training a doctoral
student in anthropological science, the research helps local stakeholders manage
natural resources and generalize these insights so they can be used to develop
management designs that incorporate local practices to prevent wildlife loss.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central research question of this dissertation project
is whether the human-influenced forests that are created by customary
agriculture can support populations of wild game and enable sustainable harvests
of wild game by subsistence hunters. The researchers test whether and how human
disturbance precludes or facilitates resource conservation. Integrating theory
and methods from human behavioral ecology, wildlife management, and community
ecology, this research documents hunter movements and harvest returns and links
them to patterns of wildlife abundance along a disturbance gradient created by
customary agricultural practices. The researchers use semi-structured interviews
and participant observation to ethnographically contextualize the social and
ecological dimensions of customary agriculture and subsistence hunting. By
studying how humans and wildlife select and use habitat in a mosaic of
cultivated, secondary, and climax forest, this study contributes theoretical
insights about the mechanisms for sustainable harvest of wild game species and
the coexistence of ecological communities with human communities. Rather than
study hunting and farming as distinct forms of human-environment relations, this
study conceptualizes these practices as key parts of an integrated
socioecological system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.