* 2116277
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cellular Senescence in Human Age-Related Mortality and Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Daniel Richard, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 33,800.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern humans are longer-lived
relative to non-human primates and often remain active at advanced ages.
However, the evolution of differences in the biology and timing of aging in
humans is not well understood. This doctoral dissertation uses laboratory-based
cellular experiments to identify elements of the human genome that act as
‘switches’ to regulate aging. By defining how the genetic sequences of these
switches have evolved in humans, the investigators add to the current
understanding of human senescence and life history evolution. The focus on
cellular aging processes also may inform other basic and clinical research
communities. In conjunction with museums and pedagogical centers, the
researchers develop exhibits and online learning materials to highlight this
research on the evolution of human aging and evolutionary theory more broadly.
The project involves the training of undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented backgrounds in STEM, for careers in biological
anthropology and related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The observation of
elongated lifespan in humans relative to chimpanzees suggests evolutionary
differences in the biological mechanisms of aging. One hypothesis is that during
the evolution of the genus Homo there may have been deceleration in cellular
senescence. In this project, the researchers use the human knee joint as a model
system for examining tissue decline and dysfunction. Experiments are performed
to generate dysfunctional knee cartilage cells, using next-generation sequencing
assays to characterize shifts in cell regulatory networks, both in the
expression of proteins and how the genes encoding these proteins are regulated,
that define the senescence process. This experimental dataset is then combined
with computational genetic analyses to understand the role of human sequence
evolution in modifying these networks and the consequences to tissue decline
that may have resulted. These publicly-available datasets can serve as an
important resource for research in the fields of biological anthropology, aging,
gene regulation, and joint biology. Given the dearth of comprehensive datasets
for joint tissue cells, particularly in the context of aging and cellular
senescence, this research is of potential interest to the biomedical community
and those studying age-related joint diseases such as
osteoarthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.