* 2116250
* NSF/BSF: Strategic Information Disclosure
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Andrzej Skrzypacz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 162,948.00

This award funds research in the economic theory of information disclosure. The
goal is to develop and analyze three separate models of how people interact in
employment and market situations. The first considers whether a manager of a
publicly traded firm who seeks to maximize share prices should disclose
everything she knows today, or whether she should delay disclosure until she has
more information. The second project examines whether a manager is more likely
to disclose when she is more confident that the information is accurate. The
third project considers how an entrepreneur might reveal information to
investors and regulators. The results of this project will advance the national
prosperity because it will help us better understand the effects of different
regulations on publicly traded firms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Voluntary information
disclosure by agents is a common feature of markets, ranging from public
information disclosure by managers of public firms that affects stock prices, to
entrepreneurs disclosing information to influence investors and customers, to
politicians trying to influence voters. While most previous models have studied
relatively simple, mostly static disclosure problems, this proposal explores
more realistic and complex environments. The first project analyzes models of
agents facing a dynamic problem: disclose information now or later. In the
model, a public firm's value follows a random walk. At each point in time, a
manager of the firm learns with some probability the current value and can
disclose it credibly. The manager maximizes a weighted average of stock prices,
and the market sets prices rationally. The project explores how dynamic
considerations affect equilibrium disclosure, how regulation requiring timely
disclosure affects information dissemination, and incentives to acquire
information in the first place. The second project captures another realistic
aspect of disclosure: that when an agent reveals information, it is often just a
noisy estimate of the true value. Moreover, the market may be worried that the
agent is hiding more accurate information. It answers which types of signals
(more or less accurate) the manager is more likely to disclose. It describes the
correlation between prices and residual uncertainty about the true value
conditional on disclosed information. The third project studies a model of an
agent trying to influence multiple decisions by receivers. For example, an
entrepreneur may reveal information to investors and to regulators to influence
decisions by both. It aims to discover under what conditions sequential
information disclosure can strictly improve upon single-shot disclosure and the
optimal order of communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.