* 2116116
* Leveraging community-based organizations to develop and study Native Hawaiian ethos-driven ('Āina-based) environmental science activities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Lui Hokoana, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,209,028.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants. Specifically, this project
connects Native Hawaiian youth ages 12-17 and their family members to STEM by
channeling their cultural relationship with ʻāina, the sustaining elements of
the natural world including the land, sea, and air. This project seeks to:
broaden participation of Native Hawaiian youth who have been historically
underrepresented in STEM; actively uphold Native Hawaiian ways of knowing and
traditional knowledge; articulate the science rooted in cultural wisdom; and
bring STEM into the lives of participants as they connect to the ʻāina. In
partnership with six ʻāina-based community organizations across Hawaiʻi, this
project will develop, implement, and study ʻāina-centered environmental
education activities that explore solutions to local environmental problems. For
example, in one module youth and their families will explore of a section of a
nearby stream; identify and discuss the native, non-native, and invasive
species; remove invasive species from a small section of the stream and make
observations leading to discussions of unintended consequences and systemic
impacts; ultimately, learners will meet at additional local waterways to engage
in similar explorations and discussions, transferring their knowledge to
understanding the impacts of construction on local streams and coral reefs. To
this effort, the community-based organizations bring their expertise in
preserving Hawaiian culture and sustainable island lifestyle, including rural
and urban systems such as farming and irrigation traditions and the restoration
of cultural sites. University of Hawai’i faculty and staff bring expertise in
Environmental Science, Biology, Hawaiian Studies and Problem-Based Learning
Curriculum Development. This project further supports organizational learning
and sharing among the six community-based organizations. Grounded in Hawaiian
ʻAʻo, where learning and teaching are the same interaction, community-based
organizations will create a Community of Practice that will co-learn Problem-
Based Learning pedagogy; co-learn and engage in research and evaluation methods;
and share experiential and traditional knowledge to co-develop the ʻāina-based
environmental education activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
uniquely situated to study the impact of community-led culturally relevant
pedagogy on Hawaiian learners’ interests and connections to environmental
science, and to understand ʻāina-based learning through empirical research.
Research methods draw on Community-Based Participatory Research and Indigenous
Research Methods to develop a collaborative research design process incorporated
into the project’s key components. Community members, researchers, and
evaluators will work together to examine the following research questions: 1)
How does environmental Problem-Based Learning situate within ʻāina-based
informal contexts?; 2) What are the environmental education learning impacts of
ʻāina-based activities on youth and family participants?; and 3) How does the
ʻāina-centered Problem-Based Learning approach to informal STEM education
support STEM knowledge, interest and awareness? The evaluation will employ a
mixed-methods participatory design to explore program efficacy, fidelity, and
implementation more broadly across community-based sites, as well as program
sustainability within each community-based site. Anticipated project outcomes
are a 15-week organizational learning and sharing program with six ʻāina-based
community organizations and 72 staff; the design and implementation of 18
activities to reach 360 youth and at least one of their family members; and the
launch of an ʻāina-based STEM Community of Practice. The project’s research and
development process for ʻāina-centered environmental education activities will
be shared broadly and provide a useful example for other organizations locally
and nationally working in informal settings with Native or Indigenous
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.