* 2116764
* Collaborative Research: A Spatial Analysis of the Distribution and Consequences of Health Care Policy Implementation in a Federal System
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Rebecca Kreitzer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 06/30/2024
* USD 216,090.00

The federal government works alongside states as well as Federally Qualified
Health Centers (FQHCs), private sector entities, and non-profit organizations to
implement policies aimed to promote the health and well-being of Americans. By
shifting resources from the federal government to the states as well as local
organizations, those who are closest to the public can tailor health policy to
the needs of its residents. However, there is variation in the types of barriers
the public may face in accessing these resources. This is especially true in
low-Income rural and urban localities. This collaborative project examines how
various factors influence the allocation of public resources by using the case
of Title X, a unique program whose resources are allocated in many ways across
the 50 U.S. states. The project also assesses the link between efficient and
equitable resource allocation and local health outcomes. The project provides
insights for policymakers to ensure that the American residents who are most in
need of support are able to obtain the resources intended to enhance healthy
public outcomes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Insights and methodological advances
from a wide array of disciplines—public policy, geography, city and regional
planning, and health policy—contribute to the project’s development of a
nuanced, accurate measurement of access to specialized healthcare resources to
ascertain the extent to which state and local governments allocate federal
resources in efficient and equitable ways and examine how public health outcomes
respond to various modes of policy implementation. The project incorporates
geographic information systems (GIS) and statistical/spatial
analysis—specifically the integrated two-step floating catchment area (I2SFCA)
method—as well as regression and factor analysis to gain leverage over multiple
forms of data (e.g. U.S. Census data, demographic variables of state
legislatures, public health measures). These analyses highlight the determinants
of equitable access to federally-approved reproductive healthcare resources
across United States as well as the consequences for those who live within
spaces where high-quality resources are not
accessible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.