* 2116436
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Digital Technologies, Legal Evidence, and Counterterrorism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Marisol de la Cadena, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 25,092.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digital technologies have become
an essential asset in counterterrorism as they facilitate surveillance practices
such as profiling, biometrics, or real-time monitoring. However, few empirical
sociolegal studies have examined how digital technologies and experts
materialize suspicion and produce digital evidence of terrorism. This doctoral
dissertation project investigates how digital data is interpreted and mobilize
as evidence of terrorism across different fields of expertise. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student, the project widely
disseminates its data and findings through presentations, publications,
lectures, and public meetings, thereby improving the public's understanding of
science and the scientific method as is pertains to sociolegal and evidentiary
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research investigates
whether the utilization of digital evidence through expert practices changes the
way terrorism and counterterrorism are understood. This project asks three
central questions: What constitutes digital evidence of terrorism? How digital
entities materialize suspicion of terrorism? What happens to counterterrorism
practices when interacting with new forms of evidence through digital
technology? The researcher explores these questions through an ethnographic
investigation of courts, terrorism researchers, digital forensics forums, firms,
and discussions. The researcher also conducts archival research based on news
articles, social media posts, and legal documents. Using a range of ethnographic
techniques of data collection and analysis (including interviews, participant
observation, and archival analysis), the researcher tracks what considerations
turn digital data into evidence. The resulting research products contribute to
scientific debates about terrorism, suspicion, digital data, evidence-making,
and expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.