* 2116348
* MRI: Acquisition of Spinning Disk Confocal for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Undergraduate Teaching and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Randal Johnson, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 472,138.00

An award is made to Butler University to acquire a spinning disk confocal
microscope. Butler University is a primarily undergraduate institution in
Indianapolis, IN that has a strong commitment to the integration of teaching and
research. This confocal microscope will enhance the training and education of
undergraduate and master’s level researchers, who will be the main users of this
instrument. Exposure to modern microscopy techniques will prepare these students
for graduate studies or for positions in the STEM workforce. This microscope
will also be used as part of a new microscopy course in the Department of
Biological Sciences. In this course, Butler undergraduate students will be
trained in the applications of different types of microscopy and will
participate in authentic research experiences using the spinning disk confocal
microscope. Reaching outside Butler, students in this course will also design a
microscopy module to engage students at an Indianapolis high school serving a
high percentage of students in marginalized groups. This partnership will
increase the involvement of students underrepresented in STEM fields to research
and coursework being done in their community. Finally, the microscope will be
made available, free of charge, to researchers at nearby institutions with
limited microscopy access, thereby increasing the productivity of multiple
research groups in the area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The spinning disk confocal
microscope will significantly enhance the types of imaging experiments that can
be performed by faculty and students at Butler University. Spanning the
disciplines of biology, biochemistry, and pharmaceutical sciences, impacted
research areas include egg development, neuronal signaling, tuberculosis
infection, mechanisms of virus attachment and entry, regulation of gene
expression, and neurotransmitter receptor structure and localization. The
spinning disk microscope will allow faculty and student researchers to perform
high resolution, long-term live imaging of cells, tissues, or entire organisms
in a controlled environment with the added ability to monitor the dynamics and
turnover of proteins or structures of interest; these capabilities were not
previously possible with the available instrumentation on campus. This
microscope will greatly expand the faculty’s research resources and productivity
and students’ exposure to state-of-the-art imaging techniques. The results from
these studies will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and
presentations at local, national, and international research
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.