* 2116216
* MAARCO – Multi-terrain Amphibious ARCtic ExplOrer
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andre Mazzoleni, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 583,473.00

This grant promotes the progress of science and national prosperity through
advancement in the field of amphibious and multi-terrain autonomous robots for
exploring Earth’s polar regions. The research makes an important contribution to
society by increasing the knowledge and understanding of robotic propulsion and
performance on terrain conditions found in the Arctic. As a result, it will help
to eliminate the need for human missions in dangerous and uninhabitable areas,
and enable scientific data collection in these regions. The current generation
of autonomous polar robots have been limited to relatively flat and arid areas
such as the central plateau of Antarctica. These robots are poorly suited for
exploring the slushy snow, melting ice, wet soil, ice-covered lakes, and
floating sea ice found in the rapidly changing Arctic. This project develops the
fundamental knowledge to create a new robot that can move seamlessly through
diverse Arctic terrains using a single multi-functional propulsion system based
on helical drives - rotating cylinders with helix-shaped blades. The new rover
will be able to move on snow, melting ice, and wet soil, float and move on water
using the hollow drive cylinders for buoyancy, and swim underwater by flooding
the cylinders and rotating the helical drives like propellers. In addition to
Arctic exploration, this robot could assist humans in search and rescue or
disaster response missions. The project involves engaging and encouraging
broader participation by underrepresented groups in engineering through outreach
and education programs that show students how engineering can be used to improve
their lives and the lives of everyone in society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
highly variable and wetter conditions of the Arctic pose challenges to
locomotion, energy budgeting, and autonomy that are not met by any current rover
technology. To solve this problem, this project addresses the fundamental
robotics challenge of understanding how variable surface and terrain conditions
couple to the dynamics, energetics, optimal design, and control strategy of a
multi-terrain helical drive-based propulsion system. The goals of this research
are to: (1) understand the locomotion dynamics and energetics of helical drives
operating on terrain conditions found in the Arctic; (2) create and demonstrate
an optimization framework capable of determining an optimal rover configuration
and control strategy based on mission requirements and environments of
operation; and (3) validate and demonstrate locomotion dynamics, control
performance, and energetics of an integrated rover system in field conditions.
This research unravels the fundamental relationships between control, design,
energetics parameters and the desired locomotion of a truly multi-terrain and
amphibious rover. The optimization framework along with the locomotion dynamics
models will enable engineers and scientists to better understand and design
autonomous rovers that may be used for terrestrial or extra-terrestrial
exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.