* 2116759
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Corporate Bankruptcy on Urban Oil and Gas Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,05/31/2023
* James Holston, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 25,156.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mass bankruptcies of energy
companies have orphaned thousands of oil and gas wells across the United States
in recent years, and these bankruptcies are projected to increase dramatically.
Without solvent owners to plug and decommission them, such wells add to the
already-sprawling network of abandoned oil and gas infrastructure. Oil and gas
wells in cities are especially prone to abandonment, exposing nearby communities
to toxins, redevelopment challenges, and exorbitant cleanup liabilities. This
doctoral dissertation project investigates the impacts of corporate insolvencies
on oil and gas-producing communities. In addition to providing training for a
graduate student in methods of scientific data collection and analysis, the
studyâ€™s findings are disseminated broadly to a variety of audiences, including
in general interest publications, industry journals, legal bulletins, and the
reports of environmental organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research
questions motivate this study: (1) To what extent and in what ways does
bankruptcy, as both a legal technology and a genre of political discourse, shape
claims for urban economic stability, environmental justice, public health and
safety, and corporate accountability? (2) How do insolvent oil and gas
corporations and their orphan wells underscore the unpredictability and
uncertainty of finance capitalism? (3) In what ways do the locations of orphan
wells, in urban as opposed to rural areas, impact the responses of citizens to
the abandonment and decommissioning of wells? To answer these questions the
doctoral student uses ethnographic fieldwork to accompany and interview diverse
urban stakeholders such as frontline community groups, environmental justice
organizations, city officials, and industry representatives as they navigate
corporate bankruptcies, oil and gas extraction, and the environmental and
financial futures of their cities. The project offers a model for examining how
accountability, liability, debt, and credit affect the oil and gas sector, and
by extension, impacts nearly every aspect of political, economic, and social
life of the spaces where this abandoned infrastructure is located for
generations to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.