* 2116543
* Social Structure Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Samuel Gershman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 604,296.00

Social groups are woven tightly into the fabric of peopleâ€™s lives. They shape
how people perceive, punish, cooperate with, and learn from other people. This
project seeks to understand how people discover the structure of social groups
from patterns in the behavior of individuals. The project is centered on the
concept of social structure learning. According this account, the brain uses
statistical learning algorithms to sort individuals into latent groups on the
basis of their behavioral patterns. These group representations are updated as
more evidence is accumulated. The research extends the social structure learning
model in several ways. One is to better understand the processes by which
updating, subtyping, and subgrouping occur. Another is to establish how people
balance the influence of explicit social categories against latent groupings. A
third is to better understand how people resolve the challenge of cross-
categorization. The project offers broad societal relevance by shedding light on
the nature of social biases and stereotypes, ultimately pointing the way toward
reducing discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances basic
understanding of social structure learning by using a combination of
computational modeling and laboratory experiments. Computational models offer a
formalization of hypotheses and make quantitative predictions about behavior.
The project develops a computational model that makes specific predictions and
captures several important features of social structure learning: (i) how people
infer hierarchically-structured groups; (ii) how people use explicit social
categories to guide their inferences about group structure; and (iii) how people
infer multiple groupings of the same individuals. Integrating insights from
these models into the study of social cognition allows for greater predictive
precision and stimulates innovative strategies for stereotype change. The
project also supports a summer internship program to involve students from
diverse backgrounds, along with regular engagement in public outreach and
education via print interviews, social media, blog posts, and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.