* 2116337
* Doctoral dissertation research: The dynamics of visual media and social change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Gary Wilder, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 10/31/2023
* USD 17,294.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How individuals adjust identity to
social change is an important question, as such adjustments affect how
individuals understand their place within larger social and political
structures. Social change offers opportunities to clarify fundamental tensions
in modern societies between individualism versus collectivism and between
private versus communal property. This doctoral dissertation research
investigates whether and how visual media reflect and/or drive social change in
rapidly changing socio-economic landscapes. The work provides a unique lens for
investigating these dynamic feedbacks in ways that illustrate whether, how, and
at what pace expressions of identity change in relation to larger socio-economic
structures. The research contributes to training a U.S. doctoral student and its
findings will be distributed widely to diverse audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project investigates what the economic
and aesthetic strategies of contemporary visual media reveal about the socio-
economic role of creative work in societies undergoing fundamental social and
economic transformations. It considers whether and how concepts of property are
exposed and reworked in the self-presentation, material production, and
exhibition infrastructures of visual media during periods of rapid social
change. Using an integration of ethnographic and archival methods, the doctoral
student examines regional visual media as they respond to recent domestic socio-
economic reforms in a context where transitions between collectivist and
individualist notions of belonging are shifting. The student integrates direct
observation, analysis of printed material, as well as interviews with relevant
stakeholders to understand how regional visual media have responded to changes
in property legislation following privatizing reforms. The results of this
research provide a more robust account of visual media as both a barometer of
and participant in processes of social, political-economic, and cultural
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.