* 2116744
* MRI: Acquisition of a Malvern Particle Size Analyzer for Interdisciplinary Research and Undergraduate Education and Research Training
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Darren Larsen, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 153,814.00

EAR-2116744&lt;br/&gt;Larsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program award supports acquisition of automated particle
size analyzer to support research and research training in the Geology and
Biology Departments at Occidental College, a non-Ph.D. granting institution.
Grain size analysis is relevant to many disciplines within the natural sciences
helping to elucidate past surface Earth environmental conditions and physical
processes that led to the sedimentary record recorded in lake, ocean, and
lithified sediments. Grain size analysis is also pertinent to studies of mineral
aerosols that impact human health and biological activity in soils and
sediments. The equipment will support student research training in Geology and
Biology at this undergraduate Hispanic Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laser diffraction based particle size
analyzer will be acquired and used to support research investigator and students
research that will include identifying and characterizing earthquake-generated
turbidite deposits in seismically-sensitive lakes in the western US,
constructing continuous records of climate and glacier dynamics in Arctic and
alpine environments, assessing the relative roles of climate and human drivers
of Arctic landscape change, studies of marine bioerosion and dissolution
processes occurring in shallow coastal ecosystems as a result of anthropogenic
stressors, and studies of soil geochemistry and plant-soil
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.