* 2116018
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing Quaternary Fault Behavior and Surface Processes of an Active Rift: The Lake Malawi (Nyasa) Rift, East Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Donna Shillington, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2025
* USD 124,623.00

The earliest phases of the formation of ocean basins involve the break-up of the
continents. The study of continental rifts is essential for understanding
hazards and potential for natural resources. The process of rifting involves
active faulting, volcanic activity and associated earthquakes, and are linked
with significant hazards. Rifting also leads to the formation of basins that
trap sediment and can host oil and gas deposits. A fundamental question in
continental rift systems is how rifting is distributed across different fault
systems and how surface processes, including changes in sediment supply, erosion
and lake levels may impact fault behavior. These early phase geological
structures act as recorders of the different processes, but after many years of
seafloor spreading, are usually buried beneath thick packages of ocean sediment,
and thus mature continental margins, and ocean basins, are difficult places to
study early-rifting processes. On the other hand, active continental rifts,
where continents are in the early stages of break-up, reveal exposed and/or
shallow geological structures and deposits related to rifting. This study
considers a part of the East African Rift Valley that is nearly fully flooded
with freshwater (the Lake Malawi Rift), where very high quality and relatively
low cost marine geophysical methods can be used to image the floor of the rift
and its subsurface. By collecting very high resolution geophysical images and
integrating with information from previous academic drilling and with numerical
modeling, we will reconstruct fault geometries and slip rates over the last
hundreds of thousands of years, evaluate controls on why particular faults are
active, and estimate past earthquake activity. Results of the study will allow
for a better understanding of how rift faults may be preserved and how they can
be reactivated on passive continental margins, for instance on the East Coast of
North America that was formed by the rifting of North America from Africa. In
addition, this study will also provide information on how rift faults redirect
flows of sediment into a rift valley and assist in understanding oil and gas
occurrences in rift systems as well as the role of climate-driven surface
processes that may influence faulting and earthquake activity. We will train 3
doctoral students and a post-doctoral scholar during the project. Our
international team consists of both U.S. residents and East African nationals,
including two of the latter matriculated at Syracuse University, and we
anticipate roughly equal representation by female and male researchers on the
field team. We will execute an extensive outreach program in Malawi, both at
institutions of Higher Education and in secondary schools, and develop museum
displays in Malawi. We will interact deeply with our Malawian scientific
colleagues, and also engage with the Malawi Departments of Fisheries and
Antiquities to share new data sets to key stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
will undertake a combined observational, analytical and numerical modeling study
of Quaternary deformation and surface processes associated with a series of
active fault zones in the active Lake Malawi Rift, in the western branch of the
East African Rift System. This system is one of the largest active rifts in the
world and is emblematic of an early-phase, low strain rate rift in a weakly
magmatic system. We will use robust marine-type high-resolution seismic and
echosounder tools to make high-fidelity observations across several different
structural settings. Using new offshore observations from multibeam echosounder
data and high-resolution CHIRP seismic reflection data, we will determine how
recent (last 25-100 ka) deformation on intrarift faults is distributed across
the rift and assess how intrarift faults have propagated along their length and
then linked together over time. We will generate time-displacement profiles
across a series of fault zones in different structural settings (e.g., flexural
vs. border fault margin settings); generate a library of fault length-
displacement relationships for the different fault systems; and use classical
scaling laws to estimate records of past earthquakes over the past 100 ka. The
fault displacement records will be chronologically constrained by the superbly-
dated, high-resolution syn-rift stratigraphy from the Lake Malawi Drilling
Program, extended from the drill cores into the new grids of CHIRP seismic
reflection data. The new fault displacement histories will be compared to known
high-resolution hydroclimate records to determine if changes in climate regimes
modulate rift fault activity. Our numerical modeling efforts will assess the
stress regimes associated with changes in water and sediment loading and erosion
across the rift, which will be compared with observations. New lake floor
bathymetric data will reveal how structurally-controlled sediment dispersal
paths have developed in the Malawi Rift, leading to a better understanding
basin-filling processes in rift-lake systems. Results from our study will
provide unique new constraints on past earthquake histories and provide the
basis for probabilistic seismic hazard assessments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding
for this project is provided by NSF EAR Tectonics and Geophysics
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.