* 2116177
* Renewal to OCE-1558374: WHOI Sea Floor Samples Laboratory: Curation and distribution of samples from the sea floor in the service of marine science and education
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jeffrey Donnelly, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 676,644.00

Samples of seafloor rocks, cores, corals, hydrothermal vent fluids and chimney
deposits, sediments, other materials are valuable scientific resources that are
collected at great expense on scientific oceanographic expeditions. Some samples
come from shallow, near-shore environments of unusual and ephemeral character
and others come from mid-ocean ridges, seamounts, the abyssal plain, the roots
of volcanic islands, and continental shelves. Many samples come from
inaccessible places miles below the surface of the ocean and are retrieved from
the seafloor by specialized robotic vehicles, human occupied submersibles,
coring devices, and/or rock dredges. To preserve these valuable samples and make
them available to other scientists for studies not envisioned by the original
collectors, the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program of the Division of Ocean
Sciences of the National Science Foundation funds four professionally run
repositories that house samples collected by seagoing scientists. This award
funds the curation, storage, and distribution of marine seafloor samples by the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution's Sea Floor Samples Laboratory. Samples in
this repository are distributed upon request to scientists and educators wishing
to better understand the ocean basins and continental shelves, the distribution
of their resources, and how the Earth works. This repository distributes
approximately 8000 samples of seafloor material per year to US and international
scientists to advance our knowledge of the seafloor, ocean crust, mantle,
seafloor volcanism, and the history of ocean chemistry and Earth's climate.
Samples from this repository have been used to pioneer new analytical techniques
and provide important insights into seafloor, continental margin, and sub-
seafloor magmatic processes. This award augments a significant investment by the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution by providing financial support for the
curation and distribution of samples to those interested in studying or
exhibiting samples from the collection. The repository staff maintains the
collection, ingests new material into the collection, collects and verifies
submitted information on samples and enters these data and metadata into an
online database making the collection visible to interested parties via the
Internet so scientists and educators can find and request samples for research
and education. In addition to the continued operation of the facility, this
funding provides resources for staff to catalog samples with unique identifiers
that can be used to link samples and analyses across publications by different
laboratories and investigators. Broader impacts of the work include public
outreach via tours for primary and secondary school groups, local community
organizations, and other interested parties. This award also provides support
for an essential piece of marine geology infrastructure that enhances the reuse
of material of high scientific value that is collected at great
expense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.