* 2116724
* EAGER: Fe/Mn-Containing Perovskite Oxides Promoted by Alkali Metal Molybdates for Chemical-Looping Catalysis – Thin-Film Preparation and Surface Characterization
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* H. Henry Lamb, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,966.00

Natural gas is a key raw material for production of olefins used extensively for
the chemical manufacture of polymeric materials. Production of ethylene and
propylene is among the most energy-intensive processes in the chemical sector,
emitting more than 300 million tons of carbon dioxide each year. The project
explores an alternative to current industry practice known as chemical-looping
oxidative dehydrogenation (CL-ODH). CL-ODH has potential to substantially
increase energy efficiency and lower carbon emissions compared to conventional
ODH. The project focuses on improving the performance and durability of CL-ODH
catalyst materials by understanding – at a fundamental level – the mechanism by
which they work, and by using that understanding to optimize catalyst design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the mechanistic aspects of alkali
metal molybdate promoted perovskites oxides, specifically, Na2MoO4, Na2Mo2O7 or
K2MoO4 promoted La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 and La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 for CL-ODH of ethane and
propane. The CL-ODH concept has potential to greatly intensify light-olefin
production. The research team has previously discovered that molybdate promoted
perovskite oxides form a core-shell structure with the Mn/Fe-containing
perovskite oxide core promoting active lattice oxygen storage/exchange, and the
molten molybdate shell facilitating selective C-H bond activation and oxidative
conversion. This project represents the first in-depth attempt to investigate
the roles of the core, shell, and active species for this novel redox catalyst
system. The project aims to unveil the underlying mechanisms for the CL-ODH
reactions by preparing thin-film model catalysts and performing extensive
characterizations using a variety of surface science tools. Epitaxially grown
thin films of La0.8Sr0.2FeO3 and La0.7Ca0.3MnO3 will be prepared on commercially
available SrTiO3 via polymer-assisted deposition. This is followed with
sequential MBE deposition of MoO3 and Na/K, and O2 ambient treatment. The growth
of the thin film will be monitored in situ and characterized afterwards.
Mechanistic investigations and reactive testing will be performed on perovskite
thin film samples both with and without alkali metal molybdates to establish a
rational approach for redox catalyst optimization. Results from the project will
be integrated in teaching by the investigators. Through the Kenan fellowship
program at North Carolina State University, high school teachers will be
involved in the project to stimulate students' interest towards STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.