* 2116945
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecological Restoration and Indigenous Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Clint Carroll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 22,778.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral dissertation project
examines North American Indigenous relationships to ecology and how Indigenous
knowledge systems have developed and changed over time, with particular
attention to socioeconomic difference, health, and environmental change.
Globally, ecosystem changes due to environmental disturbance, natural events,
climate change, or a combination thereof leads to species being unable to adapt.
This directly impacts societies where relationships to the natural world are an
integral dimension of everyday life. This project, which supports the training
of an Indigenous graduate student in anthropology in empirical, social
scientific data collection and analysis, considers how an Indigenous community
addresses the political and environmental forces that impact everyday life and
expressions of identity and community health as they relate to Lake Sturgeon
(Nmé) restoration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral research investigates how
the enactment of the Nmé Stewardship Plan correlates with Odawa expressions of
identity, understandings of health, and legal relationships with the
environment. How is the Little River Odawa community navigating contemporary
environmental and social impacts from the historical depletion and current
restoration of Lake Sturgeon (Nmé)? What role do Indigenous and Western science
play in affecting these views and practices? What does this mean for Odawa
treaty rights in the face of climate change? To answer these questions the
researcher interviews community members and tribal natural resource managers and
carries out participant observation in daily community activities related to
fishing. Archival research at university and government archives adds further
depth to the study. The resulting research products contribute to an
understanding of Indigenous science and how it encompasses humans'
accountability towards the environment and identifies opportunities for
strengthened environmental planning at local, regional, and national scales.
This has implications for both Indigenous peoples and for the study of species
restoration across the ecological and social sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.