* 2116931
* MRI: Acquisition of a Caplex System for Human Movement Research and Research Training
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Allison Kinney, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2023
* USD 280,784.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports acquisition of a Humotech
Caplex system for use by faculty researchers and students studying human
movement biomechanics assessment across three departments at the University of
Dayton: Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Health and Sports Science, and
Physical Therapy. The Caplex system is a wearable device emulator that allows
for deeper scientific understanding of the ways humans react to devices that
apply controlled forces to locations such as the waist, leg, and/or arm.
Research facilitated by the Caplex system will directly contribute to improved
wearable assistive devices, therapeutic approaches, and rehabilitation for
people with movement impairments. The Caplex system will be integrated with the
existing biomechanics equipment that measures human motion and forces. The
Caplex system enables significant efforts in advancing state-of-the-art
scientific research in human movement assessment, training of interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate researchers, and human movement assessment
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Humotech Caplex system supports research and
research training activities for eight interdisciplinary faculty engaged in
human movement biomechanics assessment at the University of Dayton. The Caplex
system enables controllable external forces to integrate with the existing
standard human movement equipment (e.g., motion capture, force plates,
electromyography). These external forces are exerted on a human subject using
lightweight, tethered attachments, and so the system is often referred to as a
‘wearable device emulator’. More generally, it is an instrument that can be used
as a means for scientifically reproducible experimental force or perturbation
analyses. The Caplex system will enable innovative research in the broad theme
of human motor control by validating mathematical representations and
computational simulations through experimental human-in-the-loop performance
studies. In the broad theme of human impairment assessment, this instrumentation
will enable advanced scientific studies on human performance deficits with
respect to age, developmental disabilities, neurological disorders, or injuries
through the ability to estimate capacities and task performance via quantifiable
force interactions. Thus, the Caplex system would be a major improvement in
existing facilities at the University of Dayton since it would be the only
commercial instrumentation that provides such controllable external forces to
conduct advanced human movement assessment studies on campus. The Caplex system
will directly enhance our ability to engage a diverse range of students and the
larger community in our work through demonstrations, hands-on experiences, and
translational research outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.