* 2116118
* Ujima (Collective Work and Responsibility) Girls in a Robotics Leadership Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Harry Cheng, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,523,397.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research shows that Black girls
and women, regardless of their academic achievements and STEM interests, often
encounter academic under-preparation, social isolation, exclusion, and race-
gender discrimination that negatively impacts their ongoing engagement and
retention in STEM. This project will provide innovative, culturally relevant
learning environments to middle and high school Black girls to counter these
negative trends. Using hands-on coding and robotics activities, project
participants will develop positive attitudes toward science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The project emphasizes peer-mentoring by
providing opportunities for Black female high school (assistant coaches) and
Black college students (coaches) to serve as counselors and mentors to
participants. Additionally, engineers, scientists, and executives from STEM
industries will serve as mentors and share their experiences to broaden
participants’ STEM career aspirations. The project is a three-year collaborative
effort between the University of California Davis C-STEM Center, the Umoja
Community Education Foundation, and the 66 affiliated California community
colleges, industry partners, and school districts in California. Over three
years, nearly 2,000 females will participate in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning environments for Black girls and women led by
other Black girls and women are referred to as “counterspaces” where they are
free to engage in STEM in ways that value their identities while promoting STEM
engagement, interests, and career aspirations. The project’s curriculum will
follow a research-based, culturally relevant multi-tiered mentoring approach.
The curriculum is designed to develop participants’ STEM content knowledge,
critical thinking, and logical reasoning capabilities through meaningful
connections to real-life applications using hands-on coding and robotics. A
mixed-method longitudinal study will examine the impact on participants’ STEM
outcomes, emphasizing contributing new knowledge on the viability of multi-
tiered, culturally relevant mentoring for increasing equity in informal STEM
learning (ISL). The program's effectiveness will be evaluated using longitudinal
assessments of mathematics standards, computer science and robotics conceptual
knowledge, logical and critical thinking skills, STEM school achievements,
interests and attitudes toward STEM subjects, advanced STEM course-taking,
involvement in other ISL opportunities, and leadership in STEM in one’s
school/university and community. The project will test a locally based informal
learning model with projects hosted by other K-12 and college
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Innovations in Development project is funded
by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a)
advance new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and
development of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences;
(c) advance innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments; and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.