* 2116671
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Training
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Timothy Lyden, University of Wisconsin-River Falls
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Wisconsin-River
Falls is acquiring a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with low-vacuum
capability, energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, as well as secondary electron,
backscattered electron, and cathodoluminescence detectors to support the
research of Samuel Alvarado and colleagues Lowell McCann, Timothy Lyden and
Kevin Thaisen. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry,
biotechnology, biology, plant and earth science, and physics. In general,
scanning electron microscopy is used to image and understand chemical phenomena
at the nano and mesoscales. This microscope uses a focused electron beam, which
is scanned over a surface to generate an image and subsequently produces signals
that reveal information about the composition and topology of a sample. This
instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts of students
at all levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award of a scanning electron
microscope for high resolution imaging and analysis capabilities is aimed at
enhancing research and education, especially in the areas of chemical,
biological, and physical sciences. Research in chemistry focuses on
characterizing polymer quantum dot composite materials for fabricating and
testing photovoltaic and luminescent devices with electron-beam lithography and
investigating crystalline byproducts from ball milling organic reactions.
Examination of micrometeorites collected in urban settings are also performed.
Biological systems will also be under study, particularly in the area of
skeletal muscle and stromal cell development to better understand healthy cell
and dysfunctional cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.