* 2116810
* HSI Planning Project: Overcoming Barriers in the South Plains: Improving Retention for HSI Community College Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ryan Gibbs, South Plains College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 197,917.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: PPP aims to improve retention for HSI
community college students. South Plains College (SPC) has identified a lack of
preparation and knowledge among high school students when it comes to STEM
careers and educational pathways. Despite 81% of SPC students indicating a
desire to transfer, the number that transfer to a 4-year institution (29.5%)
remains low. Our goal is for more underrepresented minority (URM) students to be
better prepared for STEM majors and to achieve greater retention, transfer, and
completion of STEM-centered bachelor’s degrees. The project will use faculty
professional development to improve STEM advising and help students successfully
navigate and academically progress at the community college. There will be two
summer experiences planned to help improve academic readiness and interest in
STEM fields. These will include a STEM summer experience to help rural students
increase interest and understanding of STEM fields, and an Academic Success
Academy to allow first-time college students onto campus 5-weeks early. The goal
is to increase retention in STEM by preemptively overcoming the barriers many
students face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this proposal which
address retention and graduation rates of URM STEM students are to (1) improve
STEM transfer rate by enhancing STEM advising and availability of resources for
students to help break down barriers for URM students; (2) improve academic
readiness and recruitment of K-12 students by planning an Academic success
experience for high school dual credit students and first-year generation
students to help improve college readiness; (3) survey students via success
workshops to identify apparent and conceived barriers for URM students. Many URM
students face more challenges and barriers upon enrolling and attending college
than their majority counterparts. Improving advising will be accomplished by
professional development for faculty advisors to increase knowledge and
preparedness. In order to further the advancement of SPC’s URM students, this
project will implement summer academies with tailored activities for these
students. Through the summer academic experience, and improved required
advisement (achieved through the professional development of advisors) plus
study skills/student success workshops available to all students, the sense of
belonging will be accelerated for STEM majors. The needs of students will be
periodically accessed to tailor future plans during STEM-focused workshops. This
project will help increase retention by increasing academic readiness before the
students begin their college careers. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.