* 2116183
* Collaborative Research: Charge Transport in Helicoidal Molecular Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Stephanie Lee, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2023
* USD 282,883.00

Non-technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crystals are straight by
definition. They have sharp edges and flat faces. They are polyhedra. However,
molecular crystals that twist as they grow are remarkably common, albeit little
known. More than one third of simple molecular crystals are capable of forming
twisted morphologies. As a largely unexplored phenomenon, crystal twisting
introduces a new dimension to materials design. Plastic electronic devices, e.g.
foldable LCD screens, smart phones, computers, and solar panels, depend on the
shapes of tiny crystals that carry electricity. This collaborative project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, uncovers at a fundamental science level the effect of
twisted morphologies on the propagation of electrical current and light through
crystals comprising organic semiconductors in order to usher in the next age of
personal consumer electronic devices as well as critical technologies associated
with renewable energy. Early results show that twisting boosts conductivity.
Outreach activities embracing literature, art, history, and education reflect
the themes of crystals and chirality (items that can be distinguished from their
mirror image are chiral, for example a hand) that undergird these scientific
efforts, with a focus on using intriguing aspects of twisted crystals as a
platform to engage K-12 students in STEM-related activities in the NY metro
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Helicoidal
crystals with pitches from 1-500 microns can carry charge when grown from
molecules that form traditional organic semiconductors. At the level of devices,
twisting on these length scales can have critical consequences on light
propagation and charge injection, extraction and hopping. To elucidate the
general effect of twisting on such processes, a series of semiconducting
compounds are induced to twist as they crystallize from the melt into thin films
as part of this collaborative research, which is supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF.
Conductive and photoconductive atomic force microscopy and charge mobility
measurements using a field-effect transistor platform are performed on these
helicoidal crystals as a function of pitch to determine the modulation of
electric field- and photo-induced charge transport locally along and
perpendicular to the twisting axes. As optoelectronic devices typically require
specific crystal orientations within active layers for optimal performance,
electrocrystallization is applied to molten organic conductors to collimate
twisted crystals on electrode surfaces. Electrical magnetochiral anisotropy
measurements, in conjunction with complete imaging polarimetry unique to the
PIs' laboratories, are actualized in the search for chiral defects introduced
via twisting. In doing so, this research uncovers fundamental mechanisms of
crystal growth while addressing inherent limitations in the field of organic
electronics, including large charge transport anisotropies along less accessible
crystallographic directions and difficulties in tuning molecular interactions
independent of molecular structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.