* 2116477
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Navigating reproductive care in times of uncertainty
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Jennifer Hirsch, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2023
* USD 23,900.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social and economic inequality are
known to have impacts on well-being. Yet, the pathways leading to this
relationship remain poorly understood. This doctoral dissertation project
examines how inequality intersects with individual attributes to affect access
to care and reproductive decision-making. It does so in a context in which
policies shaping reproductive care are changing rapidly, affecting not only what
types of support are available at a given time, but knowledge of these changes,
and the channels through which knowledge is gained and support offered.
Leveraging this context offers a new synthesis of theories of policy,
reproductive care, and economic inequality to better understand how these
factors shape women’s reproductive decisions. The research supports a doctoral
student’s training. Results will be disseminated widely, including to academic
and non-academic audiences, reproductive health practitioners, and organizations
involved in health policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
examines how a variety of stakeholders interpret and navigate the changing
landscapes affecting reproductive care. It has three primary aims: (1)
characterizing the association between social and economic inequality and the
experiences of women seeking reproductive care; (2) how policies shape the ways
that women understand and navigate care options; and (3) how women’s experiences
affect understanding of the ethical dimensions associated with the provision of
reproductive care. To achieve these aims, the investigators use a suite of mixed
methods such as participant-observation, policy and discourse analysis, semi-
structured interviews, and life histories in a context where policies shaping
reproductive care are changing rapidly. The results contribute to scientific
understandings about the relationships between social and economic inequality
and healthcare access and policy, and innovative solutions that arise to adapt
to policy changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.