* 2116358
* RAPID: From microbes to new tropical forests: an experimental test of fungal specialization on host tree genotypes in the context of a reforestation experiment
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Jordan Karubian, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 04/30/2024
* USD 199,898.00

Soil fungi are thought to be one of the most important factors for establishment
of tropical tree seedlings. Pathogenic soil fungi can cause seedlings to die
while other soil fungi form beneficial symbiosis with seedlings that can help
them thrive by obtaining key nutrients in the soil. The goal of this project is
to better understand the contexts in which fungi promote seedling growth and
maintain tree species diversity, in the context of a reforestation project.
Degree of relatedness between adult trees will be a particular focus of this
work, with the hypothesis that seedlings will interact with more beneficial
fungi when they are planted near adult trees that are more genetically different
from themselves. This project will take place in Ecuador, in a species-rich
region that is increasingly threatened with deforestation, which releases carbon
into the atmosphere. Reforestation, in contrast, creates a sink for carbon and
habitat for many endangered species. This research on seedling-fungal
interactions can aid in designing reforestation efforts. The broader impacts
further include training a U.S. based post-doctoral associate and graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a novel, multi-species test
of the idea that, by selecting against more common genotypes and favoring
survival of rarer genotypes, within-species specialization by pathogenic soil
fungi promotes and maintains genetic diversity within plant species. At the same
time, the research also explores whether and in what contexts soil fungal
communities have positive impacts on seedlings. To do so, the team will
implement a shade house experiment made possible by a large-scale reforestation
project in Ecuador. The study design allows an assessment of seedling
performance as a function of how related a given seedlingâ€™s maternal tree is to
the conspecific tree in whose soil the seedling is planted. The design allows 36
within-species pairwise comparisons with 8 replicates each, for each of 16
different tree species, as well as controls with sterilized inoculum. Genetic
relatedness of trees and profiles of fungal community composition and function
will be assessed via high-throughput sequencing. This work is expected to
provide novel data on the extent to which within-species specialization by soil
fungi occurs; the degree to which genetic similarity between conspecific
maternal trees predicts magnitude and direction of soil fungal impacts on
seedling performance; and how specific combinations of soil and root fungal
communities impact seedling performance. These findings are expected to advance
our understanding of the ecological and microevolutionary factors that control
the diversity of tropical trees&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.