* 2116571
* Collaborative Research: Watershed-scale Geomorphic Response to Climate Change in the Aklavik Range, NWT (Canada)
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jill Marshall, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 12/31/2024
* USD 256,527.00

Arctic landscape response to rapid anthropogenic climate change has the
potential to fundamentally alter both human and natural systems. This includes
increased hazards to Arctic communities from permafrost thaw and associated
slope instability and the destruction of river and coastal habitats from higher
sediment and nutrient yields in Arctic rivers. While it is clear that Arctic
landscapes are sensitive to climate change, a gap exists in our knowledge about
how changes in temperature will affect the ways in which sediment is transported
across a watershed. In order to address this knowledge gap, the investigators
will be conducting a field- and remote sensing-based study of Arctic watersheds
in the Aklavik Range of the Northwest Territories (NWT), Canada, where numerous
First Nations communities are situated. The research team will test the specific
hypothesis that climate change in the Arctic is leading to faster production of
sediment within mountainous regions and causing subsequent increases in sediment
delivery to hillslopes and rivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
interdisciplinary project that involves three Early Career tenure-track faculty,
multiple local collaborators, as well as the Ehdiitat Gwichâ€™in. The
investigators will study two small bedrock watersheds (where sediment is
produced) and their associated fan deposits (where sediment is stored) along a
north-south climate gradient. Prior geomorphic work on these fan deposits was
conducted in the 1960s to 1980s, making them an ideal location to quantitively
assess change over time. The major objectives are to: (1) conduct fieldwork to
understand how sediment is produced and the processes by which it moves across
this landscape; (2) perform laboratory analyses on samples collected in the
field to quantify rates of sediment production and transport over decadal to
millennial scales; (3) use remote sensing techniques to extend local findings to
the broader region over the last several decades; and (4) to use these data to
calibrate sediment production and transport models so that we can predict future
Arctic landscape response to anthropogenic warming scenarios. Many of the dating
and remote sensing techniques have greatly advanced in the last several decades,
but have not been applied to an integrated Arctic study spanning an entire
watershed. Once proven in this study, this combination of methods could be used
in other landscapes (both in the Arctic and at low latitudes) to better quantify
how changes in rates of one geomorphic process (e.g., breakdown of bedrock)
affects changes in rates of another (e.g., rates of sediment delivery to a
river). In addition, the data collected during this project will calibrate
state-of-the-science models allowing scientists to better inform local
communities of potential hazards due to future
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.