* 2116962
* CNS Core: Small: Embracing cross stack heterogeneity in next-generation cloud platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chitaranjan Das, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Cloud computing has emerged as an attractive computing paradigm to achieve
better economy of scale and flexibility for many application domains. For
catering to the increasing service demands of these applications, cloud
platforms have steadily evolved to offer a myriad of resource and service types.
This has complicated the cloud adoption process due to challenges with respect
to resource provisioning, billing complexity, and inaccurate resource demand
estimation. This leaves cloud-bound tenants with an uphill task of achieving an
optimal cost-to-performance ratio when hosting their applications on public
cloud resources. On the other hand, the ever-growing cloud market has pushed
providers to embrace heterogeneity, both at the hardware and software levels,
through the rapid adoption of state-of-the-art hardware (e.g. Graphics
Processing Units (GPUs), Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), etc.,) and
software (e.g. Virtual Machines (VMs), containers, and serverless functions)
developments. However, the main mediator between the applications and the
underlying cloud computing infrastructure, which is the resource manager and
scheduler, is not fully equipped to make the best use of the ever-evolving
system heterogeneity and software complexity. Thus, the cloud resource
management and scheduling framework needs a fresh look in order to adapt to the
emerging hardware and software heterogeneity to maximize the deliverable
performance and energy efficiency of cloud infrastructures. This project
adresses these challenges by investigating a two-fold approach for developing a
tenant- and provider-cognizant scalable cloud scheduling framework. First, from
a tenant's perspective, we are developing an efficient cloud configuration
framework that caters to the application requirements in terms of cost and
performance. Second, from a provider's perspective, we are developing an
efficient and adaptive resource management framework that can exploit the
available heterogeneity across the cloud stack. The resource management
framework will be integrated with commercial resource orchestrators like
Kubernetes and will be evaluated using public cloud platforms with real-world
workloads. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project should enable the
effective utilization of heterogeneity offered by cloud providers for enhanced
performance and energy efficiency across many application domains. The results
of this research will foster new research directions in several areas of cloud
computing, and the scheduling framework will be made publicly available.
Furthermore, student training and research opportunities for undergraduate
students will be facilitated through this research. The outreach activities
include mentoring of women and minority students, participation in K-12
activities, and strengthening the Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC)
program in the department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.