* 2116355
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Tradeoffs of Economic Mobility and Political Orientation in the Context of Urbanization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Bruce Knauft, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 25,002.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The rise of urbanization often provides new economic
opportunities for young adults. The opportunities for individual advancement may
stand in contrast to cultural ideals toward egalitarianism. The resulting
tradeoffs have implications for the political mobilization of middle-class young
adults. This dissertation project examines the effects of economic mobility on
political settings in the settings characterized by rapid urbanization and
relatively high political and economic uncertainty. The investigation examines
the determinants of political orientations among middle-class professionals in
diverse urban contexts. Using a complement of anthropological methods, the
investigators document the social dimensions of political participation and
economic motivations. In addition to providing funding for the training of a
graduate student in the methods of empirical, scientific data collection and
analysis, findings from the project are shared with policymakers, non-
governmental organizations, and civil society organizations to support on
initiatives that address economic inequality and conflict
prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project examines the
forces that push middle-class young professionals towards political
participation based on consumption and economic mobility versus political
participation driven by concerns for social justice and equality. This project
uses participant observation to explore the actions and decisions of young
professionals in two types of research sites: sites associated with consumerism,
such as shopping malls, and sites associated with activism, such as political
organizing meetings. To complement these methods, semi-structured interviews and
direct observations of study participants are conducted to understand the larger
networks and social obligations that influence the political orientations of
middle-class young professionals. The resulting research findings promote
greater understanding of the dynamics and potential impact of middle-class youth
on economic development and political priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.