* 2116422
* EAGER: Exploring the Intersection of Mathematics, Science and Art
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Andrzej Herczynski, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2023
* USD 299,934.00

This multifaceted, two-year project will aim to unlock creative possibilities at
the intersection of physical and mathematical sciences and the visual arts. It
will do so by creating opportunities for collaborations among mathematicians,
physicists, neuroscientists, cognitive scientists, and artists working in
diverse media. The program will build on the experience gained in two workshops
at the Isaac Newton Institute, Cambridge, UK, in 2017 and 2020, and bring to
fruition ideas generated during these events. The activities will be developed
around carefully formulated questions and will be organized utilizing a variety
of platforms supportive of cross-disciplinary dialogues. A series of pioneering
exhibitions and associated events will be organized in collaboration with art
historians and scientists, featuring prominent international artists whose work
engages mathematics or physics directly or indirectly. The program will offer a
unique platform for science advocacy and public appreciation of the physical and
mathematical sciences and their role in the cultural sphere. In so doing, it
will encourage a new generation of scientists to enrich their perspectives, and
perhaps steer their careers in new interdisciplinary directions. The art
exhibitions and their related events will generate the broadest public interest,
which will be combined with a proactive educational component. The program will
also open a range of opportunities for collaboration with schools and for
reimagining pre-college education as well as college majors. Furthermore, by
targeted outreach it will serve to attract new talent to STEM subjects,
particularly from under-represented groups. As an outreach strategy to secondary
schools, ready-made lesson plans and modules for teachers will be made available
to help inspire career choices of thousands of students worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching ambition of the project is to expand the
scope of traditional areas of applied mathematics and physics, and to stimulate
new insights, mathematical approaches, as well as neural and cognitive models to
the understanding and analysis of art processes, art objects and their
perception. It will also serve to firmly establish an enduring community of
scientists working on various topics at the science-art interface. Beyond
invigorating and redefining cross-disciplinary research, the project will
inspire new ideas, suggest new research directions and problems, and stimulate
advancements in physics, mathematics, and likely neural science as well. For
example, liquid instabilities discernable in many paintings have only recently
attracted physicists’ attention, while the singularities of solid mechanics
manifest in some sculptures, fabric installations, and ceramics, suggest many as
yet unexplored problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.