* 2116918
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Developing a scalable theory of alternatives in pragmatics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 07/31/2023
* USD 18,244.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans interpret language in
remarkably flexible ways. In particular, our interpretations involve not only
what a speaker actually says, but also what the speaker could have said but
didn't. For example, if someone says "some students passed the exam," listeners
probably take this to mean that not all students passed, because the speaker
could have used the more informative alternative "all students passed the exam"
if that had been the case. Reasoning about these linguistic alternatives appears
to play a key role in language comprehension, but it remains unclear how exactly
the alternatives themselves are determined. When a speaker says something, what
makes one sentence a better or worse alternative than another? How do
alternatives depend on prior experience with different grammatical structures?
And how might children learn the ability to reason about alternatives? This
research project investigates these questions by combining linguistic theory,
behavioral experiments, probabilistic modeling, and machine learning to test
competing theories of alternatives. In doing so, this work has the potential to
advance our understanding of language in the human mind, as well as artificial
models that use language in human-like ways. The project also establishes
opportunities for undergraduate researchers, and produce new code and datasets
that will be publicly released to the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to existing theories which suggest
that alternatives are generated through operations on syntactic structures, this
research evaluates the idea that alternatives capture experience-based
accessibility relationships between the lexicon, grammar, and context. A planned
series of behavioral experiments assess how the accessibility of alternatives
affects the interpretation of event causation in English periphrastic causative
constructions. In addition, model simulations investigate how knowledge of
alternatives may emerge over the course of language learning, simultaneously
establishing a framework for testing theories of alternatives in more
ecologically valid domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.