* 2116109
* AI Behind Virtual Humans: Communicating the Capabilities and Impact of Artificial Intelligence to the Public through an Interactive Virtual Human Exhibit
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ning Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,604,219.00

The AI behind Virtual Humans Exhibit aims to communicate to the public about the
capabilities and impact of artificial intelligence (AI) through AI technologies
used in Virtual Humans including facial recognition and natural language
processing. AI has and will continue to profoundly impact society in the United
States and around the globe. It is important to prepare the nation’s youth and
the future workforce with fundamental knowledge of AI. Informal settings, such
as museums, offer open and flexible opportunities in helping youth and the
general public learn about AI. Virtual Humans provide an ideal vehicle to
illustrate many fields of AI, as AI is arguably the science of building
intelligence that thinks and acts like humans. Led by a multidisciplinary team
of researchers with expertise in AI, learning design, and assessment from the
Institute for Creative Technologies at University of Southern California and the
Lawrence Hall of Science at University of California, Berkeley, this project
will develop a Virtual Human exhibit to engage visitors through structured
conversations with a Virtual Human, while showcasing how AI drives the Virtual
Human’s behavior behind the scenes. The exhibit will include collaborative
learning experiences for visitors such as parent-child, siblings and peers to
explore what AI is and is not, what AI is and is not capable of, and what impact
it will have on their lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate
three research questions: (1) How can a museum exhibit be designed to engage
visitor dyads in collaborative learning about AI? (2) How can complex AI
concepts underlying the Virtual Human be communicated in a way that is
understandable by the general public? And (3) How does and to what extent the
Virtual Human exhibit increase knowledge and reduce misconceptions about AI? The
project leverages existing conversational Virtual Human technology developed
through decades of collaborative research in AI, including machine vision,
natural language processing, automated reasoning, character animation, and
machine learning. Set in the informal setting of a museum, the exhibit will be
designed following evidence-based research in Computer Supported Collaborative
Learning. The project team will use a mixed methods design, drawing on design-
based research methodologies and experimental studies. The research team will
conduct analysis of visitor observations and interviews for iterative formative
improvement. Randomized experimental studies will be conducted in both lab and
naturalistic environments to gauge visitor knowledge about AI. Quasi-
experimental analyses will be performed to study the relationship between
engagement with exhibit features and AI knowledge. The project will produce an
interactive exhibit with a Virtual Human installed at the Lawrence Hall of
Science and other participating museums, and instruments to measure AI learning.
The project will also produce a website where visitors can experience parts of
the exhibit online and continue more in-depth learning about AI and the Virtual
Human technology. The project holds the potential for producing theoretical and
practical advances in helping the general public develop an understanding of AI
capability and ethics, advancing knowledge in the process through which young
learners develop knowledge about AI, and formulating design principles for
creating collaborative learning experiences in informal settings. The results
will be disseminated through conference presentations, scholarly publications,
and social media. The Virtual Human exhibit will be designed for dissemination
and made available for installations at informal science education
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.