* 2116437
* Effects of Responses to Bias on Cardiovascular Reactivity During Interracial Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Tessa West, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2024
* USD 497,456.00

Bias against people of color remains a significant problem in the United States.
A crucial step toward addressing this problem involves having honest
conversations about moments of discrimination that people of color experience.
What is lacking is a firm understanding of the features of interactions that
lead to productive discussions between people of color and White people,
especially when a person of color discusses an experience with discrimination.
Does the White person respond with receptive and validating behavior or with
dismissive behavior (e.g., framing comments as complaints)? How do receptive
and/or dismissive responses shape the quality of the conversation as it unfolds
and the amount of physiological stress that each person experiences? Answering
these questions has important implications for understanding how to promote
effective allyship, mitigate the harm of discrimination for people of color, and
foster cross-race friendships built on mutual understanding and
trust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present research involves two large-scale
studies with community samples of Black, Latinx, and White adults. In both
studies, a Black or Latinx interaction partner discloses an experience of unfair
treatment to a White interaction partner. A variety of measures are obtained
during these conversations, including self-reported perceptions, cardiovascular
activity to assess physiological reactions, and relevant behavioral patterns
captured on video. Participants' emotional and physiological reactions can be
linked to specific comments or behaviors from their interaction partner. This
allows for a test of hypothesized sequences, such as whether a Latina person who
describes a discrimination experience exhibits decreased stress immediately
after her White interaction partner has a receptive response. Study 1 tests the
prediction that when people of color disclose experiences with bias (vs.
experiences of unfairness unrelated to race), receptive responses from White
people are particularly helpful and dismissive responses particularly unhelpful.
Study 1 also tests whether the quality of interaction partners' conversation
affects how much they cooperate with each other on a subsequent task. Study 2
tests an intervention designed to increase a White person's receptivity to
expressions of discrimination. The intervention encourages productive cross-race
conversations about discrimination experiences and effective cooperation between
conversation partners. In addition to addressing these issues, this project
helps to train a diverse group of students on how to conduct research involving
social interactions and cardiovascular measures. The insights from this research
provide a basis for evidence-based interventions that can improve conversations
about race and reduce intergroup tension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.