* 2116991
* Voltage-based switching of memory elements based-on spin dephasing, diffusion and switching in ferrimagnetic metals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Barry Zink, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 359,888.00

Our economy and society rely heavily on information technology, which consumes
an ever-growing amount of energy to process and store the world’s information.
This makes energy-efficient, non-volatile memory systems a critical goal for
future computers. Magnets, where information is encoded in bits typically formed
from ferromagnetic materials with “north” and “south” poles with very much
reduced size, currently store a huge amount of information. However, these
memory systems rely on magnetic fields to manipulate the poles, giving a
technology with non-volatile storage but limited size and energy efficiency.
This project aims to achieve a low-current, based on materials with properties
of antiferromagnets and ferromagnets, called a ferrimagnet by using all
electrical means of manipulating nanoscale non-volatile magnetic memory. A
ferrimagnet has vanishing magnetization at a certain temperature which can be
shifted with carefully engineered applied electric field. This project will
provide fundamental scientific knowledge and demonstration of this principle,
for the fabrication of energy efficient, non-volatile, nanoscale magnetic memory
and switching devices. The project will involve graduate and undergraduate
students training and outreach activities involving collaboration with the
student physics club, online spintronics seminar series and brown bag seminars.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on ferrimagnetic metal
alloys and bilayers, with the overall goal of demonstrating voltage-based
switching of memory elements using a detection scheme based on the anomalous
Hall effect, and of spin transport sensors such as non-local spin valves. One
specific focus is on a design of a new experiment to measure both the spin
dephasing length and the spin diffusion length in ferrimagnetic metals. These
measurements for a single material, will provide critical information for a
range of spintronic systems and devices. The project will also explore voltage
manipulation via electrolytic gating using an ionic gel. The project explores
temperature-driven switching of the ferrimagnet as a first step toward eventual
voltage-gated switching, which could also prove useful for applications in
sensing. Research activities will involve characterization and development of
ferrimagnetic metals, including SQUID magnetometry and thermoelectric and
thermal conductivity measurements using unique micro- and nanomachined
measurement tools. The project has four main thrusts: (1) Developing,
optimizing, and characterizing materials for ferrimagnetic spintronics, (2)
Measuring the spin dephasing and diffusion lengths in ferrimagnetic metals, (3)
Using a ferrimagnet to Realize Voltage-Driven Deterministic Magnetic Switching,
and 4) Tuning spin direction in a ferrimagnetic non local spin
valve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.