* 2116957
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: High school choice and the social meanings of a sound change in language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jaime Benheim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 06/30/2023
* USD 9,977.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how and why language
change occurs is central to understanding the nature of human language. Recent
work among adults has found that the type of high school an individual attends
can influence how that person engages with place-linked linguistic features
(such as regional accents). However, although adolescents often lead linguistic
change, the impacts of high school choice remain under-examined among high
school students themselves. This doctoral dissertation project builds upon
previous work on an important regional sound change currently occurring in
American English by examining how the social associations adolescents attribute
to the features undergoing change relate to their own use of these features and
how the social environments within different types of schools might influence
the social meanings that are associated with these and other regional linguistic
features. In addition to the training of a doctoral student, results will be
shared publicly with participants and community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through sociolinguistic interviews, social evaluation
tasks, and perceptual dialectology tasks with adolescents in different types of
high schools, this project provides new and deeper insights into the social
meanings that high school students attribute to a specific set of regional
accent features. The exploration of how adolescents' own understandings of the
social meanings of linguistic features relate to their social environments in
school and their placed, racialized, and classed identities will in turn enhance
our understanding of the mechanisms – both social and linguistic – at work
during the course of language changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.