* 2116181
* I-Corps: 3D Printing of Microneedles for Transdermal Drug Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Salil Desai, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a microneedle technology for drug delivery and other applications
based on 3D printing. Additive manufacturing is a promising technology that may
be used for fabrication of customizable, complex, and cost-effective
microneedles arrays (MNAs). MNA devices are micron-sized needles that pierce the
outer layer of tissue (skin) to deliver drugs in the form of proteins,
molecules, and/or peptides into the body. MNAs are considered painless,
minimally invasive devices. Currently, MNA patches developed using traditional
technologies such as molding, chemical wet etching, and direct laser
micromachining require advanced manufacturing facilities, have limited
customizability, and lack flexibility over specific MN parameters. The proposed
technology allows superior control over geometric parameters such as sub-
millimeter height, tip sharpness, and high-aspect ratio. Applications of MNA
patches include drug delivery, electric stimulation, chemical biosensing,
electrical biosignal recording, and neutral
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of microneedle array (MNA) devices that are micron-sized needles
that pierce the outer layer of skin (epidermis) to deliver drugs into the body.
The proposed technology is based on a customizable stereolithography (SLA)
technique for fabricating high quality MNA devices with 10 µm - 100 µm
resolution using biocompatible and biodegradable materials. The microneedles may
be fabricated with tip heights of 200 µm - 800 µm and diameters of 50 µm - 200
µm, respectively. Using this SLA advanced manufacturing technique, various MNAs
such as conical-, pyramidal-, tetrahedron-, angled, honeybee structure, and
arrowhead-shaped may be fabricated with high fidelity and mechanical properties.
The proposed microneedle technology can bridge current treatment modalities and
is amenable to scale-up for large-scale transdermal applications. Moreover, 3D
printed microneedles may be embedded with pharmaceuticals providing tunable drug
release kinetics for a variety of medical treatments. These MNA patches will be
designed to possess superior mechanical strength and piercing capacity for
transdermal drug delivery applications in hospitals, ambulatory surgical
centers, and specialty clinics. The initial market target of this technology is
diabetes diagnostics to deliver insulin and regulate glucose for Type 1 diabetes
treatment. In addition, these MNAs may provide therapeutic efficiency, and safe,
painless penetration through skin that may be easily adapted for other drug
delivery modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.