* 2116254
* Continued Operation of the OSU/CEOAS Marine and Geology Repository
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Joseph Stoner, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2023
* USD 702,724.00

The College of Earth, Ocean and Atmospheric Sciences at Oregon State University
maintains the OSU/CEOAS Marine and Geology Repository (OSU-MGR) as an NSF-
sponsored community facility. The mission is to archive and distribute
geological samples, predominantly sediment cores, rocks, nodules and sediment
trap samples, for scientific research and education. The repository was
established in 1971 and since that time OSU-MGR has grown to curate four primary
collections. (1) NSF’s Marine Geology Collection: Consisting of 15,196 m of
marine sediments from 6,603 cores, 14,674 rock samples from 529 dredges, 568
rock samples from 61 dives (Alvin, ROV), 528 deep-sea manganese nodules, and
1,644 sediment trap samples. (2) NSF’s Antarctic core collection: Consisting of
16,187 m of marine sediments from 7,352 cores and 7,993 m of drill core from 92
sites, including ANDRILL, CRP, CIROS, DVDP and others. (3) NOAA R/V Okeanos
Explorer Dive Collection: Consisting of 365 rocks from 187 dives. And (4)
various other core and rock collections, including 567 m of Pacific NW lake
sediments and 8,061 m of terrestrial drill core from across Oregon. For almost
50 years these materials have been archived and described with continuous NSF
funding, with more than 186,000 samples distributed over the past 29 years to
scientists, educators, and museums throughout the United States and around the
world. With more than 27,000 samples taken over the last grant period, the
demand for repository samples remains high, and is a predictable component of
today’s scientific need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.