* 2116128
* RUI: Evaluating how cnidarian hosts and algal endosymbionts coordinate cell divisions to maintain healthy symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Geoffrey Mitchell, Wofford College
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2024
* USD 188,760.00

The corals responsible for building tropical reefs are disappearing at an
alarming rate as elevated sea temperatures cause them to bleach and expel the
algal symbionts they rely on. Without these symbionts, corals are unable to
harvest energy from sunlight and, therefore, struggle to thrive or even survive
in the nutrient-poor waters of the tropics. To devise solutions to address the
threat to coral reefs, it is necessary to understand the cellular events
underpinning the bleaching process. Indeed, little is known about how healthy
corals and symbionts coordinate cell divisions even though the algae reside
within individual coral cells. In fact, uncoupling of coral and algal cell
divisions has been implicated in bleaching. The objectives for this proposal are
to determine what role dysregulation of the algal cell cycle plays in bleaching
and to assess two mechanisms implicated in regulation of symbiont cell division.
Understanding this may inform strategies for mitigating coral bleaching. At
Wofford College, this proposal will fund nine undergraduate research projects,
generate publicly available sequencing data that will transform bioinformatics
instruction, and provide material support for course-based undergraduate
research at all levels of the undergraduate biology curriculum. Students who
participate in course-based research benefit similarly to students who
participate in traditional research programs; however, because they occur during
the regular semester, these courses lack the barriers to access that prevent
participation by students from underrepresented groups. Altogether, the proposed
activities will enhance educational outcomes for more than 50 undergraduates at
South Carolinaâ€™s most economically diverse college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives for this project will be accomplished by completing three specific
aims: (1) to measure the link between heat stress and increased symbiont
proliferation; (2) to assess phosphate limitation as a mechanism used by hosts
to regulate algal proliferation by evaluating gene expression and membrane lipid
composition in cultured symbionts compared to symbionts in hosts; and (3) to
pharmacologically and genetically alter the pH of the intracellular compartment
separating symbionts from their hosts and measure the effect of pH on algal cell
division. The central hypothesis is that heat stress causes an uncoupling of
host and symbiont cell cycles, which are coordinated through phosphate exchange
and the pH of the algal microenvironment. This work is important for the field
because to address stress-induced bleaching, the mechanisms responsible for
maintaining healthy symbiosis must be uncovered. Indeed, if the cellular traits
dictating thermotolerance are elucidated, it will be easier to predict which
corals are most susceptible to climate change and to focus conservation efforts
on those species. Likewise, certain species of algal symbiont are resistant to
heat-induced bleaching. One proposed explanation is that thermotolerant species
are slower to divide, making them less likely to over-proliferate at high
temperatures and burden their hosts. Our work will provide insight into this and
may make it easier to determine the best species to inoculate into juvenile
corals being used for reef restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.