* 2116159
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Changing Perceptions of Social Withdrawal in Quarantine
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Ramsey Ismail, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 3,780.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As of the summer of 2021, the
global COVID-19 pandemic is well into its second year, with fresh waves of
infection and uncertainty driven by local variants and uneven global handling of
the virus. Communities have struggled to adjust to life in full- and partial-
quarantine. This doctoral dissertation research project contributes to efforts
to address mental health issues brought to light during quarantine, by
considering the specific ways that attitudes toward mental health in quarantine
have been reconceptualized. In addition to providing funding for the training of
a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of empirical, scientific data
collection and analysis, this project d disseminates findings and data to
further public education about science and the scientific method, and leverages
collaborative networks to build the capacity to conduct future research on
mental health. The project also broadens the participation of groups
historically underrepresented in science. Additionally, attention to how
quarantined people address their lonely experiences inform initiatives to
address the putative "loneliness epidemic" striking the U.S, even after the
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research project examines how
constructions and conceptions of mental health and illness are transformed
during periods of social upheaval. The research explores shifts in perceptions
and experiences of a group of long-term stay-at-home social recluses, due to
widespread quarantines in response to COVID-19. While the study population has
historically experienced stigma for their potential mental health issues,
quarantine forced a shift in public sentiment, and caused the public to ask what
they might learn from a population that lives in isolation. In return, the shift
in sentiment has prompted potentially permanent changes in their experiences.
Through interviews, participant observation, and surveys this ethnographic study
offers insight into the changed views of self-imposed isolation, changes in
conceptions of mental health, and the experiences of quarantine. The
intellectual findings contribute to anthropological theories of the
constructions of illness, and science and technology studies on the relationship
of society and psychiatric categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.