* 2116514
* Systematic Study of Plasmon-Induced Charge and Energy Transfer in Metal-Semiconductor Hybrids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lars Gundlach, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 508,023.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The interaction between light and matter is
fundamental to numerous processes in nature, technology, and science. The
ability to control light/matter interaction by targeted design of materials and
devices is an important part of basic materials science research. Metal
nanoparticles possess optical properties that are distinct from their bulk
behavior due to the formation of plasmons, the collective excitations of the
electron cloud inside a nanoparticle. Plasmons can be very strong light
absorbers and their optical properties can be widely tuned, making them
promising targets for a broad range of applications such as light sensors and
solar energy conversion. However, it is challenging to extract the energy that
is contained in plasmons due to their extremely short life time. This research
is studying the mechanisms that govern coupling between plasmons and other
excitations in matter by combining carefully designed model systems and
ultrafast spectroscopies. This project is strongly interdisciplinary, combining
Material Science, Physics, and Chemistry. It offers many opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate research across these disciplines. A new higher-level
undergraduate course, covering the electronic and optical properties of
nanomaterials, is being developed as part of the project. In addition, the PI is
developing a new module for the University of Delawareâ€™s K-12 Engineering
Initiative that supports teachers in STEM education. The module combines hands-
on experiences and lectures focusing on the optical properties of
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is to understand under what conditions efficient direct plasmon-
induced charge and/or energy transfer can be realized and what parameters govern
the underlying processes. The project investigates plasmonic interactions
between noble metal nanoparticles with tunable optical properties and
semiconductors with adjustable electronic properties by ultrafast spectroscopic
techniques. The approach combines model systems that allow systematically
changing the parameters that are involved in plasmon-induced energy transfer
with ultrafast spectroscopic techniques that can identify the formation,
dynamics, and the products of plasmon-induced excitations. Highly ordered,
homogeneous, and precisely tunable two-dimensional metal/semiconductor
hemispherical nano-heterostructure arrays act as test-beds to identify charge
transfer mechanisms. The well characterized model systems are investigated by
femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy in the visible and mid-IR spectral
range, by time-domain THz emission spectroscopy, and by time-resolved THz
absorption spectroscopy. These ultrafast methods are combined with standard
materials characterization techniques to measure and identify dynamics of charge
and energy transfer processes as a function of optical and electronic material
properties. This project develops a detailed predictive understanding of charge
and energy transfer mechanisms, that are necessary for rational design of
metal/semiconductor hybrid structures for applications such as solar energy
conversion and opto-electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.