* 2116186
* Understanding the Influence of Climate Change on Temperature Persistence
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Thompson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2024
* USD 795,202.00

Greenhouse gas emissions cause a variety of climatic effects which go beyond
increasing global temperature and many of these, such as increases in the
frequency of heat waves and extreme rainfall, are well recognized. Work under
this award examines a consequence of global warming that has not been widely
appreciated: the tendency for short-term surface temperature fluctuations to
persist for longer periods of time. The effect has been seen in comparisons
between the last two decades of the 20th and 21st centuries in climate change
simulations, with increases of up to 50% in the 5-day persistence of surface
temperature anomalies. While the signal has not been identified in the observed
record to date it is a robust feature of simulations across a large ensemble of
model simulations performed with the Community Earth System Model (CESM) and can
be reproduced in a variety of simplified configurations of the model. The
pattern of the persistence increase is intriguing as it is more prominent over
the oceans than over land, although it extends over Australia, eastern China,
and western Canada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award seeks to
understand the change in persistence in terms of a conceptual model in which
temperature fluctuations arise from random forcing and decay through linear
relaxation. In this model an increase in persistence results from an increase in
effective heat capacity, reddening of the stochastic forcing, or a decrease in
the damping processes that control relaxation. The work follows two streams, one
of which examines reanalysis products and simulations from the Climate Model
Intercomparison Project (CMIP), particular the multi-model large ensemble
archive. The other stream consists of numerical experiments using the Community
Atmosphere Model (CAM, the atmospheric component model of CESM). Some
experiments involve techniques to disable relevant feedbacks, for instance
"cloud locking" and prescribing water vapor in the radiation code. The project
takes advantage of the model hierarchy available as part of the CESM code
base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance as its serves to
inform our understanding of how climate change influences the persistence of
extreme temperature events, and the impacts of such events depends critically on
their duration. The research team also conducts outreach to local public
schools, providing a series of outreach lectures on climate science to teachers
and students. In addition, the project provides support and training to two
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.