* 2116635
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Mass Spectrometer, Liquid Chromatography System to Support Research and Teaching within the Sciences
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Patrick Hare, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 335,114.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Northern Kentucky University is acquiring a
benchtop high performance quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer equipped with a
high pressure liquid chromatograph and a nitrogen generator to support Professor
Molly Hopper and colleagues Patrick Hare and Christine Curran. In general, mass
spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the university and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by
involving diverse students with this modern analytical technique. It is also
used by collaborators from nearby institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
of the quadrupole tandem mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It is especially useful for identification of
metabolites after crop exposure to environmental stressors and for monitoring
the metabolomic impact of gut microbiome changes following activation of the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) following benzo[a]pyrene exposure from coal tar,
tobacco smoke and many foods, especially grilled meats. The instrumentation is
also used for understanding the photophysics and photochemistry of estrogens and
their photodegradation products and the type of compounds formed during
cyclization prior to the preparation of analytically pure compounds used for
characterization in phenylethynylene- and annulene-oxacalixarene. The instrument
also serves researchers carrying out hybrids synthesis and those synthesizing
diarylheptanoid analogues to obtain a selective microsomal prostaglanding E
synthase-1 (mPGES-1) enzyme inhibitor with low nanomolar potency in vitro. The
instrumentation is also used for studying palladium-catalyzed direct
alpha-C(sp3-hybridized)-heteroarylation of carbonyl compounds for use in organic
chemistry, medicinal chemistry and chemical
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.