* 2116369
* Psychological Mechanisms of Skewed Decision Making Across Adulthood
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kendra Seaman, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,108.00

Each year, 1 out of every 18 older adults is the victim of financial fraud,
resulting in estimated losses of $37 billion. These older adults are likely
targeted because of this age group’s growing size, affluence, and power. Thus,
it is important to understand why older adults sometimes make decisions that are
different than younger adults as these age-related differences in decision
making have enormous social and economic consequences. An overall goal of this
project is to identify the psychological mechanisms that underlie age
differences in risky decision making over the adult life span. This mechanistic
focus generates critical insight about aging and decision making that guides the
development of interventions to improve decision strategies in vulnerable older
adults. This project also seeks to increase financial literacy in the general
public by developing accessible educational materials appropriate for the adult
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses age differences in
decision making when considering positively-skewed risks. Positively-skewed
risks are decisions that involve options that promise large but unlikely gains
coupled with small but likely losses. Older adults tend to accept these risks
more often than younger adults or have a Positive-Skew bias. Integrating
theories and methods from disparate subfields in psychology and economics, the
project examines two potential psychological mechanisms that underlie this
effect. One mechanism is an age-related tendency to attend to, and remember
positive information, or the age-related ‘positivity effect’ that leads to a
Positive-Skew bias. The attention hypothesis explores the tendency of older
adults to focus on positive information (including attending to and remembering
positive information). Activating other goals may lessen the bias by reducing
attention. Another mechanism examines the selective avoidance of losses, which
requires engaging cognitive control. The ability to engage cognitive resources
is inhibited during decision making in older relative to younger adults and
several experimental conditions test the influence of cognitive control
mechanisms on the Positive-Skew bias. The project tests interventions targeting
cognitive control to reduced bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.