* 2116702
* Collaborative Research: How Events are Conceptualized by Users of Homesign and by Users of an Established Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Jesse Snedeker, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2026
* USD 361,626.00

Human languages describe events in systematic ways. For example, one would say
"Layla ate the apple" and not "The apple ate Layla" to describe an everyday
eating event because, in active sentences, English and other languages place the
doer of the action (the agent) before the verb and the affected entity (the
patient) after. Where do concepts like agent and patient come from? Are they
created gradually as a language develops over historical time and then passed
down to children when they learn that language? Or are they basic features of
human thought that shape the kind of languages that we can create and learn? To
answer these questions, this research explores how deaf individuals with no
access to an existing language think about events and how event concepts change
as a new language evolves. This work contributes to our scientific understanding
of the human mind and the origins of languages and provides specific insights
into the creation of sign languages and the experiences of linguistically
isolated people. This project will contribute to the training of a Deaf
scientist, postbaccalaureate research assistants, and undergraduate
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines two groups: 1) Homesigners:
Deaf people who have not learned a sign language and cannot access the spoken
language of their community. Each of these adults has created their own signed
system to communicate. 2) Users of a new sign language (NSL) which emerged when
Deaf children came together at school. Each group of children to enter the
community introduces linguistic complexity that the adults they learn from seem
unable to acquire. Accordingly, the NSL older signers represent earlier stages
of the language, and younger signers represent later stages. This project will
examine the performance of signers from the first three age cohorts, spanning
almost 30 years of the languageâ€™s development. The tasks that are used assess
the conceptualization of event roles (like agent, patient, source and goal) and
the conceptualization of event dimensions (like manner and path of motion). If
event concepts are available to all humans regardless of linguistic experience,
then both homesigners and NSL signers should systematically differentiate these
concepts and generalize them appropriately. If these concepts arise from
historical processes that gradually shape languages, then these concepts should
be absent in all of these groups. An intermediate pattern of emergence is also
possible, whereby these concepts might be absent in homesigners and/or older NSL
signers, but present in younger signers. This would suggest that such
representations arise via a community of users who have the opportunity for
iterated learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.