* 2116515
* Quantum Phenomena in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leon Balents, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research on the quantum physics of electrons inside materials. Even a tiny
amount of a solid contains an enormous number of electrons, which, when they
coordinate their actions, can induce remarkable effects and useful material
properties, such as magnetism, switching, and superconductivity. This project
seeks to discover new examples of such effects and expand our understanding of
existing ones. In particular, the research will study unusual magnets and
conductors, make theoretical predictions for experiments to probe their novel
quantum capabilities, and determine how to manipulate the electrons within these
materials using electromagnetic fields. A core component of the study is to
incorporate recently developed abstract theoretical ideas about ways in which
electrons can cooperate quantum mechanically, known as entanglement and
topological order, into practical proposals for experiments. The results of the
research may be the basis of new technologies and quantum devices. All the
research will be continuously compared with and referenced to real materials and
experiments, with this feedback refining directions for theory to ensure maximum
impacts in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers is an integral component of this
project. These junior scientists will learn forefront areas of condensed matter
and quantum theory, as well as develop general scientific, communication, and
computational proficiency, through mentorship and collaboration on the research.
These skills prepare them to participate productively in the nation's quantum
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research on the quantum physics of quantum magnets
and ordered topological metals, to discover the fundamental mechanisms in which
electrons act together to produce new states of matter, and to predict what
novel properties these states possess. The studies of quantum magnets will
determine their dynamics in and out of equilibrium, providing experimentalists
with clear signatures to seek in the laboratory, both for highly entangled (e.g.
quantum spin liquid) states and for ordered ones. Furthermore, the research will
design ways to control materials' properties in situ via oscillating fields. The
projects on ordered topological metals address a different way to control
materials' properties - their topology - through induced symmetry breaking
order. The studies will determine how the topology of electronic states is
modified by domains and topological defects of different types of order, such as
magnetic domains and domain walls in topological magnets, and in turn, how this
topology influences the properties and responses of those domains and defects.
All the research will be continuously compared with and references to real
materials and experiments, with such feedback refining directions for theory to
ensure maximum impacts in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Training of
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers is an integral
component of this project. These junior scientists will learn forefront areas of
condensed matter and quantum theory, as well as develop general scientific,
communication, and computational proficiency, through mentorship and
collaboration on the research. These skills prepare them to participate
productively in the nation's quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.