* 2116415
* Domestic Violence During COVID-19
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Paige Sweet, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 227,104.00

Early evidence suggests that domestic violence has risen since the beginning of
the COVID-19 pandemic. Yet, we know little about domestic violence victims’
qualitative experiences of abuse or access to necessary resources. This project
considers how public health crises and stay-at-home orders affect the dynamics
of abuse. It also examines how victims’ help-seeking and survival strategies
changed during the pandemic. Through in-depth interviews with domestic violence
survivors and anti-violence workers, this research traces changes in victims’
experiences of abuse and help-seeking, as well as changes in the structure of
care surrounding domestic violence. Findings are relevant for scholars and
decisionmakers interested in the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic, the
relationship between external stressors and family violence, and the effects of
the pandemic on access to resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
interviews 120 domestic violence survivors and 60 service providers to
understand how the COVID-19 pandemic has shaped the dynamics of intimate partner
violence, the experiences of women survivors, and the availability of, access
to, and navigation of resources for domestic violence victims. Data are
qualitatively coded and analyzed for emergent themes related to the dynamics of
intimate violence, survival strategies, resource access, and inequalities. The
research contributes to sociological understandings of how crises shape
inequality. This project also allows people with pandemic-related
vulnerabilities to explain in their own words how their lives have been affected
by the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.