* 2116707
* Resilience and Vulnerability of the Developing Brain's Connectome during the COVID-19 Pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Catherine Stamoulis, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Around the world, the COVID-19 pandemic has had a profoundly disruptive impact
on everyday life. For children at vulnerable periods of development, such as
adolescence, restrictions on activities that are critical to their physical,
mental and cognitive health may have extensive but difficult to predict negative
effects. Specifically, increased stress, fear and loneliness, may have
detrimental effects on brain development and the organization of neural circuits
that support critical functions, such as decision-making and social cognition.
To address the urgent need to elucidate the pandemic’s impact on the developing
brain, this project will use cutting-edge analytic tools to harness multimodal
data from a large sample of adolescents in the Adolescent Brain Cognitive
Development (ABCD) study. The overarching goal of this work is to systematically
quantify the pandemic’s effects on brain networks that play a fundamental role
in cognition, and to better understand aspects of their organization that
reflect an increased risk of longer-term cognitive deficits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the data wealth of the ABCD
study and novel computation approaches, with the goal to quantify modulations of
neural circuits (the connectome) by the multifaceted adverse effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic. For this purpose, we will develop novel network
analyses/topological measures, hierarchical statistical models and extensive
simulations. These tools will be applied to fMRI data collected prior to the
outbreak, and topological properties of developed and maturating networks will
be compared in association with cognitive and mental health outcomes. Large-
scale simulations will predict outcome changes based on perturbed connectomes.
Neuroimaging data collected following the outbreak will be used to validate
these predictions. Findings from this project may provide transformative
insights into the resilience and vulnerability of developing neural circuits to
large-scale events such as a global pandemic. These findings could be leveraged
to develop efficient interventions to minimize/prevent detrimental long-term
effects on cognitive outcomes in children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.