* 2116319
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effect of social information on the perception of native- and nonnative-accented speech
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Kristin Van Engen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2022
* USD 18,585.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When perceiving speech, listeners
use non-speech information from their environment in addition to the speech
itself. One visual cue that informs listeners' understanding of speech is their
perception of a talker's ethnicity. This doctoral dissertation improvement grant
project examines the cognitive and linguistic mechanisms that drive this effect.
In addition to informing scientific models of speech processing, the results of
this project can shed light into the inequalities faced by speakers of English
in the United States who belong to a minority race and/or speak English as a
second language. This work can therefore serve as an important step toward
addressing and reducing inequalities stemming from linguistic and racial
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project investigates social
priming – how social information affects perception of speech – for both native-
and nonnative-accented speech. In a series of experiments, group-wide behavioral
data and individual differences data are integrated to examine the time-course
and specificity of social priming effects, their relationship with implicit
racial associations, and their effect on perceptual adaptation to nonnative
accents. To ensure appropriate power for examination of individual differences,
a large number of participants are recruited through online data collection.
Transcription tasks are used to assess listeners' ability to understand target
sentences presented in background noise. For the investigation of perceptual
adaptation to nonnative accent, curve-fitting mixed-effects models are used to
estimate performance over the course of the experiment. Ultimately, results of
this interdisciplinary work will provide foundational knowledge of how
linguistic and racial biases impact how humans process
speech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.