* 2116597
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced FTIR Imaging Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Training in the State of Mississippi
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Carolyn Freiwald, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 217,163.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Mississippi is
acquiring a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) imaging microscope to support the
research of Professor James Cizdziel and colleagues Carolyn Freiwald,
Vijayasankar Raman, Courtney Roper, and Matteo D'Alessio. This instrument
facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, energy, materials, biomedical
and pharmaceutical sciences, as well as archeology and anthropology. In general,
Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy measures the intensity of the absorbed
or transmitted infrared radiation when it passes through a solid, liquid or
gaseous sample. The resulting spectra represent the molecular absorption or
transmission of the tested substance. When infrared radiation passes through a
compound part of it is absorbed by the constituent molecules which vibrate or
rotate at certain frequencies. In a heterogeneous sample this powerful
analytical tool is good for identifying chemical composition qualitatively. The
information can also be used to create an image of the material composition in a
sample. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts
of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides accessibility
for use at nearby institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the FTIR
imaging microscope is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels,
especially in areas such as environmental and forensic chemistry involving
microplastics, atmospheric fine particulates and metabolized drugs. Research in
the area of archeology and anthropology is also facilitated by identifying
compounds in prehistoric paints and analyzing Mesoamerican artifacts. Studies
focused on biomedical and pharmaceutical sciences for studying serum exposed
ionic liquids, the role of the active human IGF-1 protein in alterations of
ischemic tissues, topical drugs and dietary supplements are also pursued as are
those focused on analysis of materials relevant for aerogels, water treatment
and solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.