* 2116612
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope to Advance Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jun-Hyun Kim, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 403,900.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
acquisition of a variable-pressure field-emission scanning electron microscope
(FESEM) with secondary electron (SE), backscatter electron (BSE), and
cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging, and energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
capabilities at Illinois State University (ISU). The instrument benefits
research and teaching activities across five departments at Illinois State
University (ISU) and four nearby institutions in central Illinois (Illinois
Wesleyan University, Millikin University, Bradley University, and University of
Illinois – Springfield). The new capabilities of the instrument such as as high-
resolution low-voltage and low-vacuum imaging, EDS, and CL allow the users to
enhance and expand cutting-edge research activities in physics, material
sciences, biology, chemistry, and geology. Research experiences for
undergraduates (majorly), and masters and PhD students will be facilitated.
There is a plan to integrate the FESEM-EDS-CL in several courses annually,
attended by over 150 undergraduate students. The project also includes outreach
efforts to engage the general public, including partnering with local K-12
educators and students in the community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
high-resolution variable pressure FESEM with EDS and CL capabilities will
facilitate problem-driven cutting-edge research projects in nanoscience,
materials science, physics, biology, chemistry, geology with an anticipated 25
laboratories across five institutions. The ultra-high resolution imaging
capability at low voltages and variable pressure, BSE imaging and elemental
identification using EDS provide opportunity to characterize materials as small
as sub-2 nm dimension. Scientists will be able to image block copolymer
templates and inorganic nanostructures with sub 5-nm resolution at low voltage
and low pressure; perform correlated FESEM-Optical Microcopy imaging with sub-2
nm resolution; new types of sub-10 nm polymers, metals, and their composites for
drug-delivery systems, Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS)-based sensing
devices, and optically responsive catalysts. Several biological sciences and
biochemistry research groups benefit from the capability at ISU and nearby
institutions. About 25 undergraduates, 6 MS, and 2 PhD students would use the
FESEM for research per year. Females and underrepresented minorities will
benefit through existing initiatives to recruit and train minorities at ISU.
Moreover, the instrument will benefit two early-career female faculty. Outreach
efforts include partnering with local K-12 educators and students in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.