* 2116952
* Doctoral dissertation research: The encoding, maintenance and retrieval of complex linguistic representations in working memory
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ming Xiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 17,586.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human language comprehension
relies on the support from working memory (WM), but it is known that WM capacity
is limited. To combat this limitation, comprehenders form structured
representations (chunks) comprising multiple words at various levels of
complexity. How the WM encoding, maintenance and retrieval processes support
structures of varying complexity remains poorly understood. This dissertation
project examines how linguistic representations are formed and stored in WM by
identifying the costs and benefits associated with supporting complex
representations in WM. While there has been previous work on complexity, this
project aims to provide a more nuanced perspective by examining different
aspects of linguistic complexity. By contributing to the body of work on the
interplay between WM and language comprehension, the project also has potential
clinical implications for language-related disorders such as specific language
impairment and various forms of aphasia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates the relatively unexplored interaction between representational
complexity and the three working memory processes (encoding, maintenance, and
retrieval). The first set of studies investigates whether forming complex
representations with more features can facilitate or hinder one or more of the
three core WM processes. The second set of studies further examines how the
facilitation or interference effects are modulated by the similarity between
elements within a chunked representation. Finally, the third set of studies
examines how the formation of a hierarchically chunked structure affects the
retrieval of its individual components. To provide a multidimensional view of
the interaction between WM processes and linguistic complexity, the project
employs both behavioral (self-paced reading) and electrophysiological (EEG)
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.