* 2116767
* Nonlinear and geometric effects in quantum condensed matter systems
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Alexander Abanov, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2025
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education using hydrodynamics and geometric methods to describe unusual
collective behavior of quantum electronic systems and active matter. Active
matter consists of assemblies of self-driven particles and the PI focuses on the
coordinated behavior of their constituents or their collective behavior. This
project is also focused on the coordinated or collective behavior of electrons
that can result from their strong interactions in diverse materials or devices.
The matter we observe around us consists of vast numbers of microscopic
particles, atoms, molecules, ions, and electrons. Understanding the properties
of the collections of a huge number of particles is crucial for technological
progress. There are well-developed techniques of computing the properties of
such systems when the constituent particles do not interact or interact only
very weakly with each other. In this case, the properties of the system can be
obtained by summing over one-particle motions. Examples include the properties
of gases or electrons in good metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When constituent
particles interact strongly, the computation of collective properties of matter
from microscopic properties of its constituent particles is much more
challenging. For some kinds of matter, one of the powerful methods known is
fluid dynamics. In fluid dynamics, the collective state of matter is
characterized by fluid density, velocity, and temperature as they vary with
time. Instead of considering microscopic particles, physicists can more easily
solve equations describing their collective behavior. The equations include
viscosity, compressibility, thermal conductivity, and other fluid properties as
parameters. The challenge is to derive those properties from microscopic
properties and expand the range of validity and the scope of fluid dynamics
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to apply fluid dynamics methods
to quantum mechanical and classical systems with unusual characteristics such as
the fluid of electrons in two dimensions in high magnetic field that gives rise
to the quantum Hall effects, chiral materials, and chiral active matter. For
these materials, the mirror image cannot be perfectly superimposed on the
material or state of matter. Chiral active fluids, for example, are composed of
self-spinning rotors that continuously inject energy and angular momentum at the
microscopic scale. The collective fluid dynamics of these materials are
qualitatively different from the descriptions of conventional
hydrodynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another part of the research involves the
description of the limit shape phenomenon - the appearance of a most probable
macroscopic state in random systems. This state is usually characterized by a
well-defined boundary separating frozen and liquid spatial
regions.&lt;br/&gt;Teaching the basics of math and physics and communicating the
values of cutting-edge research in modern physics to high school students is an
essential part of the project. PI will continue to participate in the enrichment
program for children in Stony Brook, in the science sleepaway camp for students
13-16 years old in Stony Brook, and the summer camp for gifted high school
students in Russia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research and education using hydrodynamic and geometric
methods to study quantum and classical collective phenomena with a focus on
electronic fluids and active matter. Recent decades brought a renewed interest
in applications of topological and geometric methods in physics research. The
overall trend of “geometrization of condensed matter physics” is characterized
by the essential use of symmetries and effective descriptions of condensed
matter systems. Those descriptions often have geometric meanings facilitating
the use of the existent and development of new mathematics. The broad field of
topological phases of matter, studies of collective behavior of active systems,
research in chaotic and out-of-equilibrium systems are just a few fields
strongly affected by this approach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
is in the field of theoretical condensed matter physics. It is unified using
hydrodynamic and geometric methods in studies of quantum and classical
collective phenomena. This project includes studies of anomalous fluids and odd
transport coefficients, the interplay between topological degrees of freedom and
effective boundary fluid dynamics, aspects of melting in Coulomb plasma in two
dimensions, geometrical aspects of large fluctuations in low dimensional quantum
fluids, and instanton effects on integrability breaking and chaotic behavior in
one-dimensional quantum spin chains. It is expected that geometric ideas will be
especially useful in understanding the above systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
character of the proposed research provides an excellent environment for the
comprehensive training of graduate students. The tools developed in the
described projects can be used in very different fields of physics: quantum
many-body theory, integrable models, nonlinear dynamics, classical
integrability, fluid dynamics, nuclear physics, cosmology, etc. Part of the
excitement of the proposed line of studies is due to the ability to apply
findings across barriers, sometimes separating different areas of research. The
obtained results can be verified by numerical simulations of correspondent
systems and, ultimately, by comparison with
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.