* 2116226
* Preparing Next Generation Mechanical Engineers for a Smart World: Integrating Mechatronics and Internet-of-Things Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hakan Gurocak, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 240,602.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enabling the future
mechanical engineering workforce to contribute to the Industry 4.0 revolution
through development of a modernized mechatronics course that incorporates
Internet of Things (IoT) technologies. This project will create new educational
materials and contribute to STEM education research through generation of new
knowledge. Smart products are becoming universal and STEM workforce demands are
shifting rapidly. However, the current mechanical engineering curriculum has not
kept pace. This project will address the gap between workforce demands and the
preparation of undergraduate engineering students by infusing skills from
computer science into a new modernized mechatronics course grounded in the IoT
technologies. The instructional model will incorporate project-based learning
and active learning as well as software engineering methods from computer
science. The expected outcome is a future mechanical engineering workforce that
can design smart products with cloud connectivity to contribute to the Industry
4.0 revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An innovative aspect will be the use of a
formal software engineering technique by mechanical engineering students to
develop high quality code. The project will contribute to STEM education
research by generating new knowledge regarding the efficacy of the new
curriculum and challenges to its implementation as well as through the creation
of assessment tools including IoT skills checklists, concept inventories, and
scoring rubrics specific to IoT projects. The findings, all products of the
project, and the assessment findings will be broadly disseminated through
conferences, educational journals, a new project website, the NextGen STEM
project website, and on YouTube with short videos. Many universities have
mechatronics courses, which can be replaced by the new course. Coupled with the
inexpensive hardware and the free open-source software, the products of the
project can easily be transferred to other institutions increasing the potential
for high impact in STEM education. The NSF IUSE:EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.