* 2116935
* Qualitative Data Repository 2021-2024
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Colin Elman, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,099,701.00

This award funds the Qualitative Data Repository (QDR), an open repository
dedicated to the curation, preservation, and publication of data generated
through qualitative and multi-method research. QDR, a collaborative project led
by social scientists and information scientists, is active in many disciplines
in the social, behavioral, health, and education sciences. The repository
promotes the progress of science by encouraging and empowering researchers to
share their qualitative data; building infrastructure to support the openness of
qualitative research; and encouraging institutional change to advance research
transparency and allow qualitative data to be shared ethically and legally
(i.e., without harming human participants or infringing proprietary
constraints). Data sharing and reuse are indispensable components of science
that help to make it more rigorous, cumulative, and efficient, as well as less
expensive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Qualitative Data Repository (QDR), a
collaborative project led by social scientists and information scientists, is
active in many disciplines in the social, behavioral, health, and education
sciences. Certified as a “trusted data repository” by CoreTrustSeal, QDR is a
key part of the infrastructure supporting open science in the US. Data shared
via QDR can be used for multiple goals: to verify results and claims in
publications based on the data; for secondary analysis to answer new questions,
thus facilitating discovery and the production of knowledge; and to improve
pedagogy through empowering active learning. This award enables QDR to organize
customized workshops and training sessions for researchers and data librarians
on qualitative data-management. By further integrating QDR into the academic
ecosystem and facilitating interaction with Institutional Review Boards and the
social science publication infrastructure, the repository continues to develop
new ways for scholars to provide ready access to the data and materials that
underpin their scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.