* 2116661
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Marine Conservation, Demography, and Family Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Michael Dove, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some efforts to manage natural
resources have relied on family planning initiatives designed to address broader
demographic concerns about population rise. This doctoral dissertation project
examines how an understanding of overpopulation connects to efforts to slow
fertility rates in vulnerable ecosystems, and what relationship the resulting
family planning initiatives have with reproductive behavior. This research
project asks how environmental scientists and organizations understand and
communicate the relationship between reproduction and conservation. In addition
to providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in
the methods of empirical, findings will be disseminated to stakeholder
organizations that shape the design and implementation of conservation programs.
This project also broadens the participation of groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project
explores the relationship between family planning and environmental conservation
policies aimed at addressing population concerns. Through an ethnographic study
of demographers, marine scientists, family planning practitioners, and women
participating in family planning, the project examines the processes underlying
the production of population data, and the relationship these dynamics have to
women’s own experiences and understandings of reproductive freedom. Ultimately,
this study contributes to new understandings of the ways in which demography and
reproductive policy shape women’s reproductive lives. The methods include
participant observation, semi-structured interviews and life history interviews
with demographic scientists, community-based family planning practitioners, and
women of reproductive age, as well as archival data analysis and supply chain
mapping. The project contributes to a growing scholarship on the environmental
dimensions of reproduction, and advances scholarship in political ecology and
science studies more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.