* 2116376
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Articulatory Dynamics and Stability of Multi-gesture Complexes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Dani Byrd, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 12/31/2023
* USD 18,962.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spoken language production
involves combined and coordinated articulatory actions of the tongue, lips,
nasal port, and larynx; yet the natural variation in speech and the difficulty
of "seeing" events occurring inside the human vocal tract mean that the elegant
choreography of these articulatory events critical to the formation of spoken
words remains mysterious. This project is a study of speech production using
real-time Magnetic Resonance Imaging (rtMRI)—a technique that can image vocal
tract movement during speech. The project's goal is to characterize the dynamics
of articulatory actions as they are organized into coordinated complexes such as
speech segments (roughly ‘alphabetic-sized’ units). The investigation of
stabilities in coordination will help scientists understand the cognitive
representation of the linguistic units that are used to structure and say the
words we know. Ultimately such an understanding has implications for language in
breakdown (e.g., due to stoke or disease), for language acquisition, for
language and dialect diversity, and for technologies that synthesize and
recognize human speech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation undertakes real-
time MRI experiments on speech production and concomitant computational modeling
to examine how the smallest movement 'atoms' of speech segments are
systematically coordinated. The project tests the hypothesis that vocal tract
movements composing a segmental unit are tightly coordinated with one another.
Therefore, their coordination is predicted to be stable across natural
contextual variations in speech such as phrase boundaries and emphasis, unlike
other movement sequences spanning across segments, which have been shown to
exhibit more plastic coordination. Using data from two under-studied languages,
both larynx-oral coordination in glottalic consonants and velum-oral
coordination in nasal consonants are dynamically imaged, and vocal tract
movements are tracked to analyze articulatory patterning and coordination in
space and time. Empirical findings are computationally assessed using a model of
dynamical coupling with which degrees of stability can emerge from certain
coupling structures. The project seeks to incorporate coordination relations
into linguistic cognitive representations and thereby illuminate the dynamic and
emergent nature of speech segments in the encoding system of the phonological
units that form words.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.