* 2116869
* A Meta-Analysis of Influences on Social Control
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Xia Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 08/31/2023
* USD 72,768.00

This project will examine the multiple dimensions of social control. To do so,
the research will undertake a meta-analysis of studies that have examined
various influences on social control. The project will overcome limitations in
the literature by assessing multiple outcomes and using meta-analysis rather
than narrative reviews to assess the empirical validity and generalizability of
context effects on social control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide a state-of-the-art assessment of the literature across assorted
influences of social control. Inattention to multiple dimensions of social
control, including law enforcement, incarceration and sentencing, laws and
policies, and informal social control, provides an inadequate and ad hoc test of
the theoretical concept known as the minority threat perspective (MTP). This gap
is critical because it leaves in doubt the validity of the MTP, arguably the
most prominent theoretical perspective used to explain the relationship between
racial and ethnic context and social control. To overcome these limitations, the
project will employ a meta-analysis by analyzing and synthesizing the more than
100 studies that have been published in the last four decades on the various
effects on multiple dimensions of social control. The project will thus assess
the extent to which the MTP is empirically supported and is generalizable across
different contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.