* 2116596
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Resolution Accurate-Mass Orbitrap LC-MS System at Montclair State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Meiyin Wu, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,969.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Montclair State University is acquiring a
benchtop high-resolution accurate-mass ultrahigh-pressure liquid chromatograph
tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) system with an orbitrap analyzer to
support Dr. Jinshan Gao and colleagues Meiyin Wu, Nina Goodey, Yang Deng and
David Rotella. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical
methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species
in complex samples. An instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides
additional structural identification power by separating mixtures of compounds
before they reach the mass spectrometer. The tandem capabilities, which couples
together two mass analyzers, increase the ability of the mass spectrometer to
analyze chemical samples. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at this Hispanic Serving Institution and regional area. The
instrument broadens participation by involving diverse students with this modern
analytical technique. It is also used by collaborators at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology, Fairleigh Dickinson University and Rutgers
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the UPLC-MS/MS (Ultra-high
performance liquid chromatography/two dimensional mass spectrometry) system is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially useful
for quantifying and characterizing glycan, proteins and glycoproteins as well as
identifying polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, cyanotoxin, lipids and
biopolymers. The instrumentation is also used for characterizing potential drug
candidates and their metabolites and for the identification of and
quantification of emerging contaminants and their transformation products in
water and wastewater. The instrument also serves researchers characterizing
genotoxic impurities in drug substances and other
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.