* 2116145
* The Misperception of Randomness: A Developmental Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Andreas Wilke, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2024
* USD 248,679.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The world is statistical in
nature. It is full of statistical patterns, including distributions of objects
and events in space and time generated by underlying processes that can be
partly ordered and partly random. A sound understanding of randomness is central
to navigating our statistical world, enabling us to make good decisions and
appropriate judgements under risk and uncertainty. The scientific literature in
psychology has examined how human adults grasp this statistical nature of the
world and use it in their judgments and decisions. One widely studied phenomenon
is the misperception of randomness, including seeing streaks and patterns of
events that do not exist, which occurs robustly across cultures. Past research
has in addition shown that misperceiving sequential events as streakier than
they objectively are, may be associated with gambling disorders in adults.
Little is known, however, about the misperception of randomness in human infants
or children. This project investigates the development of the cognitive
mechanisms underlying children's perception of randomness and explores how
misperceptions arise and are corrected. Project results contribute to developing
better methods of science education for helping children and students to make
accurate judgments in discerning patterns from randomness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances understanding of the development of
the cognitive mechanisms underlying children's perception of randomness and
susceptibility to erroneous judgments. To do this, three novel statistical
decision-making paradigms assess how 3- to 10-year-old children understand
randomness, and how children reason about sequential patterns in space and time.
Previous research suggests that a tendency to over perceive illusory streaks or
clumps in random sequences may be a human universal, tied to an evolutionary
history of foraging for clumpy resources. The study tests, using novel tasks,
the evolutionary account and makes methodological contributions to research on
this topic with methods created for tests with young children that can be
adapted for future use with infants (to further investigate when and how this
statistical reasoning emerges), and adolescents (to fill an empirical gap in our
understanding of origins of gambling addictions). This project provides a
crucial piece of the developmental picture of misperceptions of randomness and a
platform with which this development can be studied from infancy to
adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.