* 2116912
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Drivers of Cooperative Behavior in Situations of Conflict
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Lea Gleason, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 0.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans learn about the
reputations of people they have never met through a range of direct and indirect
forms of communication, and these reputations help them choose new partners in
cooperative scenarios. This doctoral dissertation research project investigates
how people communicate reputational information, how reputation impacts
decision-making, and what types of communication inhibit or enable utility in
these associations. Its findings shed light on the cultural norms that help
develop social consensus thereby allowing for large-scale cooperation of many
people. The results can help stakeholders develop effective solutions for
cooperative dilemmas involving many entities such as resource preservation and
climate change. Additionally, this project provides STEM research opportunities
for graduate and undergraduate students and improve science competency through
public outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines how
reputation impacts cooperative decisions in situations of conflict. Reputations
are transmitted through various forms of communicative interaction, but it is
not well-understood how these reputations endure, by remaining reliable enough
that people rely on them when making future decisions about cooperation. Using
ethnography, surveys, vignettes, and an economic game, this study assesses how
reputations are learned, the degree of agreement about an individual's
reputation, and how perceptions of reputation impact interactions with other
people. Data is analyzed through social network analysis and Bayesian statistics
to identify the level of agreement between participants and the scale of
reputational information. Data from this project assesses the assumptions of
theoretical models to evaluate the importance of reputation-based cooperation.
Multiple disciplines stand to benefit through the content and social network
analysis of reputation transmission as it provides insight into the various
functions of reputational communication, including for ostracism, alliance
building, norm enforcement, and establishing group
boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.