* 2116110
* Expanding a Model for Interactive Social Science Exhibits Presented in Outdoor Public Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Shawn Lani, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,269,326.00

Public outdoor spaces present opportunities for social experiences and learning.
This Broader Implementration project will expand and evaluate a model that
transforms urban public spaces into accessible and engaging environments for
learning social science in outdoor public spaces. The model combines social
science inquiry exhibits, place making and human facilitation of learning
experiences in outdoor public areas. Project exhibits use the facilitated social
interactions as both the content of and medium for the experiences. This project
will adapt the existing exhibits and add new exhibits and facilitation
techniques for testing in three different urban environments. Project research
will explore the efficacy of these adaptations and revised facilitation
techniques for the different settings in collaboration with civic partners at
each site. The project will share the model and research findings widely through
the Exploratorium website and publications for researchers, developers, and
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The teamâ€™s prior research showed that
facilitators improved multiple learning outcomes with the current exhibits.
Visitors acquired new social observation skills, reflected on their own
experiences, perceptions, and actions, and increased their awareness for how
social behavior, cognition, and emotion can be studied scientifically. Building
on the prior research, the project will install the exhibition and test its
efficacy in three different urban environments and explore the adaptations that
are required for different settings with different civic partners. The project
will use design-based research to develop a new theoretical model of
facilitation strategies for supporting science learning in outdoor public
spaces. For evaluation, the project will use mixed methods, including
observations, interviews, surveys, and document review. Evaluation will assess
success in attracting and engaging visitors; conveying social science concepts;
prompting self-reflection of judgments and actions; and fostering empathy among
those with different social identities. The project will assess the extent to
which participants, particularly those from marginalized communities, experience
feelings of belonging and inclusion. The project will be presented in three
sites which represent the significant diversity, income levels, and urban
environments of San Francisco. Facilitation strategies are being co-developed
with Urban Alchemy, an organization that works within distressed urban
communities in San Francisco. Project site partners and collaborators include
the San Francisco Public Library, the Port of San Francisco, and the San
Francisco Department of Parks and Recreation. The project will also measure
partnership outcomes, through surveys and interviews, to look at the extent and
ways the project integrates a co-creation model and develops an authentic,
mutually beneficial, sustainable partnership. The project will generate and
disseminate generalizable knowledge about the affordances of combining informal
science learning, placemaking, and facilitation in a variety of free, outdoor
STEM learning spaces in collaboration with local community groups. The project
will also advance public understanding of the social and behavioral
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is funded by the Advancing
Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches
to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM
learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening
access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative
research on and sssessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d)
engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.