* 2116231
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Crisis and community response in death and grieving practices
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* A. Cymene Howe, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 06/30/2022
* USD 24,985.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project
considers how a crisis has prompted changes in the ways people and communities
care for their dead. With social distancing protocols prohibiting in-person
funerals during the COVID-19 pandemic, much attention has focused on overflowing
mortuary facilities and the use of technology in modified mourning rituals.
However, far less consideration has been given to natural deathcare practices
that take place outside of typical settings such as hospitals or funeral homes.
This ethnographic research project examines the work of end-of-life care
providers, many of whom are amateur or paraprofessional caregivers providing
physical, emotional, and informational support during the dying process. The
research advances theory in political and medical anthropology by examining
whether and how natural deathcare affects concepts of death and the process of
mourning and how individual and community attributes interact with deathcare to
affect these outcomes. In addition to training a doctoral student, the findings
will be disseminated broadly to diverse stakeholders and audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this study examines how COVID-19 has
impacted alternative ways of handling and framing death. It goes beyond a
typical emphasis on virtual funerary practices to ask how individuals and
communities committed to natural deathcare have adapted to the crisis. The
research asks (1) whether and how experiences of crisis transform deathcare, (2)
what rituals this involves, (3) how natural deathcare is positioned among
alternatives to serve grieving communities, and 4) how these factors intersect
to affect concepts and expressions of death. The study is being conducted in
communities with diverse alternative practices to understand how community-level
factors affect the availability and concepts of deathcare. Additionally, the
research investigates whether and how individual social identity affects end-of-
life choices and outcomes, to provide a nuanced understand of shifting
definitions in what constitutes a good death. The investigators use participant
observation, interviews, focus groups, and archival research among deathcare
practitioners, students, and deathcare clients, and within the context of a
natural cemetery collective. Findings from this research provide insight into
diverse experiences of the pandemic and the significant cultural shifts the
pandemic has inspired within some communities. This research contributes to
recent anthropological calls to expand how death is understood and to improve
institutionalized experiences of death by exploring the contributions of
external caregivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.