* 2116719
* I-Corps: Molecular Augmented Reality for Visualizing Complex Biomolecular Structures
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Edgardo Farinas, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to implement
a Molecular Visualization System that will transform the complexities of
understanding biomolecular structures via hands-on interaction using augmented
reality (AR) technology. Users will "interact" with three-dimensional molecular
compounds and pre-programmed animations using transformative hand gestures to
facilitate scaling and rotations. Molecular manipulations of chemical compounds
will be more intuitive and replace the traditional computer graphic interface.
The natural interaction will ultimately allow users to gain closer insight into
molecular structures and conformations. The three-dimensional viewpoint of
chemical structures will enable a transformative learning environment for its
users. The system allows a shared experience facilitating enhanced group
discovery processes. The system also modernizes the learning environment for
higher education and enables discovery and collaboration processes in corporate
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project creates a tool for
understanding molecular forms and allows for enhanced exploration and discovery.
Current technology enables professionals in chemical and biological sciences to
discover, analyze, and manipulate physical forms. Additionally, the more
advanced technology supports the ability to capture and visualize molecular
forms at a smaller scale, resulting in greater visual understanding. However, a
drawback of some of these current systems is that they rely on complex chemistry
software and often have poor interfaces that greatly limit the ability to
visualize and manipulate biomolecules. The Molecular Visualization System
developed here aims to ultimately alter the path of implementation from limited
chemistry interfaces to direct, hands-on manipulation of chemical models using
wearable AR. This shift can transform the discovery process into a more
interactive and intuitive experience. The primary goal is for students and
educators to utilize the mobile application bridging the gap between theoretical
concepts and practical applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.