* 2116372
* SHF: Small: Beyond Behavioral Software Contracts
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Matthias Felleisen, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,605.00

To create complex applications, software developers compose components in a
Lego-like manner. Some software systems consist of 100s of components. The
interactions among these components are quite intricate, with each individual
component relying on informal descriptions on how to use it properly, say,
``always run this functionality before this one, followed by one of these
pieces.'' But, if a developer accidentally causes a violation of such
descriptions, things can go horribly wrong, leaving the developer team
dumbfounded about the cause of the problem. The investigator and his team are
studying novel techniques for automatically turning these informal descriptions
into checks. If things go wrong, such checks immediately signal a problem,
including hints as to which components are involved in the usage violation. The
project will impact the lives of working programmers, eliminating hours of
endless search for errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals differ from
those of two other approaches that tackle this composition problem. First, type
systems check for potential errors before the application is deployed; but
existing type systems lack the power to deal with many parts of these informal
descriptions. Second, run-time verification monitors complete systems
specifications in parallel with the execution of the application; but run-time
verification specifications are formulated after the components are linked,
meaning the developers of components cannot protect their individual code. The
novelty of this project is to build on, and extend, behavioral software
contracts. Instead of checking individual function calls, however, the
investigator's team is developing a mechanism for representing sequences of such
calls and all values associated with these calls. This mechanism then allows
component developers to express informal descriptions in terms of predicates
over these sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.