* 2116389
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Residential Segregation and Neighbor-Based Informal Hiring
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Tam Mai, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 17,946.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Place-based job policies, such as
informal neighborhood job search, are common tools to promote local job growth
and reduce regional economic inequality. It is however not clear what makes a
neighborhood good for job search. This research project will study one such
mechanism---the use of neighbor networks in job search. It explores which type
of neighborhood---segregated or integrated, by race and by education---is more
conducive to a successful job search. Disentangling the neighborhood effects on
job search is difficult partly because people self-select into neighborhoods.
The researchers use a policy experiment on refugee that were randomly assigned
to neighborhoods throughout the country to overcome the self-selection problem.
The project can help shed light on how local social connections can be harnessed
for effective resettlement and faster integration of these special immigrants
into the labor market at the destination. Second, in answering this question,
this research project will be a step towards understanding the relationship
between neighborhood diversity and prosperity. The results of this research can
provide guidance on improving the functioning of labor markets, especially for
those in segregated neighborhoods. The results could therefore help guide
policies to reduce unemployment in low income segregated
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying neighborhood effects in general
is challenging because of residential sorting. Different individuals may choose
to live in different places for reasons unobservable to the econometrician. To
overcome this selection issue and obtain causality, the project will exploit a
refugee settlement program that randomly dispersed refugees across the country,
conditional on a set of demographic characteristics and housing availability.
This natural experiment introduces conditionally exogenous variation in the
demographic composition at the neighborhood level for new and incumbent
residents. The project will complement this natural experiment with granular
geographical data that accommodate the resizing/redefining of neighborhoods.
This flexibility and the policy-induced variation will allow causal estimation
of the impacts of neighborhood segregation on the use of neighbor networks in
job search. In so doing, the research will help bridge two areas of economic
literature – neighborhood effects and networks-based informal hiring – that
heretofore have developed largely in isolation from each other. The results of
this research will provide guidance on improving the functioning of labor
markets, especially for those in segregated neighborhoods. The results could
therefore help guide policies to reduce unemployment in low income segregated
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.