* 2116748
* Examining the Geography of Pathogen Spillover
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Lauren Childs, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 11/30/2024
* USD 357,749.00

This project examines disease spillover, which refers to the transmission of
parasites and pathogens from one species to another. The transmission of
parasites and pathogens between species is a source of infectious diseases that
impact human populations, including past examples such as Ebola, SARS, and
COVID-19. As a complement to theoretical models, this study focuses on the
pathways that lead to spillover of rabies among populations of bats. The
transmission of rabies among bats is relatively common, which enables tests of
predicted spillover dynamics. The study includes sampling of bat populations in
multiple locations to determine the prevalence of rabies, which potentially
varies in response to multiple factors, including the genetic diversity of the
respective populations. The researchers also draw on archival data to assess the
probability of spillover events in relation to landscape disturbancesThe project
provides training opportunities for students, and the results will be shared
with diverse institutions that monitor public health and wildlife
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study contributes to understandings of
the risks of disease spillover between species, including humans. The research
focuses on bat-borne rabies transmission, which occurs relatively frequently,
permitting insights of transmission pathways that could similarly characterize
other infectious pathogens. To assess the determinants of rabies transmission,
the researchers use multiple methods. Blood samples collected from bats at
diverse locations permit laboratory work to assess the extent of rabies
infections in relation to the genetic diversity of the populations and
ecological variables. The researchers also use archival records on rabies
infections to assess the predictors of spillover events, such as landscape
disturbance and the expectation that spillover is relatively more common near
the center of the batsâ€™ ecological niche. The study includes the development of
theoretical models that reflect the inferred dynamics of spillover events over
time, and these models could be applied to studies of similar pathogens. The
findings inform diverse efforts to mitigate the risks of spillover events for
human populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.