* 2116322
* Genealogical ancestors, admixture, and population history
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Noah Rosenberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 293,695.00

This project develops and applies mathematical models of the process of genetic
admixture, with an emphasis on understanding the structure of genealogies for
individuals chosen at random from an admixed population. The project also
develops new ways of understanding the timing and magnitude of the genetic
contributions that have been made by source groups to an admixed population. The
research advances knowledge relevant to the study of human population history as
well as population genetics in other species. The project supports
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral training and mentoring; development
and dissemination tools for analyzing admixture through shared software,
seminars and conferences; and public and community science education and
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project introduces new quantities useful
for investigating admixture, studying distributions of the numbers of
genealogical ancestors from specified source populations. It evaluates these
quantities in mathematical models of admixture, using recursion equations that
incorporate features such as changes over time in the admixture process,
multiple models of mate choice, and source populations that contribute different
numbers of males and females to the admixed population. Through
multidisciplinary interactions, the project will also deepen the understanding
of the genetic history of specific populations. The new models from the project
contribute mathematical theory and statistical methods to the study of admixture
in human population genetics. Further, as admixture processes in non-human
species share mathematical similarities with admixture processes in humans, the
project additionally contributes tools useful for studying phenomena of
hybridization and introgression in natural and agricultural populations. This
project includes funding from NSF programs: SBE Postdoctoral Research
Fellowships (SBE/Office of the Assistant Director), Evolutionary Processes
(BIO/Division of Environmental Biology), and Mathematical Biology (MPS/Division
of Mathematical Sciences).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.