* 2116889
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Farmer Organizations and Development Actors in a Pandemic: Responses to COVID-19 and the Food-Water-Energy Nexus
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Atte Penttila, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 7,619.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has
adversely affected the agricultural sector, resulting in supply chain problems
among many other challenges. Such problems are mitigated differently by
independent farmers, farming collectives, and development organizations. How
responses to the pandemic are organized across these different scales affects
successes and failures. The pandemic environment thus offers a critical window
into the reasons for success and failure in farming activities as the pandemic
continues to evolve. This doctoral dissertation research investigates the
responses of agricultural development actors and small-scale farmer
organizations to the Covid-19 pandemic in multiple locations. In addition to
contributing to training a U.S.-based doctoral student in scientific cultural
anthropology, the research findings will be disseminated widely to academic and
non-academic audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses resilience
theory to investigate the processes by which farmers at different levels of
organization adapt to ongoing crises. The investigators focus on three research
questions: 1) How has the pandemic affected the flow of capital and who controls
the flow? 2) What are the vulnerabilities in food-energy-water systems exposed
by the pandemic? 3) What can answers to these questions reveal about mechanisms
to build resiliency? Through ethnographic interviews with development actors
operating at different scales and locations, and online participant observation
in virtual meeting spaces that have become more prevalent during the time of the
pandemic, this study traces the flow of capital, project funding, and ideas
between different agricultural development actors as the pandemic continues to
unfold. This research contributes to contemporary anthropology by integrating
approaches from disaster anthropology, development anthropology, and political
ecology to better understand pandemic responses and shifts in development
practice with far-reaching implications for local livelihoods on a global
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.