* 2116938
* Collaborative Research: How online foci shape conversation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Barum Park, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 103,149.00

This project investigates the characteristics of online communities that shape
the quality of their conversations. Social media sites are not homogeneous; they
are made up of online “foci” of interaction -- online communities like groups,
blogs, and discussion forums characterized by their stability and bounded
nature. In certain foci, conversations are friendly and constructive, in others,
hostile and unproductive. The goal of this study is to understand how the
different characteristics of online foci — their cultures, moderation policies,
attitudes towards outsiders, and social relationships — influence the quality of
their conversations. Findings will advance scientific knowledge to improve a
democratic society and help scholars and practitioners imagine and design a more
inclusive and democratic online public sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
leverages a large-scale multilevel dataset that covers all public conversations
that unfolded during a major campaign across 1,058 topical forums on a popular
platform. The data consist of 1.2 billion comments, 8.2 billion reactions to
posts, and 2.6 billion reactions to comments among three hundred million users
across 7.5 million posts. In addition, the project collects labeled comments to
train machine learning models that measure and predict whether comments are
deliberative according to two core dimensions: the civility of conversations and
meaningful cross-ideological interactions. These data, in conjunction with
recent methodological advances in the analysis of quasi-experimental designs,
social network analysis, natural language processing, and multilevel modeling
strategies, are used to identify the characteristics of online foci that foster
cross-ideological interaction and civil discourse and to understand the role
online foci play in moderating the impact of divisive, exogenous social events.
This project is supported jointly by the Sociology, Methodology, Measurement,
and Statistics, Human Networks and Data Science-Research, and Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.