* 2117422
* MRI: Development of A Real Time Antenna Metrology System for the Large Millimeter Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kamal Souccar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 02/29/2024
* USD 571,859.00

Observations of the Universe at millimeter wavelengths address a broad range of
scientific questions. The 50m-diameter Large Millimeter Telescope Alfonso
Serrano (LMT) is essential to this work. LMT was built by a partnership between
the country of Mexico and the University of Massachusetts Amherst. It is the
largest telescope of its type in the world and provides an important research
tool for astronomers in the US. Very large antennas like the LMT must be
carefully aligned to operate optimally. A major limitation is the result of the
internal alignment of the telescope changing as it heats and cools. This project
will build a system to measure the shape of the antenna surface and the internal
alignment of the mirrors that will allow the LMT to adjust and maintain its
alignment. The improvement will be most significant during daylight hours when
solar heating of the structure causes the greatest deviations. The project makes
extensive use of students and young LMT staff members to train the next
generation of scientists and engineers. Research with the LMT connects
astronomers in the US and Mexico encouraging scientific collaboration between
the two countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate performance of a large
single dish radio telescope like the LMT is limited by its response to thermal
gradients in the antenna structure that lead to deformations of the primary
reflector surface, causing a loss of antenna gain. These deformations also
change the relative position of the secondary and primary mirrors, leading to
antenna focus and pointing errors. The real time metrology system to be
developed by this project will directly measure internal alignments in the
antenna and allow the LMT’s control systems to maintain a high level of
performance even in the presence of transient deformations. Sixteen absolute
distance measurements between points on the primary surface will be used to
determine the coefficients of 14 low spatial order Zernike polynomials to
characterize surface deformations. An additional eight absolute distance
measurements between the surface and the secondary mirror are used to monitor
the position and orientation of the mirror. Simulations show that transient
primary surface mirror errors can be reduced to a level of ~20 microns rms,
which removes thermal deformations as an important error source in the LMT’s
overall surface accuracy. The secondary mirror measurement reduces pointing
errors due to misalignment to the level of 0.2 arcsec
rms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.