* 2117784
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI TOF/TOF Mass Spectrometer with Imaging Capabilities to Advance Research and Education at Carnegie Mellon University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mark Bier, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 385,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Carnegie Mellon University is acquiring a
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization tandem time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF-
TOF) mass spectrometer to support Professor Mark Bier and colleagues. In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing intact ions
of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and
other similarly sized species) with a detection mode that offers an excellent
balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range. This highly
sensitive technique allows identification and determination of the structure of
molecules in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the university and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. It is also used by collaborators at the University of Pittsburgh and
other regional institutions as well as industrial users. The MALDI-TOF-TOF is
also employed by undergraduate and graduate students and in a summer program
targeting low-income minority students from Oakland Planning and Development
Corporation School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the MALDI-TOF-TOF mass
spectrometer with imaging capabilities is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It is especially useful for studies in the development
of delivery systems for protein and nucleic acid-based molecules with potential
to serve as drugs and for improving atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP).
The instrumentation is also used for monitoring atomically precise gold and
gold-based alloy nanoclusters and studies of lipid peroxidation and oxidative
stress. The instrument also serves researchers imaging nucleic acids in situ and
those developing tools for studying RNA-RNA and RNA-protein interactions for
potential therapeutics since they are related to lipid nanoparticle mRNA
therapeutics from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna that have been afforded EUA
(emergency use authorization) by the FDA for use as SARS-CoV-2 vaccines. The
mass spectrometer is also utilized in the design and development of chiral gamma
peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) as well as in other studies of modified nucleic
acids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.