* 2117941
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU Cluster for Multi-Disciplinary Research and Education at University of Nevada, Las Vegas
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mingon Kang, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 432,269.00

The project funds the purchase and commissioning of a high-performance graphical
processing unit (GPU) cluster at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV). The
project will address emergent and longer-term needs, challenges, and
opportunities in research and educational efforts across multiple disciplines:
biomedical research, intelligent transportation systems and automated vehicles,
genomics, astronomy, and physics. The project will help advance national
initiatives in big data, strategic computing, artificial intelligence, and smart
infrastructure systems. These will integrate, synthesize, model, and visualize
large volumes of data from various sources as well as develop and apply
Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques to assist decision making. For applied
and basic research aspects of the project, the GPU cluster will leverage
advances in computing hardware, software, sensor networks, and communications
systems. Some elements of the project will address near-term societal needs to
preserve and enhance the quality of living of individuals and families, support
economic competitiveness and growth of businesses, and foster the vitality of
communities. These include topics related to public health, transportation,
environment, and energy. The project’s longer-term initiatives will address
explorations and innovations in basic research in these domains as well as in
astronomy, physics, and genomics. These activities will include partnerships
with academia, government entities, and private sector organizations. The
project will support curricular and co-curricular activities for undergraduate
and graduate students to increase their interests in related education,
research, and career opportunities. As a Minority-Serving Institution and
Hispanic Serving Institution, this grant will help UNLV to significantly expand
such opportunities for students from varied socio-economic and socio-demographic
communities. Thus, an outcome of the project will be to help develop skilled
work-forces from diverse backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GPU cluster will
support basic and applied research, as well as educational programs across
multiple disciplines. Common elements for the research efforts include
integrating, synthesizing, modeling, and visualizing large volumes of data along
with the development and application of various AI techniques to support
decision making. Efforts in Biomedicine will be to stratify individuals at risk
for benzodiazepine and opioid overdose using interpretable deep learning
techniques using publicly available pluripotency transcription factors datasets.
Activities related to intelligent transportation systems and automated vehicles
will address comprehensive trajectory prediction challenges for near real-time
applications on transportation networks to help accelerate the deployment of
Connected Automated Vehicles and Infrastructure Systems; they will use data from
various in-vehicle, on-roadway, and roadside sensors. Research in Genomics will
be to better understand the evolution of novel transcription factor (TF) binding
sites originating from endogenous retrovirus (ERV) integration. Astronomy
related endeavors will be to estimate planet mass from protoplanetary disk
images using Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN). Efforts in Physics will be to
develop rotationally equivariant CNN to simulate and evaluate force fields at
atomistic scales of materials. Educational aspects of the project will include
curricular and co-curricular initiatives at the undergraduate and graduate
levels to help alert, engage, excite, and motivate students to pursue education,
research, and career opportunities in related fields. The project will include
partnerships with public and private sector organizations and
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering (CISE) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.