* 2117575
* MRI: Acquisition of Dolly Sods GPU Cluster for Accelerated High-Performance Computing and Applications in Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence in West Virginia
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gianfranco Doretto, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,099,448.00

This project will enable West Virginia University (WVU) to acquire a special-
purpose graphics processing unit (GPU) cluster called Dolly Sods. Dolly Sods
will be a critical driver of WVU's goal of developing capabilities in utilizing
big data, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) to enable
transformational research in a broad range of fields encompassing drug
development, interstellar phenomena, biometrics, material design, and business
logistics and management. In conjunction with other institutions of higher
learning in West Virginia, development of these capabilities will in turn lead
to training an AI-ready West Virginian workforce that can leverage their skills
to strengthen current relationships with regional high performance computing
(HPC) centers as well as forging new relationships with federal and industrial
partners. The creation of training opportunities for first generation college
students, female students, and those from marginalized communities will aid in
the diversification of the computationally intensive workforce and will be
invaluable to West Virginia. Finally, this acquisition will contribute to
keeping the United States at the forefront of AI
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid adoption of hardware accelerators
(e.g., GPUs) in the research computing community has facilitated massively
increased compute capability and application of ML and AI approaches to solving
big data problems in every STEM field and non-traditional fields like business
data analytics. The requested acquisition of the Dolly Sods cluster will enable
cutting-edge research for efforts in diagnostic imaging of tumors, high-
throughput screening of small molecule drug design, on-the-fly detection of
interstellar phenomena, design and optimization of data compression algorithms
used in space flight, computer vision of medical images, and informatics of
business-based managerial decisions and system/process analysis, among others.
This research will put WVU at the forefront of the movement to integrate ML and
AI into the fabric of data-driven research, allowing for timely and relevant
scientific and societal issues to be addressed as well as providing training
opportunities for the next generation of data scientists, led by 24 faculty in
conjunction with 92 postdocs, graduate students, and undergraduate students.
Dolly Sods will also serve as an integral teaching resource for a newly formed
undergraduate degree in Data Science, which will incorporate ML and AI
throughout the curriculum. Combined with outreach to statewide institutions of
higher learning, Dolly Sods will drive continued efforts in training a diverse
HPC workforce, drawing from communities historically underrepresented in STEM,
including first generation college students, women, and other underrepresented
groups. The project will strengthen partnerships with regional federal labs (DOE
National Energy Technology Laboratory, NOAA Environmental Security Computing
Center, NASA Independent Validation and Verification Facility, and the FBI
Criminal Justice Services Division), industrial partners (Leidos and PPG), and
the nation’s leading center for ML and AI (Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center
(PSC)). It will further WVU’s long-term goal of transforming the economically
disadvantaged region of Appalachia into a top-level destination for investment
from the technology sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.