* 2117087
* Integrating Innovative Biological Research Data into Biostatistics – Fostering STEM Interest and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Dafeng Hui, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2024
* USD 288,171.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing coursework and
teaching strategies that will increase the number of STEM professionals who are
well-prepared to utilize biostatistics skills in the workforce. Specifically,
this project will increase undergraduate STEM students’ biostatistics skills at
two Historically Black College and Universities (HBCUs), Fisk University and
Tennessee State University. Skills in biostatistics are essential for students
in STEM fields to analyze, interpret, and predict outcomes across a broad
collection of disciplines. This project is intended to increase students’
interests in pursuing STEM research, deepen students’ learning through applied
course work, and improve students’ matriculation by providing support in an
often difficult course, biostatistics. This project will design and study a
biostatistics course with four prominent elements. First is the use of flipped
classrooms that emphasize short on-demand lectures with follow-up quizzes and
real-time technical demonstrations. Second is hands-on practice using real data
sets. Third is engaging students in small group discussions for supportive group
learning. Fourth is the use of comprehensive data-based projects that provide
opportunities to interpret biostatistics in plain language. By the completion of
this project, participating students will have an increased capacity to use
biostatistics effectively for assisting with analyses in research labs and
pursuing their own research interests. Project research will compare the newly
developed course to a traditional biostatistics course, in particular exploring
ways to meet students' needs and identify potential growth of critical
biostatistics skills. Furthermore, HBCUs have a prominent role in supporting
African-American students’ journeys to the STEM workforce and the project's
research and dissemination activities will generate new knowledge on effective
approaches in biostatistics education at minority-serving institutions and other
schools serving diverse student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to foster engagement and improve student learning of
biostatistics, which will specifically contribute increased opportunities for
students at HBCUs. To achieve this goal, there are three objectives: (1)
implement a biostatistics course with integrated research-focused classroom and
computer lab assignments; (2) develop a replicable flipped classroom approach to
teaching biostatistics; and (3) assess the value of the strategies used to
improve outcomes for future biostatistics HBCU students. Objective 1 will be met
through the development and iterative improvement of course projects with
authentic data, small peer-to-peer discussion groups, and participation in
ongoing research projects. Objective 2 will be met by tailoring the flipped
classroom approach to students at two HBCUs and creating materials and toolkits
that will be publicly available to other institutions nationwide. Objective 3
will be met by conducting a mixed-methods research study to compare growth of
biostatistics content mastery and interests in STEM careers by comparing
students enrolled in the project biostatistics course and a matched control
group taking traditional biostatistics courses. Major data sources include
content assessments, interviews, validated survey instruments and student
academic outcome data. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.