* 2117327
* I-Corps: Reducing the Threat from Active Shooters Using Miniature Air Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Robert Gamache, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a non-lethal building defense system that will guarantee that no
one can draw a firearm without being immediately detected and disabled. In the
time that it takes for first-time responders to arrive at an active shooting
scene, the lives of many defenseless civilians may be taken. This technology
seeks to eliminate this time delay and to render the assailant unconscious. The
proposed technology has the potential of having high impact on society as mass
killings of children and innocent civilians leave deep scars for many decades.
This technology will allow people to feel safer in any building, decreasing
stress and anxiety, and may result in greater productivity. Applications include
houses of worship, stores, homes, and commercial businesses. In addition, the
proposed technology will allow those who cannot afford security guards to be
safe from shooters. For those who can afford security guards, this technology
offers a higher level of defense that also will help eliminate shoot-outs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a two-
component, non-lethal building defense system composed of a robust, accurate
target detection and classification system and a highly maneuverable Miniature
Air Vehicle (MAV). The proposed research is based on weapon detection using
computer vision, artificial intelligence, and machine learning algorithms to
develop a multistep and multilayer system that combines multi-sensor data
streams that feed a real-time dynamic world model through an object fusion
subsystem, a rule-based system for refinement, a risk assessment system to
advise appropriate actions, and physics models. These multiple steps and
multiple layers will increase the likeliness of correctly identifying a weapon
and a threating situation. Research for the second component will focus on the
design of a MAV that will be small enough and fast enough to be hard to defend
against, while capable of removing the threat. The MAV will be equipped with
advanced target tracking with a non-lethal disabling payload. This research will
advance scientific and technological understanding of MAV and aerodynamic
surfaces operating at Reynolds numbers below 50,000 and the understanding and
achievement of autonomous systems with exceptionally low false
positives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.