* 2117049
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Investigating Environmental Justice and Managing Air Pollution Risk through Participatory Sensing
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Sara Grineski, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 26,640.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some people have turned to non-
governmental air quality monitoring networks (NAQMNs) to assess their air
pollution exposures. NAQMNs include low-cost, networked air pollution sensors
hosted at homes and schools that display real-time pollutant concentrations on
publicly accessible websites. The self-organizing nature of NAQMNs may produce a
highly uneven spatial distribution of sensors, and barriers to acquiring sensors
may systemically disenfranchise some social groups. This is important because
air pollution exposure causes negative health effects and exposures tend to vary
based on race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status. The overall goal of this
project is to assess how families with children with asthma use the sensors
while expanding the Salt Lake County, Utah NAQMN. Without equal access to air
pollution information, the public cannot stay adequately informed, which in turn
may affect their perceptions and actions concerning pollution exposure and
health. This project is relevant to environmental policy nationally, and in Salt
Lake County, which often exceeds national pollution standards. Adding 20 sensors
in areas of greatest need will enhance equity in Salt Lake County’s NAQMN. The
researcher recruits a student from a historically underrepresented group as a
research assistant and disseminates findings via multiple outlets, including by
publishing articles in top-tier journals and sharing findings with NAQMN
managers, study participants, and policymakers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to: (1) assess socio-spatial inequalities in the distribution of a
NAQMN in Salt Lake County; and (2) use those results to select local
environmental justice communities of concern with sparse NAQMN coverage in order
to examine how participatory air quality sensing shapes residents’
understandings and decisions. The research first uses statistical analyses to
assess whether sensors in the NAQMN (n=249) are unevenly distributed with
respect to race/ethnicity and socioeconomic status at the census tract level
(n=236) and identifies tracts in ‘high need’ of sensors. Next, the researcher
recruits 20 families without sensors who live in the ‘high need’ areas and 10
families that already have sensors as a comparison group. He provides sensors
connected to the NAQMN to the 20 families without sensors and all families have
a child with asthma. He conducts pre-interviews, 16 weekly surveys, and post-
interviews to investigate how participants understand and manage air pollution
risks with the use of a sensor. While others have examined environmental justice
implications of air pollution, few have assessed the environmental justice
implications of a NAQMN. The methodological approach provides a transferable
model for assessing NAQMNs elsewhere. This project advances understandings about
the process of democratizing public access to air pollution information as well
as how citizen science can inform decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.