* 2117976
* RUI: Household and institutional responses to security threats from environmental and economic disturbances
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2024
* William Sundstrom, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 12/31/2024
* USD 285,722.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies how small-
scale farmers, communities, and institutions can exhibit more resilience in the
face of a complex and changing set of environmental and economic challenges.
These challenges include droughts, hurricanes, and natural disasters, crop
diseases, political instability, fluctuations in food and agricultural prices,
pandemics, and problems arising from low socioeconomic status. A strategy for
mitigating the detrimental effects of these extreme events is to practice
diverse livelihoods while decreasing dependence on a single crop or commodity.
This project examines the effects of diversification on farmers’ economic
outcomes while also assessing whether diversification enhances biodiversity in
ways that improve crop harvests, food security, and pest control. The research
provides insights about economic livelihoods that are relevant to populations of
farmers in diverse regions, including areas that contribute much of the
cultivated food that is consumed in global markets. The project also advances
the training and education of university students who will participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much remains to be learned about the
effectiveness of diversification and about how farmers, communities, and
organizations can experiment with new approaches and share promising practices.
To address these outstanding questions, the investigators develop a
participatory approach to identify and assess the effects of diversification
practices on multiple outcomes, including disaster risk, livelihood
capabilities, food security, dietary diversity, gender equity, water security,
and food sovereignty. The investigators also examine the processes of
innovation, learning, and farmers’ motivation for adopting new diversification
activities. Methodologically, the project integrates field research with
concepts and analytical techniques from multiple academic disciplines, including
agroecology, political ecology, development studies, and economics. This study
also identifies how farmers with different diversification practices responded
to recent natural disasters, showing the consequences of variation in
diversification. Insights from this research can be used by institutions who are
responsible for guiding and recovery efforts following natural disasters. The
findings will also be beneficial for multinational efforts to promote
sustainable agriculture in diverse settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.