* 2117820
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer Microprobe (sXPS-u) for Research and Education at the University of Nevada, Reno
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Dev Chidambaram, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 434,000.00

This award supports the acquisition of a Scanning X-ray Photoelectron
Spectrometer Microprobe (sXPS-u) at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR). The
sXPS-u system allows characterization of various materials and provides
researchers with the chemical makeup of materials. Such a system is critical for
scientific advances in a range of topics such as metallurgy, corrosion,
aerospace, nanomaterials, catalysis, mining, automotive, anthropology, geology,
electronics and advanced manufacturing, with a special emphasis on energy
generation and storage topics such as geothermal, nuclear, solar, and battery
technology. The sXPS-u instrument is used to train hundreds of students at
various levels to help prepare the next generation engineers, scientists, and
inventors. A large number of faculty and scientists from UNR, other academic
institutions and national laboratories have access to 20% of the time on the
sXPS-u system. Users from industry, ranging from multinational corporations to
small businesses and startups in the UNR incubator share 30% of the time through
the Materials Characterization Nevada (MCNV), an UNR entity dedicated to
providing materials characterization services to industry. The instrument is
used in several courses to enhance education and training at UNR. Specifically,
dedicated course modules are being developed to demonstrate the use of sXPS-u in
surface analysis to students. Women and underrepresented minorities in science
and engineering are particularly targeted to broaden their participation and
help develop a diverse workforce for Nevada.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;XPS provides
both the chemical speciation (bonding or oxidation state), the molecular bonding
information, bandgap and valence band properties. The acquisition of the sXPS-u
system greatly benefits the following core-funded research projects at UNR (50%
of total usage): development of new metallic materials for energy efficiency,
lightweight vehicles, and next-generation power plants, understanding corrosion
of metals in extreme environments, development of advanced batteries, improving
electrocatalysis, developing dynamic windows, optimization of
reprocessing/management of used nuclear fuel, comprehending electrochemistry of
nanostructures, and projects at the nano-water-food-energy nexus. This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.