* 2117693
* MRI - Acquisition of a high resolution multibeam sonar for coastal ocean research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Straub, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 301,600.00

Acquisition of a multibeam echosounder sonar (MBES) mapping system will
galvanize marine research and educational programs at Stockton University, a
regional, comprehensive, primarily undergraduate institution. This project will
increase the capacity to integrate research with teaching in the areas of remote
sensing of coastal evolution, succession and submerged structure ecology and
habitat value. Masters and undergraduate students will benefit from this
advanced technology for research. Stockton researchers have been assisting the
state of New Jersey and its coastal communities for over 35 years to map and
assess their coastal resources and quantify shoreline change caused by multiple
forcing mechanisms including climate change and sea level rise. Acquisition of a
cutting-edge multibeam sonar system will enable Stockton researchers to expand
their mapping capabilities and to collect data from deeper sites. This advanced
mapping technology will also contribute to citizen science underwater
archaeology projects at Stockton and to engagement with the recreational
fishing, diving and boating communities who benefit from mapping and study of
artificial reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MBES system will provide high-
resolution and multi-spectral capabilities for ongoing studies of coastal
processes in the Mid-Atlantic and contribute to coastal evolution research to
fill recognized data gaps. Simultaneous data collection at multiple frequencies
allows multi-spectral analysis of bottom composition and contributes to bottom
classification for habitat and resource studies. High-resolution capabilities
will contribute to mapping fine structure of artificial reefs and energy
generation infrastructure introduced into the underwater environment.
Documenting change over time in benthic habitat, physical and biological
components, as well as effects of submerged structures on ecological succession
are challenging research questions. The research enabled by this instrument will
expand on previous state and federal projects and be used to contribute to the
development of a framework of the regional coastal ocean and inlet systems. This
research is crucial in evaluation of decisions to support carbon neutral energy
technologies such as offshore wind and to gauge the potential effects, positive
and negative, and tradeoffs of overlaying a large underwater structural energy
footprint, with its own expected biological community trajectory, over an
already stressed benthic ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.