* 2117362
* Graduate Education and the Earnings of Men and Women
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Joseph Altonji, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 406,000.00

This research project will study the earnings and careers of highly educated men
and women, with a focus on graduate education. A large fraction of college
graduates choose to obtain an advanced degree, but there is little reliable
information about the labor market payoff to graduate study. The project will
provide estimates for men and for women of the value of an Masters in Business
Administration (MBA), a Juris Doctor (JD), a Master of Science (MS) in
engineering, and several other advanced degrees. The research will also explore
how the return to specific graduate degrees depends on a person’s college major
and on the quality of the school. The estimated returns would be useful to
individuals making education decisions and to policy makers deciding where to
invest in graduate education. The project will use the estimates to decompose
earnings differences between highly educated men and women into gender
differences in college major choice; gender differences in graduate degree
choice; gender differences in the labor market return to specific college majors
and advanced degrees; and other factors. The final part of the project will
study how trends in the college major, graduate field, and occupation choices of
men and women have influenced the gender gaps in occupational attainment and
earnings over the last several decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
involve merging data from surveys conducted by the National Center for Science
and Engineering Statistics (NCSES) with Census surveys and earnings and
employment histories from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics program.
These data will be a new and important resource for researchers and will amplify
the value of the NCSES surveys. Fixed effects strategies will be used to address
the selection and omitted variables problems associated with estimating returns
to specific graduate degrees. Various decomposition methods will be used to
decompose gender gaps in occupational attainment and earnings. Hierarchical
clustering methods will be used to study gender differences in sequences of
graduate education, labor force participation, and occupation over a
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.