* 2117982
* MRI: Acquisition of a Broad-Energy Germanium Detector at Western Washington University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* John Rybczyk, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 124,892.00

This award is made to Western Washington University (WWU) to purchase a broad-
energy germanium gamma ray detector to expand research and education programs in
environmental science and geology. The earth possesses many naturally occurring
radioactive elements that emit gamma radiation. By measuring the quantity and
distribution of these elements, researchers can estimate the rates of important
processes, such as the burial of sediment and organic carbon, removal of
contaminants from seawater, and the mixing and transport of important
particulate materials including carbon, metals, and organic contaminants. The
instrument will allow students and faculty at WWU to quantify sedimentary
processes, characterize past environments, and to assess changes in land use,
pollution, and other natural conditions over time. The research communityâ€™s
interest in the use of our existing gamma detector and our associated expertise
has now exceeded our ability to accommodate the demand. The expanded
capabilities of this instrument will enable WWU students and faculty to address
new environmental problems, take on additional research projects, improve the
design of existing projects, and expand our network of collaborators at the
global scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new broad-energy germanium detector
(Mirion BE3825) will support the research and teaching programs of eight senior
personnel and their associated students at WWU. These users all have research
questions that can be addressed using gamma-emitting radionuclides, with
applications ranging from bioturbation and sediment accumulation to tribal
coastal clam gardens and estuarine carbon burial, to lake paleo-genetics and
riparian geomorphological development. While our existing detector is in
continuous use measuring low-energy gamma emitters such as Pb-210 and Th-234,
the new broad-energy germanium detector will also enable the measurement of
higher-energy gamma emitters such as Cs-137, Be-7, Zn-65, and Fe-59, allowing
for a much greater number of users, more educational opportunities, and a
greater diversity of instrument applications. As a non-PhD granting institution,
WWU places a strong emphasis on undergraduate and Masters-level research and
education. The new instrument at WWU will be made available not only for
faculty-driven research but also for student-led thesis research and class
projects to train the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.