* 2117257
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: Understanding the American Publics COVID-19 Vaccination Uptake
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 26,156.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite public health effort to
persuade Americans to get the COVID-19 vaccine, vaccine hesitancy is a threat to
achieve herd immunity in the U.S. Americans who are reluctant to get vaccinated
cite worries about the development of the vaccines and their potential side
effects. Vaccine views are also connected to political partisanship, with polls
showing that at least half of Republicans do not plan to get the vaccine. How
citizens comprehend and evaluate the risks associated with the COVID-19 vaccines
and the COVID-19 pandemic is key to the success of this mass public health
intervention. Through two national surveys, this dissertation research attempts
to uncover the factors underlying vaccine hesitancy. It addresses, first, how
citizens compare the risks from the COVID-19 vaccines with the risks from the
COVID-19 pandemic and whether this risk comparison influences their vaccination
intention. Second, how three individual characteristics — exposure to COVID-19
misinformation, political ideology, and socio-demographics — influence vaccine
uptake. In doing so, this research benefits both social science research and
society. The COVID-19 pandemic and the COVID-19 vaccine offer a timely context
to study how risk perception and risk comparison influence risk mitigation
behaviors (e.g., vaccination, social distancing, hand washing, mask wearing). At
the societal level, this research offers evidence-based recommendations to
improve risk communication messaging about COVID-19 vaccine uptake. In
particular, this research informs on how to craft empathetic and clear risk
communication messaging that resonate with citizens from all walks of life to
encourage vaccine uptake and continued adherence to preventive behaviors against
COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two surveys of American adults (N = 1000 each)
test hypotheses and research questions. Guided by the psychometric paradigm),
the research compares two interrelated risk objects and evaluates how a mental
risk comparison influences risk mitigation behavior. This research contribute to
a more refined understanding of risk perception in a world where multiple risks
often simultaneously command our attention and people often have to balance each
in order to make informed decisions. Findings from the research may also be
extrapolated to future risk events. In addition, the inclusion of exposure to
COVID-19 misinformation and political ideology will contribute to the rapidly
developing literature on misinformation and political polarization in public
opinion related to important social issues. In essence, this research can
unearth invaluable insights to improve risk communication about the COVID-19
vaccines to improve uptake. Specifically, this research provides evidence-based
recommendations to improve communication specifically targeting minorities and
other high-risk groups. Educating the public to stay vigilant until we reach
broad vaccine coverage as a nation is crucial to overcoming this pandemic; that
is, the longer the public continues to practice preventive behaviors, the sooner
it will be for this pandemic to end.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.