* 2117691
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next-Generation High-Resolution Mass Spectrometer with Ion Mobility Separation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Michael Doyle, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 403,830.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Texas San Antonio is
acquiring a high-resolution quadrupole-time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Q-TOF
MS) with ion mobility (IM) separation and an atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization source to support Dr. Wendell Griffith and colleagues Michael Doyle,
Aimin Liu, Francis Yoshimoto and Audrey Lamb (from Kansas University). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex
samples. Ion mobility is a method that separates gas phase ions based on their
interaction with a collision gas depending on their masses. First the ions are
quickly separated as they move on a buffer gas and then introduced into the mass
analyzer. It is useful to analyze complex samples in proteomics and
metabolomics. In the time-of-flight (TOF) method of mass spectrometry, the mass-
to-charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way in which ions are accelerated
by an electric field of known strength. The velocity of the ion depends on the
mass-to-charge ratio (heavier ions of the same charge reach lower speeds). The
time that the ions take to reach a detector at a known distance is measured.
This time depends on the velocity of the ion, and therefore is a measure of its
mass-to-charge ratio. From this ratio and known experimental parameters, the ion
can be characterized. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
this Hispanic Serving Institution and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. It is also used by collaborators at primarily undergraduate
institutions in South Texas as well as the University of
Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the IM-Q-TOF MS system is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially useful for
studying opine metallophore synthetic pathways in bacterial with the aim of
developing antimicrobial drugs; the opine metallophores are low molecular weight
compounds found in plant tumors which extract metal ions from the host. The
instrumentation is also used for understanding the effect of intramolecular
crosslink cofactors to dioxygenase enzyme structure and function, as well as
expanding knowledge of the biosynthesis of artemisinin, an endoperoxide
containing plant natural product used to treat malaria. The instrument also
serves researchers developing new catalytic approaches to stereoselective
syntheses of structurally complex organic compounds and those trying to gain
deeper insight into the kinetics of insect odorant reception. The mass
spectrometer is also essential to characterize lipids that might be associated
with Alzheimer's disease and chronic pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.