* 2117447
* MRI: Acquisition of a Mössbauer Spectrometer for Research and Training in Iron based Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Material Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rachel Austin, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 146,405.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation program. The City
University of New York College of Staten Island (CSI) is acquiring a Mössbauer
spectrometer to support the research of Professor Rupal Gupta at CSI and
colleagues Rachel Austin and Michael Campbell from Barnard College and David
Lacy from the State University of New York University at Buffalo. This
spectrometer, which relies on interactions of gamma rays with the chemical
element iron, allows research in a variety of fields such as functional and
structural studies of non-heme iron dioxygenases responsible for carbon cycling,
determining active site structure function relationships in alkane monooxygenase
(AlkB), investigating electronic switching in iron metal–organic frameworks with
redox-active ligands, understanding the evolutionary optimization of diiron
enzymes, studying the behavior of iron in potentially multiferroic perovskite
oxides, and carrying out mechanistic studies of the type II iron dioxygenases.
In general, Mössbauer spectroscopy is a powerful tool to probe the chemical
environments and reactivities of molecules, where probing the environments of
iron atoms provides information about the chemistry of the rest of the molecule.
Access to this type of equipment is important to chemists carrying out cutting
edge research in fields as diverse as biochemistry and materials science. This
instrument is the only one of its type in the New York City region, and it is an
integral part of teaching as well as research at undergraduate, master’s and
Ph.D. levels, with faculty from nearby institutions joining CSI in utilizing it
for both research and teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the Mössbauer
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the diverse student bodies at both CSI, a Hispanic-serving
institution, and Barnard College, a women’s college, and the instrument is
incorporated into course work at both colleges, as well as being incorporated
into a workshop for high school students. The instrument particularly provides a
complete and detailed description of the amount, oxidation state and the
electronic and nuclear properties of Fe centers in chemical samples of interest,
with the ubiquity of iron in chemistry making this technique appropriate for
instrumentation that is shared by multiple
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.