* 2117487
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magnetic Property Measurements System for Multidisciplinary Research and Training in Detroit
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Brock, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,080.00

This project focuses on the acquisition and installation of a next generation
Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID) Magnetometer system at Wayne
State University, which enables multi-disciplinary research and education
efforts in Detroit and Southeastern Michigan. The SQUID magnetometer measures
magnetic properties of samples over a wide range of temperatures and magnetic
fields. The capability to measure many sample shapes, e.g. films, crystals, and
powders, allows researchers from Physics, Chemistry, Engineering, and Physiology
to all engage with the new instrument. Undergraduate and graduate students from
these departments are individually trained on the SQUID magnetometer. At least
20 graduate research students use the tool regularly, giving students in Detroit
and Southeastern Michigan direct experience with a cutting-edge tool in
magnetism research. The new SQUID magnetometer is integrated into an existing
Materials and Device Characterization course as well as complements a suite of
instruments focused on characterizing advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition and installation of a latest-
generation SQUID magnetometer system Wayne State University enables researchers
in Detroit, southeast Michigan and beyond to engage in advanced magnetic
materials and systems research. This magnetic property measurement system is
cryogen-free, can operate in a temperature range between 3 and 1000 K, and apply
magnetic fields up to 7 Tesla. Using the vibrating scanning magnetometry option,
minute magnetic moments can be sensed. The instrument has additional options
such as a horizontal rotator and electrical transport probe to study magnetic
anisotropies and magneto-transport properties of various samples. The system
supports research projects in the areas of antiferromagnetic spintronics,
magnetic refrigeration, and the development of new rare-earth free hard magnets.
The acquisition of the SQUID magnetometer also enables new collaborative efforts
between researchers combining expertise in antiferromagnetism and van der Waals
materials. In particular, the investigators use the SQUID magnetometer to work
on systems where magnetic anisotropies and interactions are controlled by twist
angles between adjacent layers in two-dimensional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.