* 2117865
* Improving wildland firefighter safety through geospatial modeling of lookouts, communications, escape routes, and safety zones
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Philip Dennison, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,554.00

This project improves wildland firefighter safety using novel digital mapping
technology. Wildland firefighters routinely put themselves in high-risk
environments to ensure the safety of others by containing the spread of
potentially hazardous fires. In the roughly 100-year history of wildland
firefighting in the US, there have been over 1000 documented fatalities,
countless injuries, and untold numbers of close-calls and near-misses. This
research leverages the capabilities of global positioning systems (GPS),
geographic information systems (GIS), geospatial modeling, and remote sensing
that creates more potent processes for real-time implementation of firefighter
safety measures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lookouts, communications, escape routes,
and safety zones (LCES) are four of the most critical safety tools employed by
firefighters to minimize their risk of injury or fatality. These geospatial
technologies enable firefighters to identify, evaluate, and implement LCES, and
improve the efficiency and reliability of these critical decision-making
processes. This project includes an inquiry into how situational awareness and
visibility can be assessed across entire landscapes to facilitate the placement
of lookouts and successful maintenance of communications. It also examines the
effects that vegetation has on pedestrian movement, providing insight into
firefighter travel time along escape routes as they evacuate to safety zones.
Just as digital mapping technology has improved the convenience and efficiency
in our daily lives, it can be leveraged to greatly improve the safety of
wildland firefighters in a time of increasing fire activity and demand on
firefighting resources. Reducing the safety risk to firefighters reduces the
risk to all who live in fire-prone environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.