* 2117822
* MRI: Development of a mmWave-Networked Robotic Testbed for Multi-Agent AI Learning and Operations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Dimitris Pados, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposal aims to develop an experimental shared re-programmable platform
that will provide robotics and research communities with an instrument that can
be a catalyst in the field. The platform will advance research activities in the
field of multiagent AI, mmWave networking and communications. It will enable
rapid testing and repeatable comparable evaluation of collaborative swarming
operations and distributed sensing, positioning, timing, navigation, and
communication developed by researchers at different institutions. To the best of
the investigators’ knowledge) to recreate mobility and dynamism seen in real
world scenarios it will be the first to allow thorough experimental evaluation
of multifunction mmWave radios, and creates an opportunity to strengthen the on-
going partnerships between researchers in mmWave networking and an industrial
player that has been leading the development of mmWave and subTHz software-
defined radios,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The platform offers a unique research and
training opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students at Florida Atlantic
University (FAU) for the potential to train information technology professionals
and scientists with unique theoretical and system design skills in mmWave
wireless networking, robotics, and multiple-agent AI operations. Indeed, it has
the potential to become the experimental platform of choice for te mmWave
communications and networking and robotics research community. Moreover,
researchers at other institutions will be allowed (and trained appropriately) to
use the platform.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The platform will be incorporated into
the current graduate courses taught by the PIs to provide students with an edge
over other wireless communication and networking-centric graduates, thus
providing these students with an advantage in the competitive job market. The
instrument will also benefit the CISE community advancing robotics and wireless
research. The infrastructure will be available for researchers in the field. FAU
will either charge user’s fees as needed or will provide access free of charge
to users willing to fund their own experiments. The code and schematics of the
mmWave transceiver kit will be made available to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.