* 2117274
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Price of Property: An Economic and Spatial Analysis of American Indian Land Loss on the Western Frontier, 1880-1915
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Laura Taylor, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation
research in economics (DDRIE) project will study how the economic conditions,
land rights, and water rights of American Indian tribes were influenced by
western expansion. The evolution of American Indian development as a result of
western expansion allows for the study of long-standing questions about
institutional development in many ways---land and natural resource management
during and since settlement, property rights enforcement, contract recognition,
and corruption in public finance. This research is based on the construction of
a new dataset based on highly disaggregated annual data that looks at individual
land transfers over time and includes tribal characteristics, socio-economic
data, land-use information, legal institutions, and details of financial
arrangements between tribes and the U.S. government. This project will make
available a new dataset of parcel-level data, collecting information held in the
national archives and other sources that have been difficult to aggregate
previously due to technological limitations. This project will broadly expand
the accessibility of pivotal information regarding U.S. western settlements and
the United States’ relationship with American Indian
tribes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first section focuses on how land
characteristics, socio-economic conditions, and public finance influenced
American Indian reservation boundaries. The research team has have geocoded the
transfers of individual parcels of land from Bureau of Land Management records
and matched to reservation boundaries, data on land-price information, to
historic reports from the Office of Indian Affairs, and to digitized U.S. –
American Indian treaties. The land parcel data allows the researchers to analyze
the checkerboarding of reservations, changes in patterns as new rules are
introduced, the heterogeneity of experiences across tribes and reservations, and
the impact of treaty and financial arrangements between the tribes and federal
government. The second section then focuses on the political economy and
legislative changes associated with land transfers – to examine the mechanisms
of expropriation. The third section examines the impact of changes in and the
uncertainty surrounding tribal water rights on western water use and quality. I
use millions of observations of water pollution measurements from 1960 to the
present to examine how the timing of lawsuits and specific settlements and
rulings in these cases influenced water pollution patterns on reservations and
outside reservations for surrounding waterways. The proposed project will thus
enhance the current literature by using connecting new and existing historic
information in novel ways to better understand the precursors and impacts of
legal and economic institutions surrounding U.S. western
settlement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.