* 2117799
* MRI: Acquisition of Advanced Solid-State NMR Instrumentation to Investigate Novel Biological &amp; Engineered Materials at CCNY
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ruth Stark, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 833,284.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. CUNY City College (CCNY) is
upgrading a console for solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR)
spectrometer that is equipped with an advanced control system for solid-state
NMR experiments and a pulsed field high-gradient (PFG) NMR broadband diffusion
probe. The instrument supports the research of Professor Ruth Stark, Robert
Messinger and other colleagues. This spectrometer allows research in a variety
of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant
economic importance, as well as permitting study of chemically and biologically
relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching
as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students
in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as collaborators from
neighboring colleges. This advanced solid-state NMR instrumentation at CCNY
facilitates new collaborations among molecular biophysicists and chemical
engineers who target both natural and designed materials, laying the groundwork
for activities that share technical expertise, seed partnerships and disseminate
scientific advances. This instrument is also employed in educational activities
such as half-day workshops among CCNY ssNMR users that share technical
expertise, illustrate research applications and foster student communication
skills. An annual NMR poster session brings together ssNMR practitioners from
the NYC region and a hands-on outreach workshop using ssNMR projects to spark
the interest of undergraduate students in STEM, especially those from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts investigations on pigments and polyesters that protect cells and studies
of molecular environments and structures of inorganic battery materials. The
instrumentation is also used to enable the study of lipids and membrane proteins
in complex biomembranes and the study of tension-dependent dynamics in designed
and natural elastin fibers which are an essential component of extracellular
matrices. In addition, it the instrument allows investigations of ion storage in
molecular organic electrode materials for use in batteries, and allows studies
of protein-mediated signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.