* 2117646
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magneto Optic Kerr Effect (MOKE) Microscope for Research and Teaching
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Radhika Barua, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,650.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;A magneto optic Kerr effect (MOKE)
microscope is based on the principle that when light is reflected from a
magnetic surface, the magnetization components of the surface affect the
polarization or intensity of the reflected light. When integrated with a camera,
one can visualize the in-plane and out-of-plane magnetization orientation in
different regions of the sample. The Kerr effect is a powerful tool in
understanding the magnetic behavior of bulk materials and thin films, studying
exotic magnetic states, and characterizing small magnetic devices. Such magnetic
devices have applications in computer memory, computing, communications, energy
conversion, solid-state microcooling systems, etc. The acquisition of a MOKE
microscope benefits several research groups at the Virginia Commonwealth
University (VCU) and nearby universities, industries and laboratories and
promotes further collaboration among them. In addition, it facilitates the
training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in
cutting-edge interdisciplinary research and magnetism-related K-12 outreach
activities, including summer research experience for K-12 students from under-
represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The
room-temperature MOKE microscope purchased with this major research
instrumentation (MRI) grant has high resolution imaging capability. It includes
a white light source that allows for domain imaging under standard sensitivity
conditions (polar, longitudinal and transverse MOKE) as well as blue- and red-
light sources for materials that are more sensitive to these wavelengths and
electromagnets for independent control of in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic
fields over a large range (up to 1.3 T). The research benefited from this
acquisition includes nanoscale magnetism, skyrmions, voltage control of
magnetism, multiferroic piezoelectric-magnetostrictive composites, straintronic
spin-wave nano-antennas amenable to miniaturization, topological insulators,
chiral materials, non-collinear antiferromagnets, magnetoelectric,
magnetocaloric, magnetic hyperthermia and magneto-optic properties. The
applications of these research activities include energy-efficient nanomagnetic
computing and communication, magnetocaloric cooling, and magnetic nanoparticle-
based biomedical and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.