* 2117061
* MRI Acquisition of a high-resolution confocal Raman microscope with capabilities to perform liquid and solid experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Nikolai Kalugin, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 396,934.00

This grant supports the acquisition of a high-resolution confocal Raman
microscope with capabilities to perform liquid and solid experiments. Raman
Spectroscopy is a non-destructive analytical technique, that can provide
detailed information about chemical structure, composition, crystallinity, and
molecular interactions in solids and liquids, thus finding broad applications in
geologic, life and material sciences. The strategic mission of this funded Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) project is to build a collaborative Raman
spectroscopy laboratory with experimental capabilities, which aims to: 1)
strengthen multi- and interdisciplinary research at the New Mexico Institute of
Mining and Technology (NMT), 2) foster external collaborations, and 3) promote
the education mission of NMT. Research from this new Raman facility will support
four early career faculty and will allow solving problems directly relevant to
society through research in economic geology and petroleum sciences as well as
material, environmental, human health, and life sciences. The instrument and its
software are easy to use and provide full control over data acquisition,
analysis and display, enabling visualization of otherwise complex concepts such
as characterizing synthetic vs. natural gemstones, fluid and melt inclusions,
biomolecules, and fossil organic matter in Earth’s oldest rocks and aerosols
present in the environment. This new facility will have a significant inter- and
multidisciplinary impact fostering collaborations across campus and with other
NM universities and national laboratories. The new facility will also be
available to undergraduate and graduate students, the Master of Science for
Teachers program and other new education programs that involve K-12 and senior
high-school students (e.g., Water Resources Education Program, Fluids and
Minerals Summer School) broadening participation and training including exposure
to cutting-edge analytical techniques. In collaboration with the Mineral Museums
XRD laboratory, we will provide access to the Raman instrument for mineral
characterization to interact with the New Mexico mineral enthusiast community
and to promote outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Horiba LabRAM HR
Evolution high-resolution confocal Raman microscope is equipped with a 266 nm UV
laser and a 532 nm VIS laser (green light) and has a focal length of 800 mm.
This instrument greatly improves spectral resolution, which permits carrying out
research on microscopic fluid, gas and melt inclusions in mineral samples,
biomolecules, aerosol particles and it also allows working with water immersed
samples. The 266 nm UV laser improves fluorescence suppression from organic
molecules and UV excitation increases Raman scattering efficiency and signal
sensitivity. Another advantage of UV excitation is resonance enhancement of
specific complexes promoting the development of new Raman methods for
investigating chemical and physical properties of materials and fluids. The
motorized XY stage, four microscope objectives and a 40x UVB objective provide
versatility for different applications and are compatible with many types of
experimental cells (i.e., heating/cooling stage for fluid/melting inclusions,
capillary fluid cell and/or hydrothermal diamond anvil cell for aqueous
speciation experiments, a flow system for aerosols, etc.). The new 3D-mapping
technology (Horiba SWIFT and Duoscan) provides improved mapping capabilities
with spatial resolution of 0.5-1 µm. This will allow characterization of fluid-
mineral interaction at the micron-scale, determination of phase proportions in
fluid and melt inclusions and will have other new applications in rock mechanics
and environmental sciences. The research activities enabled through the
acquisition of this Raman instrument will permit integrating experimental
laboratories across New Mexico Tech campus and provide a strong basis for
interdisciplinary collaborations. The research areas that our team will cover
include: i) fluids in the crust through the study of oil and fluid inclusions in
geologic materials in fossil and active geothermal and hydrothermal-sedimentary
systems, ii) fluid-mineral interface reactions and properties of critical
minerals in ore deposits, iii) minerals in the deep crust, which inform
geodynamic models, iv) biogenic features in microfossils and microbial deposits
in modern and ancient near Earth surface environments, including Martian
analogues, and v) discovering hidden reaction pathways and mechanisms in
environmental processes to better understand their impact on global climate,
ecosystems, and human health. This award was funded by the Instrumentation and
Facilities program in the Earth Science Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.