* 2117449
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Science and Engineering Research at the University of Kansas
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Brian Laird, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 687,060.00

A High Performance Computing (HPC) cluster resource will be built at the
University of Kansas (KU) that will advance computational science and
engineering at KU and selected Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs). This
cluster, nicknamed BigJay, will be part of the KU Community Cluster housed in
the state-of-the-art Advanced Computing Facility and maintained by the KU Center
for Research Computing (CRC). The major users form a multidisciplinary group
from 11 different academic departments/programs at KU: Aerospace Engineering,
Bioengineering, Chemistry, Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Computational
Biology, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Geography, Geology,
Mathematics, Molecular Biosciences, and Physics &amp; Astronomy. In addition,
faculty and undergraduate researchers from four different Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs) with ties to KU (The College of St.
Scholastica, Prairie View A&amp;M University, Hobart &amp; William Smith
College, and the University of Southern Indiana) will have access to the enabled
computational resources. Additionally, workshops will be offered by the CRC and
participants on cluster use and advanced computational methods, that will also
be available to students (and faculty) from KU and the participating PUIs. The
proposed HPC resources will enable exposure to HPC techniques to students in
graduate and advanced undergraduate courses. Finally, the BigJay cluster will
stimulate increased interdisciplinary collaborations centered around HPC,
including with the PUI faculty participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BigJay will
be made up of a mix of CPU, high-memory CPU, and GPU-enabled processors and
include gigabit ethernet and high-speed Infiniband networking. The proposed
configuration was chosen to reflect the diverse computing need of the
participants. The fundamental research enabled by BigJay will span algorithm
development, computational methodology, machine learning, and theoretical
descriptions of physical systems. The work will impact problems of importance to
society ranging from the development of battery materials to cancer recognition
to optimization of catalytic systems, as well as improved theories of physical
and biological systems. Interdisciplinary collaborations will be facilitated by
the workshops that will introduce students and faculty across disciplines. These
will be used as an opportunity to identify commonalities in research topics,
numerical methods, and computational tools. Collaborations will also be
encouraged by instituting a Computational Research Symposium, consisting of
posters and short talks, that will be held biannually for the participants, as
well as others who are engaged in computational research on the KU campus. The
proposed purchase will substantially enhance HPC research efforts at KU and the
PUIs and make participating research groups potentially more competitive for
funding from federal, non-profit, or industrial sources. It will further be used
to enhance student training in scientific and technical computing through
research, the CRC and participant-led workshops, and inclusion of HPC components
in graduate and advanced undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program,
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering (CISE)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.