* 2117774
* MRI-Acquisition: Sputtering System for Developing Novel Germanium Detectors and Materials
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dongming Mei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,575.00

This award will provide a new sputtering system for developing novel germanium
(Ge) detectors and materials research in the Departments of Physics at the
University of South Dakota (USD) and at South Dakota State University (SDSU).
This instrument will significantly improve the research facility and capability
in the state of South Dakota. The device will be used by a number of
investigators to develop and test novel germanium detector designs, some with
promising applications to dark matter and neutrino detection, others for medical
imaging. The equipment and the dedicated detector fabrication laboratory promise
to realize an unusually broad spectrum of Broader Impact. This includes advances
in medical research, but also more generically, in fields like environmental
monitoring or homeland security. In addition, the group has a track record of
involving students from underrepresented groups in the research. The planned
instrument will enable multidisciplinary research and more than 50 students will
be trained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sputtering system with a configuration to
coat up to 4 inches in diameter and 3 inches in thickness for substrates per
batch from both sides by utilizing an in-situ substrate pallet flipping
mechanism is planned in this project. Sputtering is a deposition technology
involving a gaseous plasma which is generated and confined to a space containing
a target (substrate) to be deposited. The surface of the target is eroded by
high-energy ions within the plasma, and the liberated atoms travel through the
vacuum environment and are deposited into a substrate to form a thin film. The
sputtering technology has been used in developing novel Ge detectors by creating
amorphous Ge (a-Ge) or a-Si thin films onto high-purity Ge crystals to make
electrical contacts, which provide bipolar blocking for electrons and
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.