* 2117073
* SaTC EDU: Assessment Resources for Cybersecurity
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Matt Bishop, Dark Enterprises Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 06/30/2024
* USD 492,892.00

In this Assessment Resources for Cybersecurity (ARC) project, DARK Enterprises
Inc. will address the need for rigorous research on assessment by partnering
with cybersecurity researchers, educators and assessment experts. Cybersecurity
educators need high-quality assessment resources that can help them to make
valid claims about student knowledge and guide student learning. Cybersecurity
educational researchers need high-quality assessment resources to conduct
studies that advance improvements in teaching and student learning in
cybersecurity. Finally, state departments of education need high-quality
assessment resources that support educational pathways as they build their
cybersecurity high school to college/career pathways. The project team will
leverage Evidence-Centered Design to create and pilot-test a bank of
cybersecurity assessment items and share the findings broadly. The assessment
resources will be based on the High School Cybersecurity Curriculum Guidelines,
that are now being used as a resource for high school educators across the
country in implementing cybersecurity courses and programs. Assessments based on
the guidelines will further support the advancement of cybersecurity pathways
into dual/concurrent enrollment and placement credit opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will be using Evidence-Centered Design
to: 1) model how students represent knowledge and develop competence in a
subject domain; 2) identify tasks or situations that allow observation of
studentsâ€™ performances; and 3) develop an interpretation model for drawing
inferences from performance evidence. The Evidence-Centered Design methodology
is rigorous, used for a broad range of assessment types, and is particularly
relevant when developing innovative assessments of novel, hard-to-measure
domains like cybersecurity. Another strength of Evidence-Centered Design is its
broad applicability through creating design patterns that lead to extensible
development of assessment items and scoring rubrics. The outcomes of this
project will include approximately 20 items for each of the following four Big
Ideas in the High School Cybersecurity Curriculum Guidelines - Ubiquitous
Connectivity, Data Security, System Security, and Adversarial Thinking. Findings
from this study and the resulting design patterns and bank of assessment items
will be posted and shared publicly and freely via a K-12 cybersecurity education
website, as well as academic journals and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) program,
which funds proposals that address cybersecurity and privacy, and in this case
specifically cybersecurity education. The SaTC program aligns with the Federal
Cybersecurity Research and Development Strategic Plan and the National Privacy
Research Strategy to protect and preserve the growing social and economic
benefits of cyber systems while ensuring security and
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.