* 2117557
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Industrialized ecologies and infant gut microbiome development
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Claudia Valeggia, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,175.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The human gut microbiome is a
community of bacteria and other microorganisms that has co-evolved with humans
and plays important roles in metabolism and health. Rapid global
industrialization has led to changes in diet, lifestyle and medical practices,
all of which may shape the early life development of the gut microbiome and its
contribution to energy storage and fat deposition. This doctoral dissertation
research project examines how infant feeding and care shape the development and
energetic function of the gut microbiome and infant growth and fat deposition.
The findings can inform the understanding of how evolutionarily novel
environments interact with biology and culture and influence the development of
the human microbiome and its contribution to growth in early life. The project
provides training and mentoring in STEM for female scientists and involves
science and public health outreach in local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates approaches from
biocultural anthropology and evolutionary medicine to understand how early
environments shape infant growth and metabolism through the gut microbiome. The
primary aim of the project is to examine the impact of different complementary
diets (an infant’s first non-milk foods) and antibiotic exposure on infant
growth and the composition and energetic function of the gut microbiome during
the weaning period. With a longitudinal cohort of mother-infant dyads in urban
and rural settings, the investigators use next-generation sequencing and
targeted metabolomics approaches to measure the composition of bacterial
communities and short-chain fatty acids (markers of microbial energetic
activity) in infant fecal samples. The investigators also collect qualitative
and quantitative data on infant diet, health histories, antibiotic exposures,
adiposity and growth rates from 4 to 8 months
postpartum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.