* 2117823
* MRI: Development of a Next Gen 9.4T Magnetic Resonance system for Translational Neuroscience
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Thomas Foo, Nathan S Kline Institute for Psychiatric Research
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,740,073.00

This award supports the development and implementation of a 9.4 tesla magnetic
resonance imaging system which will be one of the most powerful imaging systems
in the world for neuroscientists to study the human brain. This neuroimager will
be used to safely and noninvasively observe human brain anatomy, metabolism and
function at the highest spatial, spectral and temporal resolutions achievable.
This instrument will bring together neuroscience researchers from throughout the
Greater New York City, Tri-State area. Centrally located in one of world’s top
neuroscience communities, this 9.4T neuroimager will foster significant new
discovery in understanding the human brain and behavior. Educational and
training programs are also supported. A new generation of trained engineers and
scientists and a new level of science and discovery will
follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant itself supports the development of a
novel second-generation console to optimize the quality of data obtained from
this ultra-high field strength magnet. This revolutionary engineering project is
conducted as a collaboration between Columbia, NYU and Cornell engineering
schools and New York State industries including GE Global Research and
Communications Power Corp. This console will be interfaced to an existing 9.4T
head-only magnet to complete the neuro-imaging system. It will be housed in a
new ultra-high-field imaging laboratory being built separately for this project.
Participating in this project are both academic faculty and industry engineers,
students and technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.