* 2117745
* MRI: Acquisition of Continuous Flow Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (IRMS) for Climate Change and Environmental Research at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Beizhan Yan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,553.00

Dâ€™Andrea&lt;br/&gt;EAR-2117745&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant supports acquisition of a mass spectrometer
for study of stable isotopies proxies of climate and environmental processes as
recorded in organic molecules in ocean and lake sediments and tree rings. The
instrument will support the research of over twelve scientists at Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory (LDEO) and the educational program that impacts many
undergraduate and graduate students trained at LDEO annually. The instrument
will also support students at Barnard College that will gain hand-on
experiential learning in methods of stable isotope mass spectrometry through an
extant summer internship Program at LDEO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Thermo DELTA V
Plus Mass Spectrometer with gas chromatograph and liquid chromatograph front
ends will be acquired enabling carbon and hydrogen isotopic analysis of polar
and thermo-labile compounds including organic acids, carbohydrates, amino acids,
phospholipids, and glycolipids and analysis of carbon and hydrogen stable
isotopes in specific lipids. The instrument would support interdisciplinary
research including studies of the degradation of petroleum products in the
ocean, contamination processes in groundwater aquifers, metabolic pathways
within harmful algal and bacterial taxa, microbial controls on methane
production in ocean margin sediments, paleoclimate and the evolution of
terrestrial plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.