* 2117657
* MRI: Acquisition of a Xeuss 3.0 with Genix 3D Small-Angle X-ray Scattering Instrument
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Alex Frano, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 09/30/2024
* USD 504,179.00

This Major Research Instrumentation Award is for a 3D Small-Angle and Wide-Angle
X-ray Scattering (SAXS/WAXS) instrument, located in a shared
nano/microfabrication and materials analysis facility at UC San Diego. As an
essential analytical tool, this advanced SAXS/WAXS instrument supports the
ongoing research of a broad cross-section of researchers, enabling discoveries
in synthetic chemistry, catalysis, inorganic and biological materials, quantum
materials, and energy storage/conversion materials. The instrument provides a
versatile, state-of-the-art, reliable and local solution to the SAXS needs of
the large scientific community in the Southern California region comprising San
Diego and Orange Counties. In addition, the SAXS/WAXS instrument is used to
enrich the training of both graduate and undergraduate students in the theory,
synthesis, and analysis of nano- and microstructured materials. It allows
instructors to use modern research data for pedagogical purposes, provides
students with hands-on x-ray training to enhance their science, engineering, and
technology curriculum, and augments the educational outreach programs at UC San
Diego, bringing a significant opportunity to increase participation of
underrepresented students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small-Angle and
Wide-Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS/WAXS) is one of the few experimental
techniques that can characterize the nano- and microstructure of soft matter and
nanomaterials. It is an essential analytical tool in the characterization of
mesoscale and nanoscale features in a wide range of biological and artificial
materials. The instrument enables measurement in a dynamic environment (with in-
situ control of temperature, humidity, and ambient gas concentration) to provide
insights into materials structure-function and structure-response relationships.
Unique features of the instrument include automated simultaneous SAXS and WAXS
measurements, grazing incidence measurements on liquid interfaces, and low-
volume flow-through sampling of biomacromolecules. These features are also
appropriate for studies of: (i) short-lived species; (ii) degradation-prone
biological samples; (iii) air-, temperature-, or water-sensitive materials; and
(iv) materials systems that require frequent or long-timescale x-ray
measurements. The instrument also features a doubly focused point source, which
allows for collecting scattering data from both isotropic and anisotropic
samples because a scattering image can be generated from the entire projected
source. The instrument is used to solve transformational materials science
problems in the areas of mesomaterials, inorganic, and biological materials,
quantum materials, and energy storage/conversion
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.