* 2117987
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman spectrometer for ocean acidification and marine debris research
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Jennifer Lynch, Hawaii Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 356,690.00

The ocean—and the ecosystem goods and services that it provides—faces a gauntlet
of impacts from human activities including climate change caused by carbon
emissions and pollution. Ocean acidification and plastic debris are among the
two longest-lasting impacts to marine environments, owing to the long retention
times of carbon dioxide and non-degradable debris in the ocean. The rates at
which human carbon emissions and plastic particles enter the ocean are only
increasing, and both are cumulative, meaning that the impacts of these two
sources of pollution are also increasing. Marine calcifying organisms are highly
sensitive to ocean acidification, and a wide range of marine species from
plankton to fish to whales are affected by plastics. One of the most powerful
tools available to investigate ocean acidification and marine debris is Raman
spectrometry, a technique that uses lasers to probe the structural properties of
minerals and polymers. This award provides for the acquisition of a Raman
spectrometer at Hawaiʻi Pacific University, in a location uniquely situated
adjacent to coral reefs and near the epicenter of plastic accumulation in the
Pacific Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new Raman spectrometer will facilitate a
range of studies into the mechanisms by which calcifying organisms build their
shells and skeletons. The high spatial and spectral resolution of the
instrument, combined with its topography mapping and submersible objectives,
will enable quantification of the chemical conditions at the micro-scale site of
calcification, visualization of micron-scale banding patterns, and in vivo
analysis of corals, coralline algae, and foraminifera. Additionally, the
instrument will enable identification of the polymers in debris collected from
the ocean and Hawaiian beaches, information that will help understand the source
and fate of plastics in the marine environment. With the non-destructive and
rapid analysis capabilities of Raman spectrometry, the instrument will be
readily available to visiting researchers, and the instrument will be the focal
point of new laboratory classes that will substantially improve the training of
undergraduate and graduate students at Hawaiʻi Pacific
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.