* 2117256
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Education and Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kenyon Evans-Nguyen, University of Tampa
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Tampa is acquiring a high
resolution mass spectrometer equipped with an orbitrap analyzer, a direct
analysis in real time (DART) interface and an ultrahigh pressure liquid
chromatography (UPLC) unit to support Kenyon Evans-Nguyen and colleagues Kelly
Deister, Michelle Crosby and Christine Theodore. In general, mass spectrometry
(MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize
small quantities of chemical species in complex samples. An instrument with a
high resolution liquid chromatography sector provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. The direct analysis in real time is an ion source that
produces electronically or vibronically excited-state species such as helium,
argon or nitrogen that ionize atmospheric molecules which then undergo ion-
molecule reactions with the sample molecules to be analyzed. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. It is extensively used to train undergraduate and high school
students and by collaborators at neighboring
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the UPLC-MS/MS system is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially useful for
quantifying, characterizing compounds to develop advanced data sets to aid
natural products research. The instrumentation is also used for characterizing
the spatial and temporal distributions of contaminants in Tampa Bay. The
instrument also serves researchers characterizing and analyzing new psychoactive
substances (NPS), also known as substances of abuse, in biological specimens. An
important use is for the development and construction of ambient ionization
sources capable of combined molecular, organic, and elemental analysis for
applications in forensic science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.