* 2117083
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Effects of Gender and Racial Stereotypes on Math Confidence, Effort, and Achievement
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Frank Schilbach, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2024
* USD 24,984.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are large, persistent gender
and race gaps in STEM participation and achievement, as well as persistent
academic stereotypes about race and gender. This project seeks to understand the
effects of providing information to elementary and middle school students to
counteract the negative stereotypes and social norms surrounding the
participation and achievement of under-represented groups in STEM – particularly
the effects of this information on students’ confidence, STEM engagement, and
achievement. While research show that stereotypes about ability matter for
adults’ confidence and participation in STEM, these stereotypes emerge at much
younger ages. This study will evaluate the impacts of intervening against these
negative stereotypes early in students’ educational trajectory, which may be
more effective and more long-lasting than intervening with adults. In addition
to increasing diversity in STEM and encouraging more equal opportunities for all
students, closing the gender and race gaps in STEM engagement is expected to
improve productivity and innovation in the sector and reduce wage gaps, since
more than 90 percent of STEM occupations offer wages above the national average.
Closing gaps in STEM participation is thus a top priority for the US government
as well as business leaders and professional organizations in STEM fields. The
results of this research could guide policies to close the racial and gender
STEM gaps and thus increase the supply of STEM workforce. This will increase
economic growth, decrease poverty as well as decrease income inequality in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide the first
experimental evidence on the role of stereotypes in creating gaps in STEM
achievement. It will also provide novel evidence on the mechanisms through which
stereotypes cause these effects; specifically, the effects of stereotypes on
confidence, engagement with and responsiveness to feedback, and effort. This
research uses a randomized intervention – a series of videos and exercises that
provide information to counteract prevailing negative academic stereotypes –
delivered to students on a leading online learning platform to study these
issues. Student behavior on the platform will provide high-frequency measures of
student effort, learning strategies, and engagement with feedback. Additional
outcomes will be measured in a survey, also integrated into the platform, which
will provide psychometric and revealed-preference measures of math interest,
confidence, and endorsement of stereotypes. Finally, student achievement will be
measured using standardized test scores. Differences in outcomes between treated
and control students will deliver the effect of the intervention, and the large
set of considered outcomes will be used to test various mechanisms that explain
the effect of race and gender stereotypes on math achievement. The results of
this research could guide policies to close the racial and gender STEM gaps and
thus increase the supply of STEM workforce. This will increase economic growth,
decrease poverty as well as decrease income inequality in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.