* 2117656
* MRI: Acquisition of Volumetric Capture System for the Institute for IDEAS
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Philip Johnson, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

A state-of-the-art, high-quality volumetric capture system will support
multidisciplinary research projects at the Institute for Immersive Designs,
Experiences, Applications, and Stories (the Institute for IDEAS) at American
University in Washington, DC. Volumetric capture is a computer vision technology
that enables recording the topology of objects and people rather than, as in
traditional video recording, the projection of three-dimensional objects onto a
two-dimensional surface. By using virtual or augmented reality headsets or CAVE
systems, volumetric captures can be viewed and interacted with from any
perspective chosen by the user at the time of viewing. Thus, volumetric captures
allow for a “holographic” experience that combines the immersiveness of virtual
and augmented reality with the realism of traditional video recording.
Volumetric capture presents an interesting, yet unexplored, research potential
across many domains, such as healthcare, education, entertainment,
visualization, and communication, etc. Yet, due to high costs of system
acquisition, volumetric capture and its application is currently being research
only at a handful of research centers (e.g. Stanford’s Virtual Human Interaction
Lab, the University of California San Diego, and Georgia State University).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American University Institute for IDEAS was created
specifically to pursue research projects in immersive technologies, including
volumetric capture and desires to better understand the affordances and
applications ordered by volumetric capture technology and have the public
benefit from it, as well as try to make more accessible and affordable. The
acquisition of volumetric capture system will allow the 24 full-time faculty
fellows of the Institute, as well as faculty and students across the university
and the region, to pursue multiple, multiyear research and creative projects
involving volumetric capture, including some that are already funded by NSF,
NEH, private foundations, or other federal agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.