* 2117246
* MRI: Acquisition of a CryoProbe-Enabled NMR Spectrometer for Enhanced Efficiency and Sensitivity in Chemical and Biological Research
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Morken, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 542,820.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Boston College is acquiring a 500
MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with liquid nitrogen
cooled probe to support the research of Professor Thusitha Jayasundera and
colleagues James Morken, Jianmin Gao, Jeffery Byers and Jia Niu. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as those that
accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as well as
permitting study of chemically and biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. The probe uses nitrogen-cooled
radiofrequency coils that deliver a much greater sensitivity enhancement over
room temperature. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as
collaborators from neighboring colleges including primarily undergraduate
institutions. In addition, the instrument is part of activities involving the
NSF funded Boston College Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program
and the Paper to Plastics (P2P) summer program, as well as other outreach
initiatives, such as the Women in Science and Technology (WST) program. These
programs are largely composed of women, first generation students, and/or
minorities that are under-represented in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
development of non-noble metal-based catalysts and the characterization of
synthesized molecules to interrogate biomolecules that cannot be targeted
pharmacologically, commonly referred as "undruggable". The instrumentation is
also used for developing new synthetic methods for applications in organic
chemistry and for identifying macromolecules prepared with tailor-made
structures and sequences. In addition, it allows the characterization of species
used in metalloradical catalysis and for understanding molecular interactions in
microbiome communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.