* 2117255
* MRI: Acquisition of a Western Blot Detection Equipment for core facility of a community college
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 79,590.00

An award is being made to The City University of New York (CUNY), Queensborough
Community College (QCC) campus (Department of Biological Sciences &amp;
Geology), to purchase a LI-COR Odyssey Imaging System. This multitasking imaging
system allows for the visualization of Quantitative Western blots (WB), In-Cell
Western Assays, Viral Titration Assays, and Nucleic Acid Gel Imaging – to name a
few of its applications. QCC is one of the seven community colleges within CUNY
and serves a diverse population of first-generation college students and admits
many students who would otherwise not have access to higher education. 84% of
QCC students are African American, Asian, or Latino, and more than 50% come from
families with incomes of less than $25,000. More than a third of the Biological
Sciences and Geology department’s faculty members mentor students in research
techniques and ethics every semester. Our faculty members are exceedingly
invested in the success of our students as they embark on their careers in STEM
fields. Acquisition of this system will complement the campus’s undergraduate
research core facility, which in part includes a real-time PCR equipment, a FACS
machine, and a confocal microscope. All instrumentation in the core facility
allows faculty to introduce students to cutting-edge experimental methodologies
and helps prepare them for entry into the STEM workforce. The newly acquired LI-
COR Odyssey instrument will also be an integral part of the educational training
in the Biotechnology Program and the newly formed Associates Program in Biology
at QCC, thus impacting even more students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LI-COR
Odyssey is an essential part of the continuous research effort and teaching
curriculum at QCC and its sister campus, Queens College. Its acquisition will
support a variety of diverse projects. These include studies of (a) the
molecular regulation of STAT3 in cell-cell interactions, (b) regulation of host
amino acid transporters by an intracellular parasite, (c) examination of
conserved root development genes in Selaginella (d) inhibition of DnaK by
intrinsically unfolded polypeptide substrates in Escherichia coli, (e)
investigation of cancer cell gene expression after treatment with single-walled
nanotubes, (f) the molecular regulation of Cnidarian behaviors, (g)
investigating novel proteins in obesity and associated comorbidities, (h) role
of CDX1 as a regulator of colon cancer sensitivity to chemotherapeutic drugs and
(i) cardiovascular health-related research. Data generated using the instrument
will be disseminated by faculty and students through peer-reviewed journal
publications and at both regionally and nationally held professional and
scientific conferences. Procuring this system will thus open new frontiers of
research for several of QCC’s most recently recruited early career investigators
and their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.