* 2117300
* Identifying Opportunities at the Interface of Chemistry and Quantum Information Science
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Linda Nhon, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2024
* USD 399,960.00

This award is funded by the Chemistry Division of the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate through the Special Projects mechanism. The principal
Investigator is Jeremy Mathis and the co-principal investigator is Kavita
Berger, both of the National Academy of Sciences. This work is conducted through
the Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology in the Division of Earth and Life
Studies. The overall goal is to conduct a consensus study to identify the
opportunities and research priorities that exist at the boundaries of chemistry
and quantum information science (QIS). The expected outcome is a report with
recommendations on how chemistry can move forward and expand the field of QIS
while also identifying ways that QIS can impact the field of chemistry. The
study is being conducted by a diverse committee with a range of expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No other studies have been undertaken that have focused so
exclusively on the relationship between chemistry and QIS. The study will result
in a publicly accessible report that identifies strategic research areas in this
complex and highly interdisciplinary area. Key strategies for furthering the
fields of both QIS and chemistry are expect to result. Broader impacts of this
work could well lead to impactful outcomes such as new drug design and
sustainable energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.