* 2117035
* Geochemical and Environmental Research Group, Texas A&amp;M University Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Brendan Roark, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 03/31/2022
* USD 52,675.00

The Geochemical Environmental Research Group (GERG) at Texas A&amp;M University
(TAMU) requests instrumentation as well as materials for ROV compatible
instrument frames. These instruments are proposed as shared-use instruments for
the fleet. The first research cruise for their NSF funded project, OCE #1851378
(TAMU) and 1851365 (FSU), titled “Collaborative Research: Defying Dissolution:
Unraveling the Enigma of North Pacific Deep-Sea Scleractinian Reefs in
Undersaturated Water” was originally scheduled for September 2020 and was
postponed (currently scheduled for August 2021) because delivery of critical
instrumentation for the deep-sea coral lander was delayed due to COVID-19
closures by suppliers. In addition, the lack of redundancy in their instruments
was noted by the UNOLS safety review panel and to remedy this concern were
advised to submit this Oceanographic Instrumentation proposal for a second set
of instruments to deploy. The instrument lander consists of a SAMI-pH, SAMI-CO2,
and Aanderaa Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) with CTD, oxygen sensor,
and data logger. The proposed Oceanographic Instrumentation
includes:&lt;br/&gt;1) SAMI-pH $24,036&lt;br/&gt;2) SAMI-CO2
$28,796&lt;br/&gt;3) Aanderaa ADCP $36,726&lt;br/&gt;4) ROV compatible frame
$9,969&lt;br/&gt; $99,527&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal
impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.