* 2117554
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multi-Channel Ion Chromatograph to Support Geochemical and Environmental Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Christopher Gammons,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 180,058.00

Cox&lt;br/&gt;EAR-2117554&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Major Research Instrumentation Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Funding will support acquisition of an ion
chromatograph which allows the determination and quantification of important
molecules in natural waters. The IC would directly benefit ten ongoing projects
in geochemistry, chemistry, mine-waste remediation, botany, and environmental
science and engineering. Intended studies of Arsenic and metal remediation at a
local Superfund site has implications for public health and environmental
recovery. Planned engagement with a local watershed education Program would
expose hundreds of K-12 teachers and their students to geochemical analysis
applications to local mining related environmental issues. The instrument will
support the research of early career and female geoscientists and research and
teaching training at two primarily undergraduate institutions in rural Montana
where first generation and Native American students make up a significant part
of the student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IC will support analysis of major
cations, anions and organic acids in aqueous samples. A particular focus of the
PIs research agenda are investigations aimed at understanding how arsenic and
metal contaminants cycle in the environment, study of bio-electrochemical
methods to reduce nitrates from agricultural runoff, ecosystems remediation, and
exploring extremophile mediated biogeochemical interactions in Yellowstone's hot
springs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.