* 2117318
* MRI: Acquisition of 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Research and Education Infrastructure Enhancement at Michigan Technological University and Upper Peninsula
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Haiying Liu, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 446,082.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Michigan Technological University
is acquiring a 500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer to support
the research of Marina Tanasova and colleagues Haiying Liu, Shiyue Fang, Evan
Kane and Daisuke Minakata. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields including biological chemistry, organic synthesis, nucleotides, polymers,
and environmental science. NMR spectroscopy is a powerful tool that chemists use
for the elucidation of molecular structure. Unknown substances can be
identified, specific arrangement of atoms in molecules can be determined, and
the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state
can be studied. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and
graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as
regionally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially facilitates the
exploration of substrate selection by facilitative sugar transporters gluts with
diverse stable sugar mimics, the execution of solid-phase synthesis of
monodisperse polyethylene glycol and its derivatives, and the development of
technologies for the synthesis of sensitive oligodeoxynucleotides. The
instrument is also used to support the design and development of conjugated
polymers with xanthene units and three-emission conjugated polymers with
xanthene units fused with dyes. In addition, it allows for the investigation of
the photochemical fate of dissolved amino acids in natural aquatic environments,
the understanding of soil carbon cycling via pore water-dissolved organic
matter, and the study of electro-responsive underwater adhesive based on mussel
adhesive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.