* 2117054
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intersections of The Mind and the Body in Hospital-Based Violence Intervention Programs
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2021,06/30/2023
* William Wical, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 06/30/2023
* USD 25,500.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Violence disproportionately
affects certain communities. The ways by which support is offered to individuals
and communities affected by violence is often based on one-size-fits-all models
that fail to consider how individual- and community-level attributes affect
responses to interventions. This doctoral dissertation research uses theory from
medical and psychological anthropology to frame an investigation of how
hospital-based violence intervention programs (HVIPs) intersect with individual
attributes and personal concepts of violence and healing to impact health and
well-being among individuals who have experienced traumatic violence. In doing
so, this project offers a contextually informed understanding of the experiences
of individuals who survive violent injury, offering insights to facilitate
improvement of HVIP recruitment, retention, and programming. This research
trains a doctoral student in cultural anthropological science and method and
will disseminate results widely to academic and non-academic audiences and
interested stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds upon and
extends anthropological theories of emotion, care, embodiment, and deservingness
to investigate how affective experiences influence personal feelings of
discomfort, wellbeing, and illness related to violent injury via three specific
objectives: 1) characterizing the emotional experiences of PTSD in HVIP
settings; 2) understanding how HVIPs conceptualize violence and encourage coping
strategies; and 3) examining how concepts of violence interact with concepts of
care and patient response to impact health, well-being, and access to psycho-
social support. A mixed methods approach is used to investigate these issues
within two trauma centers dealing with significant traumatic violence patient
loads. The methods include participant observation, ethnographic interviews,
validated quantitative measures of mental health, and descriptive statistics of
relevant demographic data. The findings inform the ways in which affected
individuals understand and interpret their emotions to provide alternative
theorizations of conditions of violence as experienced by
victims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.