* 2117125
* MRI: Acquisition of a Benchtop NMR Instrument with Pulsed Field Gradient and Autosampler for Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Corin Slown, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 145,200.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, Chemistry
Research Instrumentation, Chemistry of Life Processes and Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms B programs. California State University at Monterey Bay
is acquiring a 43 MHz benchtop nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer
that has the capabilities to perform both routine analysis and more complex
experiments and helps elucidate molecular structures of chemical compounds. The
instrument supports the research of Professor John Goeltz and colleagues Corin
Slown and Amy Danowitz at California State University at Monterey Bay. This
spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as development of
battery materials, exploring quorum sensing pathways in interactions with small
molecules, and carrying out research training in protein-ligand binding events.
In general, NMR spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to
chemists for the elucidation of the structures of molecules. It is used to
identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms
within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is
an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate students in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the
NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
will be especially impactful in providing critical hands-on research experience
to students from underrepresented groups, first generation college students and
female students at this Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.