* 2117282
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computer System to Support Research and Training in Computational Biology and Data Science at Meharry Medical College
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aize Cao, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 671,411.00

This MRI aims to acquire a High-Performance Computing (HPC) System to support
research and training in Computational Biology and Data Science in a
Historically Black College and University (HBCU). The system will allow Meharry
Medical College to: &lt;br/&gt;• Support and expand multidisciplinary research
in big data and areas with high Computational needs; support Maharry’s planned
school of Applied Computational Sciences by incorporating state-of-the-art
&lt;br/&gt;genetics studies, learning, data visualization, and other functions
requiring high performance computing, and other functions, and other areas with
high computational needs, &lt;br/&gt;• Assist in recruiting and retaining
historically underrepresented minority students in computational sciences and
biology, &lt;br/&gt;• Expand educational and research outreach in High
Performance Computing in Middle Tennessee and other HBCU. &lt;br/&gt;This HPC
system aims at providing robust computational processing to support programs at
the Data Science Institute. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This system will provide
significant computational support for high throughput research and advance
knowledge in computational biology and data science. This includes, but is not
limited to big data management, sequencing data analyses, image processing,
machine learning, and other types of data analyses (sequencing data and Acade
analyses). The system offers a safe place for resource sharing, and contributes
in retaining valuable knowledge, as well as providing opportunities for
collaboration and engaging in trying to restrain the pandemic, and attaining
more students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.