* 2117321
* Analysis of fire suppression and increasing environmental variability on wildfire intensity
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Tammy Rittenour, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2024
* USD 396,527.00

Wildfires are burning at scales and intensities not seen in generations with
potentially devastating impacts on watersheds, ecosystems, and human
communities. Investigators plan to analyze 400 years of tree-ring fire records
and 1,000 years of heat sensitive archeological artifacts to determine if fires
today are burning hotter than they have historically. After more than a century
of fire suppression, forests are full of undergrowth, dead fuel, and overly
dense stands of trees. Warmer temperatures and severe drought make these forests
explosively combustible. It is difficult to disentangle the relative
contributions of environmental change and of fire suppression to wildfires
because of these confounding factors. Comparing recent fires under cool weather
conditions versus those that only burned in pre-fire suppression fuels will
enable these scientists to separate the influences of environmental change from
those of fire suppression. This project trains Native American students and
enables land managers to better allocate resources to activities that mitigate
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of a century of fire suppression,
many forests have accumulated fuels in the form of leaf litter, dead and down
branches and trees, and an increasing density of young trees and shrubs. Hotter
temperatures and pervasive droughts make these accumulated fuels more
combustible and are driving extreme fire behavior including fire tornados.
Increasingly large "megafires" have impacted water supplies, ecosystems, and
destroyed thousands of homes. It is difficult to parse the relative
contributions of environmental change and fire suppression in these contexts
because they are operating simultaneously. However, knowing the relative
importance of each would aid land managers and policy makers to allocate
resources to mitigate the situation. In this project researchers use an
innovative integration of heat sensitive archaeological proxies in artifact
dating and charcoal analysis, and tree-ring science to determine if fuels
accumulated from a century of fire suppression alone are enough to drive
increases in fire intensity that are unprecedented in last 500-1,000 years. They
investigate sites that burned frequently prior to fire suppression to establish
a baseline for historical conditions (pre-suppression sites) and sites that
burned in cool-season conditions after a century of fire suppression (post-
suppression sites). By focusing on cool-season post-suppression fires, the
impact of environmental change can be reduced by isolating the impacts of fire
suppression and fuels on the temperature and duration of fire events. The
results of this study contribute to land-use and fire planning by allowing
policymakers to better weigh the opportunity costs of intensive forest thinning
and prescribed burning versus. environmental mitigation and home
protection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.