* 2117455
* Advancing Methods for Spatial Analysis in Local Modeling
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Stewart Fotheringham, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 09/30/2025
* USD 405,920.00

This project develops statistical methods for spatial data. It is common for
data to exhibit variation across spatial contexts, including outcomes such as
crime rates, voting preferences in elections, and disease prevalence.
Conventionally, researchers have used statistical models that implicitly assume
that the processes generating these outcomes are uniform across locations. Yet,
the processes that lead to this variation may vary in different spatial
contexts, and statistical approaches are needed that account for this variation.
In this study, the researchers develop statistical methods that address
correlations between spatially proximate outcomes. As a complement to the
methods that they develop, the researchers are developing open source software
to make these approaches freely available to other scholars. In addition to the
methodological advances, the award supports the involvement of two graduate
students, who benefit from the training in scientific research. The award
supports a researcher with a disability, which contributes to goals of
broadening participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the
researchers examine and develop methods for the statistical modeling of data at
multiple scales. Specifically, the researchers advance multiscale geographically
weighted regression (MGWR) methods, which allows the effects of predictor
variables to vary based on their spatial context. These approaches address known
challenges to statistical inferences, specifically that regression models may
indicate biased and contrary effects if the models do not adequately account for
the scale and structure in the dataset. In this project, the researchers examine
the extent to which these problems can be addressed with the use of MGWR
methods. Additional aims include new methods for adjusting inferences when
multiple hypotheses are examined and the implementation of diagnostic tools for
examining the robustness of model assumptions. To advance the methods, the
researchers apply the modeling approach to empirical datasets with spatial
structure, such as mortality during the COVID-19 pandemic, teen pregnancy rates,
and voting trends in recent elections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.