* 2117843
* MRI: Development of an ultrafast, ultrasensitive, and high resolution direct electron detector for next-generation electron back-scattered diffraction of metallic and beam-sensitiv
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tresa Pollock, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 578,000.00

Electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) has evolved into a widespread and
powerful characterization technique for the mapping and analysis of phases in
materials, providing key information about crystal orientation, morphologies,
lattice strain, topology, and crystallographic texture. The advent of direct
electron detection that circumvents inefficient conversion between electrons and
photons has revolutionized the field of transmission electron microscopy owing
to single-electron sensitivity for low-dose imaging and ultrafast detection for
time-resolved studies, but its use in scanning electron microscopes (SEMs) is in
its infancy. An award is made to the University of California Santa Barbara to
develop an ultrafast and ultrasensitive direct electron EBSD instrument for the
widely accessible SEM platform, providing a rich opportunity for materials
research that are hindered by electron beam damage and temporal limitations of
detectors. The development project improves on the state-of-the-art EBSD
acquisition speed and enhances the sensitivity through a new sensor design,
unlocking the most vexing challenges in the rapid 3D characterization of
additively manufactured materials and emerging dose-sensitive energy storage and
conversion materials plagued by beam damage. The award will ensure engagement
with the community and early-career researchers via a yearly open house hosted
by the shared user facility, as well as with REU and RET projects through
partnerships with the Materials Research Laboratory and the Quantum Foundry at
UC Santa Barbara. The developed instrumentation and simulation tools will also
be integrated with the Center for Scientific Computing, which promotes the
effective use of High Performance Computing in the research and teaching
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The next-generation direct-detection EBSD
instrument will be optimized for electron beam energies of 3kV to 30kV with
single-electron sensitivity, and a small sensor form factor permitting flexible
location within the microscope chamber. For materials that are damage-prone,
such as organic crystalline materials, limiting the electron dose is critical
and detection yield becomes paramount, especially at low energies. The developed
instrument will enable the detection of rich material information encoded in
electron diffraction, circumventing longstanding issues of low-damage threshold
and weak scattering signals. Metallic alloys and battery materials also benefit
from high detection sensitivity and low-kV operation, revealing structural
features such as dislocation cells in additively manufactured materials and
enabling the evolution of microstructure at rates that can keep up with in
operando device observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.