* 2117516
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wei Wang, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,182.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Arizona is acquiring a
single crystal X-ray diffractometer (SCXRD) to support Professor Elisa Tomat and
colleagues Wei Wang, Jon Njardarson, Thomas Gianetti and Tai Kong. In general,
an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full
three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles,
and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students, including
veterans, in chemistry and biochemistry at this Hispanic Serving Institution as
well as collaborators from other regional universities in the Southwest
(Arizona/New Mexico region). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this
diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the exploration of coordination chemistry strategies in
bioinorganic redox reactivity and cell biology and the design of organic
reactions such as those for total natural product synthesis. The instrumentation
is also used for developing carbenium-based ligands for catalytic applications
and the development of chemical tools for biology and potential drug discovery.
The instrument also serves researchers searching for natural-product-based
compounds that may act as therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.