* 2117404
* Assessing the Impact of Conservation Areas on Local Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Jessica L'Roe, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2026
* USD 181,121.00

Protected areas are a key tool for conserving threatened species and ecosystems.
There is a renewed interest by the international community to designate more
land as protected. At the same time, resistance from local communities
undermines the effectiveness of protected areas and raises equity concerns that
burden local people with costs when benefits of protection accrue globally. This
project contributes to an improved understanding of parks-people conflicts by
scaling up from individual case studies using the Wildlife Conservation
Society’s Basic Necessities Survey to evaluate protected area impacts on local
communities. The study is a longitudinal analysis that correlates indicators of
park benefits and proximity to parks with metrics for resident’s wealth and
well-being. The results of the research are intended to advance the
understanding of both positive and negative impacts of protected areas on local
resident’s livelihoods. The research strengthens partnerships between scholars
and practitioners working to understand and improve human-environment relations
in conservation hot-spots and mentor's undergraduate students in STEM research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-environment scholars have made substantial advances
in evaluating impacts of conservation initiatives, but recent research often
focuses on average and aggregated impacts. Less is known about how and why
impacts vary locally, or how communities around protected areas have been
changing over time. This project maps the distribution of reported benefits of
protected areas at local and regional scales, and measures how clusters of high
or low benefits correlate with characteristics of households, villages, and
protected areas. It uses repeated measures of well-being to assess whether
living near a protected area is especially beneficial for certain kinds of
households, such as indigenous or poorer households that depend on natural
resources. Finally, it examines whether key contextual factors, such as the
proportion of households that are dependent on forest resources, has been
changing around protected areas over time. A better understanding of variation
in human communities around protected areas can lead to more contextually
sensitive conservation initiatives and help expand and strengthen protected area
networks while fostering outcomes that are more efficient and
equitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Human-
Environment and Geographical Sciences (HEGS) Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) at the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.