* 2117198
* MRI: Acquisition of a Laboratory-Based X-ray Absorption and Emission Spectroscopy Instrument
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Daniel Giammar, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 295,464.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) program award supports the purchase of
an X-ray absorption and emission spectrometer that will be hosted by Washington
University in St. Louis. The new instrument will be available for use by
researchers at the university, in the surrounding region, and further afield. It
will be the first of its kind at a university in the United States that is
optimized for research in the field of Earth and environmental science.
Scientists will use this new tool to study a wide array of questions, such as
how life forms minerals, how soils and treatment methods remove contaminants
from water, and how gases and water in molten rock affect volcanic eruptions. In
addition, this instrument will be used to train the next generation of
scientists and as part of research internships for college and high school
students, including those from the City of St. Louis. The instrument laboratory
will accept samples by mail in addition to in-person usage. This mail-in service
opens up access to this unique research capability to students at undergraduate-
serving institutions that lack their own major instrumentation and to persons
with disabilities who would otherwise need to travel to one of the four major
national facilities where these X-ray techniques have traditionally been
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will enable two types of
measurements in a laboratory setting that until recently were only accessible at
a synchrotron lightsource: transmission X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and
high-resolution X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES). The XAS capability will allow
quantification of oxidation state, coordination environment, and local structure
of elements occurring at &gt;1 wt.%. The XES capability extends sensitivity to
elements occurring at concentrations as low as 10 to 100 μg/g, providing
information on oxidation state, transition metal spin state, and coordination.
Diverse solid, liquid, or biological samples can be studied using both methods.
The instrument will facilitate research on a diverse array of topics, including
biogeochemical mineral formation and transformation, biosignatures and prebiotic
chemistry on the early Earth, bacterial and fungal metabolisms and products,
metal contaminant fate and remediation, volatiles that drive volcanic eruptions,
conditions during the formation and evolution of the Solar System, signatures of
sedimentary and diagenetic processes in the rock record, drinking water
treatment and supply, and recovery of nutrient and energy resources from
wastewaters. The instrument enables migration of a subset of XAS measurements
from a synchrotron to a laboratory setting, freeing time at beamlines for the
many experiments that uniquely require a lightsource facility. In addition, the
proposed instrument facilitates the development of XES for Earth and
environmental sciences applications, where this technique has seen little usage
to date, and will serve as a testbed for wider migration of X-ray spectroscopic
methods into a laboratory setting over the coming
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.