* 2117917
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Heat Compatible System for Interdisciplinary Research and Education on Human Thermal Exposure and Safety in Hot Climates
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Konrad Rykaczewski, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2023
* USD 413,875.00

This award supports the purchase of a thermal manikin custom-built for indoor
and outdoor research studies in extreme heat conditions. This advanced
instrument measures how much heat a human body receives and mimics the
thermoregulatory system’s response in different situations. Use of this
instrument will avoid the dangers of exposing humans to extreme heat while
measuring how heat impacts human health and performance. Such measurements can
help find better ways for individuals and organizations to cope with
increasingly common and severely hot weather. More specifically, the benefits of
this research may include fewer heat illnesses and deaths, improved societal
well-being and productivity, improved urban planning, and reduced energy use
required for air conditioning of buildings. To advance these topics, the manikin
will be paired with a state-of-the-art mobile weather station developed at
Arizona State University. These combined instruments will be used to
simultaneously characterize the local environment and its impact on human
thermal comfort, core and skin temperature response, and sweating. These
processes will be measured in various settings (e.g., desert paths, old mobile
homes, etc.) and allow testing of traditional and new cooling strategies. The
research will be collaboratively performed by a diverse group of students and
faculty from engineering, physical sciences, architecture, fashion, public
health, nutrition, and sports sciences. The new thermal manikin will expose
diverse and underrepresented student populations to new, interdisciplinary STEM
research, thus promoting the participation in these fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With recent instrumentation advancements and custom
modifications requested of the manufacturer, the acquired thermal manikin system
will be the first in the world to be easily moveable, compatible with high heat,
and utilized to conduct multi-site outdoor and indoor measurements. Such
experimentation will produce advanced information on the mimicked human
thermoregulatory response presently unavailable from simulations, human trials,
or current thermal manikins. The instrument will be used to 1) develop novel
experimental methods and modeling approaches to quantify evaporative,
conductive, convective, and radiative human heat exposure on 35 human body-zones
and 2) to evaluate and improve indoor/outdoor thermal exposure and physiologic
models and indices under oppressive heat across climate types and personal
contexts. The manikin will also be used to accelerate development of a broad
range of human-centric adaptations for coping with extreme
heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.