* 2117652
* Indigenous-Led Ecological Restoration
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2026
* Matthew Williamson, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2026
* USD 414,411.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).‚Äù&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research examines how
Indigenous groups navigate institutional and environmental legacies to restore
ecologically and culturally significant species. The project advances geographic
theory and methods across political ecology, Indigenous studies, geographical
sciences, and conservation biology. It investigates the complex relationship
between biological conservation and Indigenous Peoples that can lead to
innovative conservation efforts that support Indigenous ecological and cultural
goals. The study supports Indigenous-led restoration efforts by providing
qualitative and geospatial data and charting best practices, and in turn
supports proposed federal platforms for biodiversity protection and increased
engagement with Tribal Nations. The project advances STEM education by
supporting Indigenous students and developing teaching modules and multimedia
outlets for the public and Indigenous institutions on Indigenous-led STEM
advances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify obstacles that face
Indigenous-led, ecological restoration by answering the following questions: (1)
How do restoration projects negotiate jurisdictional fragmentation, the
patchwork of land and land-uses into national parks, forests, other public
lands, and private lands to enable adequate habitat for reintroduced species?
(2) How do these projects engage with Western conservation science and practice
to incorporate Indigenous place-based knowledge systems and goals? (3) How do
these engagements shape the resulting model of restoration that results in
effective species reintroduction? This project develops a generalizable mixed
methods framework that combines interviews, Elder circles, transect walks, and
participatory GIS with novel spatial analyses of jurisdictional fragmentation.
Project findings will inform researchers about the ongoing role of institutional
legacies in shaping conservation efforts, how Indigenous actors work through and
alter these structures, and the socio-ecological complexity of reintroducing
keystone species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.