* 2117801
* MRI: Acquisition of Open-Source Electron Beam Powder Bed Fusion Platform to Expand Advanced Manufacturing Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Eric Macdonald, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2023
* USD 400,728.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
novel open-source electron beam powder bed fusion (EPBF) system. As the first
system of its kind in the US, this instrument will enable University of Texas El
Paso (UTEP) investigators and a large network of collaborators to perform
fundamental research in key areas of metal additive manufacturing—enabling new
material systems and enhanced process understanding and control. This knowledge
can lead to lighter, stronger, higher quality and more versatile materials and
parts--enabling more fuel-efficient cars that can be produced at lower cost,
minimally invasive medical instruments and implants, and advanced aircraft
engines with higher efficiencies and significantly reduced emissions and fuel
consumption. The instrumentation will also enhance training for the next
generation advanced/smart manufacturing workforce through use in undergraduate
research and education and K-12 outreach activities. The instrumentation will
enrich outreach activities in regional middle and high schools, to recruit
students from predominantly underrepresented Hispanic backgrounds to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The instrumentation will enable researchers to
gain insight into processing-structure-property links for the EPBF process and,
together with the capability for novel scan strategies, will provide knowledge
needed to fabricate complex materials such as refractory alloys, high strength
aluminum alloys, Ni-Ti shape memory alloys and metal matrix ceramic composites.
The instrumentation’s process monitoring capabilities will enable researchers to
gain fundamental insight into physically relevant process phenomena such as
powder ejecta, powder charging and oxidation that can cause defects. The
instrumentation’s high temperature processing capabilities will enable
researchers to better understand the intricacies of phase changes, defect
formation, and microstructural evolution in relation to the thermal history
during processing. This will provide a foundation for advances in fabrication of
materials that withstand harsh conditions and the development of more durable
and resilient smart parts and novel materials needed for energy, aerospace,
defense, transportation and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.