* 2117180
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray diffractometer for materials structural characterization and research training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Abdellah Lisfi, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,708.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award is to acquire a multifunctional X-ray diffractometer that will
enhance research and education activities at Morgan State University. The
requested instrument will be crucial in fulfilling the needs of advanced
structural characterizations of various types of functional materials developed
by scientists at Morgan State University and their partners at other
collaborating institutions. This instrumentation award will consolidate the
existing research collaboration between Morganâ€™s scientists and their partners
at neighboring institutions and allow the establishment of new alliances with
other academic institutions and the industrial sector. In addition to benefiting
the university and its collaborators, the acquisition of this instrumentation
will positively impact other sectors. The requested funds will enhance the
research infrastructure of Morgan State University, which is an HBCU, and will
offer research opportunities and training to minority students. It will boost
junior faculty development at this institution. This will promote greater
participation in materials science by African-Americans, who are
underrepresented in this field of science. This instrument will increase the
competitiveness of minority students in the functional materials field at Morgan
State. This will significantly enhance the opportunities for African-American
graduates in the job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multifunctional X-ray diffractometer to be
acquired includes all typical scans offered by a four-circle diffractometer in
addition to the capability of high temperature measurement. The PIs and the
senior personnel of this grant are scientists from Morgan State University and
Loyola University Maryland with research interests in materials such as
ferromagnets, highly magnetostrictive alloys, nanomaterials, thermo-electrics,
low-dimensional hetero-structures, porous materials, magneto-electrics, and
optical materials. The equipment will be used to fulfill the needs of advanced
structural characterization of various types of materials under development by
the PIs and their research partners, as well as to provide research training to
students, postdocs and faculty. The multifunctional diffractometer will play a
key role in investigating the structural properties of these materials by
conducting the following measurements. (1) The four-circle diffractometer scans
will enable the determination of the materials' structure, quantify strain in
heterostructures, determine the crystallographic orientation and epitaxy, and
map the distribution of crystallites in the investigated materials. (2) The high
temperature capability of the requested instrument will be crucial in
investigating phase transition and determining structural changes accompanying
this transition in functional materials. All these measurements together with
other analyses offered by facilities at the PIs' and the senior personnel
institutions will be crucial in conducting cutting-edge research and advancing
scientific knowledge in the field of functional materials. This will enable
engineering new advanced materials with superior performances, which will
benefit the industrial sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.