* 2117956
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU/CPU computing cluster for research and education in computational chemistry and materials
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jussi Eloranta, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 455,237.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports California State University
Northridge (CSUN), a primarily undergraduate and minority-serving institution,
to acquire its first mixed GPU/CPU high performance computing (HPC) cluster. The
requested HPC cluster will enable CSUN research labs to expand the current scope
and pursue new research ideas that need the support of large-scale simulations
on a self-administrated machine. Specifically, it will allow the exploration of
novel chemistry and new state of matter under extreme conditions; the design of
novel functional and low-dimensional materials for the harvest and storage of
renewable energy; the high-throughput screening of candidate organic and
inorganic compounds; and the large-scale simulation studies of physical,
chemical and electrochemical processes in materials synthesis and applications.
The HPC cluster will greatly enhance the STEM education program at CSUN by
providing necessary facilities for existing and newly created courses and by
establishing research programs that broaden the participation of a diverse
student population in advanced materials research. Computer simulations can
greatly enhance the learning experience and efficiency by visualizing the atomic
and electronic structures and relating them with the properties and functions of
the molecules and materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired HPC cluster will
greatly enhance the activities and outcome of the research labs at CSUN by
enabling large-scale screening of candidate compounds, high-throughput structure
searches, constructions of ternary and quaternary phase diagrams, and
thermodynamic modeling of multi-phase systems. Specifically, the labs of the
PIs, the senior personnel, and other faculty members will explore the following
areas of materials and solid-state chemistry: 1) the study of novel oxidation
states of elements, the transformations of structures and properties of
materials and minerals under high pressure and other conditions in the interior
of large planets; 2) large-scale atomistic simulations of electrochemical
processes and the corresponding evolution of nanostructures in metal-oxygen,
metal-sulfur and new aqueous redox flow batteries; 3) developing computational
methods to model the thermodynamic and fluid dynamic processes of nanoparticle
formation and assembly in quantum and classical liquids during laser ablation;
4) designing new 2D materials, polymer electrolytes, carbon quantum dots,
metallic glasses, hydroflurocarbon replacements and new hydrogenation catalysts
through large-scale screening of the candidate materials and the understanding
of related chemical processes and mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.