* 2117045
* MRI: Acquisition of a Bio-AFM for Life Science and Soft Matter Research and Research Training in New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Elba Serrano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 475,685.00

An award is made to New Mexico State University (NMSU) to purchase a Bio-AFM
microscope comprising a NanoWizard 4 XP atomic force microscope integrated with
an inverted OLYMPUS IX73 fluorescence microscope. This instrument will support
the research and training of investigators and students in the state of New
Mexico at three Hispanic-serving institutions that also serve Native American
students from the region: New Mexico State University in Las Cruces (NMSU); New
Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology in Socorro (NMT); Eastern New Mexico
University in Portales (ENMU). The equipment will foster inclusion and build the
STEM workforce through the participation of women and underrepresented minority
faculty and staff from over fifteen departments and their diverse student
mentees as members of the Bio-AFM User Collective. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be recruited and trained through workshops and activities offered
in partnership with programs whose mission is to broaden participation in STEM
research such as NSF LS-AMP, the College Assistance Migrant Program, and NIH
RISE and MARC. Academic courses offered through Biology, Mechanical Engineering,
and Molecular Biology, will formally develop student expertise by emphasizing
theory and experimental design as well as hands-on research with the Bio-AFM. In
addition, a partnership with the NMSU student business accelerator program, the
Arrowhead Center, will encourage student innovation in the use of Bio-AFM for
biotechnology start-ups. Training of diverse students in biomechanics and
interdisciplinary research will impart skills that will build competitiveness
and expertise for the modern STEM workforce in basic science, biotechnology, and
bioengineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bio-AFM is a critical tool for
life science and soft materials research that permits high resolution imaging
under physiological conditions for studies of the mechanical properties and
responses of cells and tissues. The instrument will build research capacity at
institutions in New Mexico and will increase investigator competitiveness in a
broad range of disciplines such as molecular dynamics, biotechnology, cell and
developmental biology, microbiology, phycology, reproductive biology,
neuroscience, physiology, and bioengineering. Access to the Bio-AFM system will
foster interdisciplinary research and will enable researchers and students at
the three minority-serving partner institutions to conduct relevant, impactful,
and cutting-edge research in microbial, plant, and animal systems. Their
discoveries will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journal articles and
presentations at scientific conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.