* 2117299
* MRI: Acquisition of Micro-computed Tomography and 3D Imaging Infrastructure for Interdisciplinary STEM Research in North Carolina
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bryan McLean, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 642,892.00

An award is made to the University of North Carolina Greensboro to acquire a
micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) scanner which will facilitate STEM research
and training based on high-resolution 3D imaging. Micro-CT is an X-ray-based
technology whose use is advancing knowledge of past and present complex
biological forms, genotype-phenotype-environment connections, human cultural
(pre)history, and engineering of synthetic and biocompatible nanoelements. The
instrument will accelerate research in these areas for a user base in North
Carolina and Virginia, including researchers at minority-serving institutions,
HBCUs, and scientifically underserved regions of both states. The CT instrument
will also facilitate synergies among additional research instruments and foci
based at JSIRT, which is a nanoscience hub and collaboration between two
institutions in Greensboro (UNCG and North Carolina A&amp;T). To ensure the
instrument serves regional STEM training needs, the award supports short-form
and semester-long CT-based courses for undergraduate and graduate students at
both of these institutions. It will also engage and inspire the next generation
of STEM researchers via development of K-8 educational kits and CT-based
outreach in science-focused community events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micro-CT
allows objects to be imaged in three dimensions (3D), non-invasively, and at
very high resolution (micron to sub-micron scale), transforming surficial,
compositional, and cross-sectional analysis for applications focused on
nanoparticles, engineered composites, and hard and soft biological tissues.
Acquisition of the micro-CT instrument will catalyze discovery that spans these
STEM foci, providing exciting research and training opportunities across
material types, levels of biological organization, and temporal scales (from
deep time to present). It will serve a diverse consortium of users based at UNCG
and 11 other academic institutions (plus industry partners) in the Triad and
western North Carolina, as well as southwestern Virginia, providing capacity to
advance basic knowledge and extend synergies among diverse research
institutions. The award will bolster STEM research and training at UNCG and
JSIRT in particular, via cross-listed, graduate and upper-level undergraduate
courses in CT and scan reconstruction. This will lower the barrier of entry for
innovative, imagery-based student research projects. Further, the instrument
will be used to inspire the next generation of STEM researchers within our
community by contributing to development of K-8 educational kits (including
3D-printed biological, paleontological, archaeological, and engineered objects)
and integration in outreach events at the annual Science Everywhere festival on
UNCGâ€™s campus&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.