* 2117902
* III: Small: RareXplain: A Computational Framework for Explainable Rare Category Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jingrui He, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Despite the large amount of data being generated across various domains every
day, it is usually the rare categories that are of the greatest importance and
profound impacts on our society. However, existing work for analyzing such rare
categories mainly addresses the separable cases or the homogeneous and static
settings, and thus is not suitable for analyzing complex rare categories such as
rare complications among patients and defects in semiconductor manufacturing.
Motivated by these two use cases, this project focuses on bridging the gap
between the imminent need to analyze complex rare categories and the inability
of state-of-the-art techniques to address this problem in an effective,
efficient, and explainable way. This project develops RareXplain, a
computational framework for explainable rare category analysis, which consists
of new models and algorithms to analyze complex rare categories while providing
explanation for the model outputs. The developed techniques benefit multiple
application domains by advancing state-of-the-practice in terms of the detection
and tracking accuracy, running time, as well as model explanability. This
project provides training and research opportunities for students at various
levels, especially those from under-represented groups. The research results
will be disseminated via publications, course integration, tutorials, workshops,
and potential tech transfer to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses three types of complexity in rare category analysis, including the
data complexity, the dynamics complexity, and the model complexity. More
specifically, it consists of two complementary research thrusts, namely (Thrust
1) complex rare category detection, and (Thrust 2) complex rare category
tracking. The first thrust detects complex rare categories in an explainable
way, i.e., identifying the first examples from the rare categories of interest
with the help of an oracle in the presence of data complexity. In particular,
the data complexity is addressed via band-pass filters and cross-domain rare
category detection in the open set setting. The second thrust tracks over time
the rare categories detected from the first thrust in an explainable way, i.e.,
tracking the detected rare categories with respect to the underlying graph
topology and the vertex features respectively. In particular, the dynamics
complexity is addressed via online local clustering on time-evolving graphs and
continuous transfer learning on time-evolving vertex features. Furthermore, the
model complexity is addressed via both point-wise and pair-wise model
explanation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.