* 2117536
* MRI: Acquisition of a New Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer with Carbonate System to Support Research and Education at the University of Southern California
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Lowell Stott, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 304,684.00

Funding will be used to acquire a new dual inlet stable isotope ratio mass
spectrometer with carbonate preparation system and clumped isotope capability
for the Earth Sciences Department at the University of Southern California. The
faculty and students at USC who are engaged in studies using isotope methods
will use the new instrument to investigate some of society’s greatest
challenges, to understand how natural processes affect the Earth’s environment
on decadal and longer time scales. Without a clear understanding of Earth’s
natural environmental behavior, it would be very difficult to adequately assess
how anthropogenic influences will ultimately influence the surface environment.
The stable isotope laboratory at USC is a research and an educational facility.
Graduate and undergraduate students will use the new instrument to support their
education and career development goals. Students will be trained in isotope
geochemistry and in the operation and maintenance of the new instrument, as well
as gas extractions for mass spectrometry. The acquisition of a new stable
isotope ratio mass spectrometer is necessary to continue these activities at
USC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and students at USC and nearby California
State University Dominguez Hills conduct NSF-sponsored environmental research
that requires thousands of stable isotope measurements each year. This research
includes investigations of geologic processes that influence natural variations
in atmospheric CO2 that accompanied some of Earth’s greatest climatic changes
during the past 1 million years. Other research involves reconstructing paleo-
precipitation records with stable isotope tracers at key times in the past where
climate variability may have influenced human history. The new isotope
instrument will facilitate new and innovative research using clumped isotopes to
study the ocean’s Lithium budget in Earth’s ancient past. Measurements of the
stable isotopes of nitrogen are being used to study biological nitrogen cycling
in the modern ocean. The new instrument will ensure the continued success of
these endeavors and provide opportunities for new innovative and
interdisciplinary research at USC. The new isotope ratio mass spectrometer will
replace an instrument that is no longer operational after 18 years of continuous
use. The new instrument is manufactured by Nu Instruments. It will be equipped
with dual inlet and multicollectors with electronics specifically designed to
conduct high precision isotope ratio measurements of very small gas samples. The
instrument will also be equipped with an automated carbonate preparation system
for continuous online measurements of carbonates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.