* 2117349
* MRI: Acquisition of High-Resolution Photon Emission/Laser Fault Injection Microscope with High-Performance Computers for Failure Analysis and Security Assessment of Electronic Syst
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Fatemeh Ganji, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,608.00

This MRI acquisition project will allow the purchase of a high-resolution Photon
Emission/Laser Fault Injection microscope and high-performance computers. This
setup will provide a platform for research, teaching, and hands-on experience
for students and industry professionals. The research this instrumentation will
enable focuses on the performance and security analyses of electronic devices
and systems at different stages of their lifetime which will address a critical
issue, securing the integrated circuit (IC) supply chain. The project has the
potential to secure large number of devices used across sensitive applications,
such as in healthcare, artificial intelligence (AI), finance, transportation,
and defense. With a user-friendly interface, the instrument is expected to
maximize the accessibility for on-site and off-campus students and researchers.
The data collected from this setup will be further made available as benchmarks
to researchers in the field of AI and cybersecurity. The instrument will bring
unique capabilities to the PIs’ institution and surrounding areas to conduct
research, education, and outreach activities on IC security. The PIs plan to
educate and train students through online and on-site courses, as well as
seminars and workshops. The PIs plan to promote broadening the participation in
this research area, especially recruitment of female students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MRI instrument is expected to facilitate research
geared to the needs of the semiconductor industry, especially with the focus on
security and reliability of ICs, including three interdisciplinary topics, IC
tampering and counterfeiting detection, security testing and design for
security, and security evaluation using AI. The common factor among these themes
is the requirement for an advanced optical mechanism to interact with an
integrated circuit at the scale of a single or a handful of transistors in a
non-destructive fashion. While the first topic addresses the attacks that can be
mounted during the pre- and post-fabrication, the second topic aims to provide a
framework for testing and certifying a chip after manufacturing and designing a
more secure chip. To achieve the goals defined in these themes, in the third
topic, AI acts as an enabler since its essential role is to help analyze the
data more efficiently and extract more in-depth and comprehensive information to
back methodologies in the prior topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.