* 2117098
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser confocal microscope to enhance faculty research and undergraduate research training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* James Berleman, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 384,762.00

An award is made to Saint Mary’s College of California, a Hispanic-serving
Institution, for the acquisition of a laser confocal microscope to be used for
research and research training of a diverse population of undergraduates. The
acquisition of this microscope will allow faculty to train the next generation
of scientists in the use of this imaging technology through academic course work
and course-based research experiences in both introductory Biology courses and
upper division courses in Cell Biology, Developmental Biology and Microbiology
courses. This instrument will also help advance research programs of faculty who
normally mentor multiple undergraduate students, thereby providing valuable
research, publication and presentation opportunities for students and helping
them to prepare the students for graduate programs and careers in STEM. In
addition, this instrument will be incorporated into microscopy workshops for
middle school students and community outreach to nearby high-need high schools
and local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The confocal microscope will
impact a broad range of research projects including dendritic growth regulation
in sympathetic neurons; the cellular interactions in predatory bacteria; the
function of various polymorphisms in endogenous retroviruses; the role of Rho-
GTPases and signaling pathways in the establishment and maintenance of adherens
junctions; the role of histone methyltransferases in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii;
the genetic links between gamete and embryo development; effects of
environmental toxins on embryo and germ cell development; factors affecting
reproductive lifespan; and identifying unculturable microorganisms present on
skin and environmental surfaces. In addition, this microscope will allow the
faculty to pursue novel avenues of research that were previously difficult to
pursue at Saint Mary’s College. Furthermore, the availability of this instrument
will allow faculty and student researchers to address impactful research
questions, bring their research to fruition sooner and disseminate their work to
the scientific community through conference presentations and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.