* 2117118
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS: A Case Study of Enhanced Geothermal Systems: The Interaction of Imaginaries of Place and Energy for Renewable Energy Transitions
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Katherine McComas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 24,631.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategies to mitigate the impacts
of climate change include developing low-carbon energy sources for heating and
power, but transitioning to renewable energy systems requires understanding the
social and cultural factors that affect whether energy projects are successful.
This study aims to understand how people react to an emerging form of renewable
energy technology called Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS), and to identify the
main factors that lead to people supporting or opposing EGS projects. The
researcher analyzes four EGS projects, focusing on concepts related to risks and
benefits, public engagement, visions of the future, past experiences, and local
histories, in order to better understand how responses to renewable energy
development are influenced not only by the technology and institutions involved
but also by the context that the project takes place in. This research aims to
provide valuable insight for addressing climate change, through enhancing
understanding of drivers of renewable energy acceptance and providing evidence-
based guidance on risk communication and effective public engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an international case study of EGS developments, we aim
to understand generalizable factors that lead to support or opposition, context-
specific factors related to place and visions of energy futures, and the role of
communication and stakeholder engagement. The project consists of a comparison
between multiple cases of EGS sites at various stages of development: 1. Ithaca,
NY; 2. Espoo, Finland; 3. Redruth, England; and 4. Basel, Switzerland, where an
EGS project was canceled following increased seismicity in 2006. Data collection
methods include interviews with key stakeholders, textual analysis of media
coverage, public relations materials, and policy documents, and observation of
meetings and events. The aim is to understand how each project has unfolded over
time; how such concepts as sociotechnical imaginaries, place, and legacies of
energy and earthquakes are present in public negotiations around the
acceptability of EGS and its risks; and how these factors have influenced public
attitudes and subsequent project outcomes. While much research has focused on
public responses to a particular energy project or technology, this research
extends the literature on energy acceptance by considering the role of both
place and energy imaginaries, at multiple scales, as they interact within a
local context for a given energy project. Previous research has used socio-
technical imaginaries – collectively-held visions of desirable futures and the
desired role of technology – to understand trajectories of energy development at
regional and national levels, and a growing body of literature has explored the
influence of place attachment on local differences in acceptance of energy
projects. However, interactions between these potentially competing visions of
energy and place and the implications for acceptance of renewable energy have
not been investigated; this research provides insight for addressing climate
change, through enhancing understanding of drivers of renewable energy
acceptance and providing empirically informed guidance on risk communication and
effective public engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.