* 2117510
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Temperature and Pressure Solid-state NMR Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Pratim Biswas, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 886,362.00

The award supports the acquisition, installation, and shared research
application of a state-of- the-art solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance
(ssNMR) spectrometer system in the Nano Research Facility/Jens Molecular and
Nanoscale Analysis Laboratory (NRF/Jens Lab) at Washington University in St.
Louis, Missouri (WUStL). The ssNMR system is capable of high- temperature and
high-pressure sample analysis, thus opening the door to the study of a broad
range of critical environmental remediation, biological processing, and
fuel/chemical/polymer manufacturing technologies under realistic conditions.
Primary research areas include: (1) homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis, (2)
membrane-based separations, (3) polymeric and biological materials properties,
and (4) geochemical and biogeochemical systems (e.g., carbon sequestration). The
system will support a broad user base consisting of researchers at multiple
universities in the Midwest region surrounding St Louis (including Missouri
Science and Technology, Kansas State University, University of Kansas,
University of Notre Dame, and the University of Oklahoma). The NMR system will
play a key, connecting role in advancing fundamental knowledge in critical
technology areas while promoting diversity and STEM education at multiple
educational levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquired system is a commercial
AVANCE NEO 400 MHz NMR spectrometer uniquely designed and equipped to acquire
in-situ NMR spectra simultaneously from solid, liquid, and/or gas analytes at
high-temperatures (up to 250 °C), high-pressures (up to 400 bar at 20 °C), or
high-T,P conditions (up to 225 bar at 250 °C). The greater St. Louis
metropolitan region does not have an ssNMR facility with these capabilities. The
spectrometer is designed for magic-angle spinning (MAS) solid-state NMR (ssNMR)
across a range of NMR-active species for conventional (ex-situ) NMR studies and
for in-situ MAS ssNMR capable of analyzing simultaneously gases, liquids, and
solids under such high-T,P conditions. The spectrometer is equipped with a wide-
bore magnet; MAS pneumatic and variable temperature (VT) control with heater
power booster units; VT-stack for high-T experiments; and high-T MAS probe
required for in-situ ssNMR experiments at high-T,P. Access and administrative
support will be provided through the NRF/Jens Lab with instrument management and
oversight coordinated and supported by two advisory committees (a Scientific
Advisory Committee and an Operations and Management Committee). The instrument
will be available to internal and external academic users as well as external
corporate users through a web-based scheduling system. All users will pay hourly
usage fees to support the operation and maintenance of the instrument. This
broadly accessible ssNMR instrument, with its modern commercial console and
high-T,P capabilities, will provide unprecedented opportunities to (1)
familiarize students with this technology—important for their training and
professional development, (2) advance the specific science and engineering
research projects of user groups, and (3) facilitate shared expertise and
catalyze new research partnerships and collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.