* 2117308
* MRI: Acquisition of a Multimodal Collaborative Robot System (MCROS) to Support Cross-Disciplinary Human-Centered Research and Education at Montclair State University
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michelle Zhu, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2024
* USD 321,737.00

This proposal addresses the current need for collaborative robots in hazardous
environments (e.g., hazardous chemical experiments), as well as transmission of
the latest studies in smart manufacturing (where their absence limit knowledge
discovery). Claiming that the role of robots has changed from “robots in a cage
model” to the “human interaction model in a shared environment,” the
investigators aim to acquire a robotic system (MCROS) to support human-centered
science and engineering interdisciplinary research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing two collaborative manipulators, an
omnidirectional mobile base, a control and computing unit, and multimodal human-
robot interfaces (including 3D vision, 3D Lidar, GPS, and F/T sensing), the
investigators expect to make the most efficient use of the MCROS, advancing a
wide range of transformative and diverse research distributed across four
colleges and 12 academic units (departments/institute centering at the institute
MCROS). They cover 5 focus areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Intelligence systems
and advanced computing,&lt;br/&gt;- Ecology and chemistry science,&lt;br/&gt;-
Smart urban agriculture and food science,&lt;br/&gt;- Human factors engineering
and social sciences, and&lt;br/&gt;- Interactive
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MCROS are expected to:&lt;br/&gt;- Provide a
State-of-the-art robot platform to accelerate a wide-range of research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;- Expand innovative collaborative research across diverse
departments and foster potential funding opportunities to exploit and create new
cross-disciplinary knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;- Enable fundamental research in
multiple science and engineering areas utilizing high productivity approaches
enabled by the robot collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;- Establish cost-effective and
high-quality solutions, enabled by the developments in smart manufacturing,
interactive learning, and smart urban agriculture, that in turn is enabled by
the human-robot collaboration model. The institution will offer training and
prepare careers using AI and robotics, “possibly benefitting the national
economy.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.