* 2117287
* MRI: Acquisition of a Modern Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 278,877.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill is acquiring a single crystal X-ray diffractometer (SCXRD) to support
Professor Wei You and colleagues Jeffrey Johnson, Alexander Miller, Jillian
Dempsey and Aleksandr Zhukhovitskiy. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
for the accurate and precise determination of the full three-dimensional
structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides
accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to
neighboring molecules in the crystal lattice. The studies described here impact
many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry,
solar fuel production and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as
collaborators from other regional universities such as the University of North
Carolina Greensboro, North Carolina Central University, Duke University, Elon
University, Davidson College and East Carolina
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this diffractometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
development of chemical reactions and deployment of reaction strategies for the
synthesis of bioactive natural products with an emphasis on sustainable
catalysis. The instrumentation is used in the development of approaches to the
sustainable synthesis of chemical building blocks and fuels and for improving
efficiency in solar fuel production by optimizing fundamental electron transfer
processes. In addition, it benefits studies of high-valent iron-oxo porphyrins
that perform selective hydroxylations of unactivated sp3 hybridized carbon-
hydrogen bonds and studies developing asymmetric methods for enantioselective
synthesis of lactones and hydroxy esters. This diffractometer also benefits the
exploration of catalysis for conjugated polymer synthesis, and the creation of
optoelectronic devices through the development of hybrid
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.