* 2117500
* MRI: Acquisition of an Octet RED96 BioLayer Interferometry Instrument for Multidisciplinary Molecular Interaction Research and Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Hildreth, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 243,000.00

An award is made to South Dakota State University (SDSU) Functional Genomics
Core Facility (FGCF) to acquire and implement an Octet RED96 BioLayer
Interferometry Instrument (BII). This BII will enable researchers and students
from throughout the state of South Dakota (SD) to study biomolecular interaction
rates (i.e. kinetics), including DNA-protein, protein-protein, and protein-small
molecule interactions across a variety of biological system involving existing
and future research projects. The kinetics of these molecular interactions are
the basis for all biological processes, and so quantifying these interactions is
critical for the growth of bioscience research in SD. Understanding the
associated technologies will promote professional development of existing and
future scientists within most biological disciplines. The mission of the FGCF is
to facilitate interdisciplinary gene function research and training in viral,
bacterial, plant and animal systems by providing researchers and educators with
access to and train for cutting-edge molecular technologies. The capabilities
provided by a BII system is not currently available in the FGCF but are needed
by the users of this facility. As a component of the FGCF, the Octet BII will
immediately enhance the collective research efforts from at least three SD
universities involving 15 investigators, 34 graduate students, 28 undergraduate
students, and 6 postdoctoral associates and visiting scientists. These research
efforts are primarily focused on improving human and animal health and
minimizing the environmental impact of crop production. Teachers from the SD
institutions have also committed to incorporating BII technologies into several
graduate and undergraduate courses. The FGCF will be responsible for also
promoting the utilization of these technologies into various SD research
programs within all colleges, universities and emerging companies within the
region. This instrument will also allow BII technologies to be incorporated into
ongoing outreach programs, such as high-school teacher workshops, training
programs for Native American students through the SDSU Wokini Initiative and
summer undergraduate research experiences through REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a wide variety of projects ready to use
this instrument with studies ranging from nitrogen fixation in cyanobacteria, to
the symbiotic microbe relationships in agricultural plants, to the optimizing
functional components within mammalian immune systems, and various virus-
receptor specific interactions. This instrument will enhance strengths among
emerging research entities (e.g. the Biochemical Spatiotemporal NeTwork Resource
(BioSNTR) and 2D material Biofilm Engineering Science and Technology (2DBEST)
research centers established to investigate the sophisticated molecular circuits
involved in cell signaling using advanced imaging and molecular biology
technologies) by adding a workflow to quantitative measure and kinetically
characterize biomolecular interactions in various living systems. The BioSNTR
was the focus of a previous a NSF EPSCOR RII program entitled “The 2020 Vision:
Building Research, Education, and Innovation Partnerships for South Dakota", but
it's activities are ongoing through new projects that will be facilitated by
this instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.