* 2117661
* MRI: Acquisition of a Robotic Joint Simulator for In-vitro Testing of the Musculoskeletal System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Trevor Lujan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 262,493.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
robotic joint simulator (simulator) that can apply physiological loading and
kinematic conditions to cadaveric or prosthetic joints, including the knee, hip,
shoulder, and spine. As the only robotic system of its kind in the Northwest
region of the United States, this instrument will enable researchers at Boise
State University, as well as partnering universities and hospitals, to study the
mechanical origins of pervasive and debilitating disorders in the human
musculoskeletal system, and to develop and evaluate treatment and prevention
strategies for these disorders. The robotic system will stimulate cross-college
and inter-disciplinary collaborative research between engineers, biologists,
local clinicians, and orthopaedic device companies. The team will integrate the
instrument into five undergraduate and graduate courses to engage students in
hands-on experiential learning activities. In addition, the simulator will
provide real-world training opportunities for the large cohort of undergraduate
and graduate students actively involved in musculoskeletal research projects at
Boise State, with a majority of these students from groups underrepresented in
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental knowledge gaps currently exist in
how human movement leads to musculoskeletal disorders, and what clinical
strategies are best able to prevent and treat these disorders. The acquired
instrument can address these gaps by recreating the complex six degrees of
freedom loads and motions that human joints experience on a daily basis. The
simulator will enable potentially-transformative research on tissue-level
strains repetitive joint loads that lead to injury of the meniscus and
cartilage, joint kinematics associated with knee instability, specimen-specific
patellar and soft tissue loads that lead to patellar dislocation, and cellular-
level loads and corresponding cell response that stimulate osteogenesis in bone
marrow analogs. Further, data obtained from the simulator can be used to
validate the accuracy of computational joint models that can guide patient-
specific surgical interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.