* 2117078
* MRI: Acquisition of Electroencephalography Equipment for the Study of the Neuroplasticity of Language and Cognitive Processes in Bilingualism and Multilingualism
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eve Higby, California State University, East Bay Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 258,811.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Major Research Instrumentation
grant supports the acquisition of a state-of-the-art electroencephalography
(EEG) system (ActiCHamp Plus 64-channel active electrode system, BrainVision
LLC) that will be used to non-invasively measure electrical activity generated
by populations of neurons with very precise timing accuracy. The acquisition of
this EEG equipment will permit cross-disciplinary collaborations among faculty
at several institutions throughout California to study the neural processes that
support language and cognitive processes in bi-/multilingual adults, and how
these processes change across the lifespan in response to new experiences or
injury (i.e., neuroplasticity). Interdisciplinary approaches are critical to the
advancement of our understanding of the complex mechanisms in the mind and brain
because the complexity of these processes requires perspectives from
developmental science, cognitive science, language science, cognitive aging, and
neurolinguistics, among others. The new equipment will be used to train a
diverse student population in cognitive neuroscience research methods and the
study of the neuroplasticity of communication, thereby promoting access to
careers in basic science, clinical research, and applied settings. California
State University East Bay is a Hispanic-Serving and Asian American &amp; Pacific
Islander-Serving Institution, drawing first-generation and minority students
from the diverse Bay Area community who are historically underrepresented in
these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite recent advances in the basic neural
changes associated with experience-dependent brain plasticity, our understanding
of the structural and functional neural plasticity associated with language and
cognitive functioning across the lifespan, and in response to injury, is still
limited. The study of bilingualism and multilingualism provides a unique window
into these processes; managing two language systems and flexibly switching
between them engages the linguistic and cognitive control systems in unique
ways, shaping the neural structures that underlie language and cognition.
Research activities enabled by the EEG equipment include investigating neural
activity associated with a) second language learning in adulthood and the
regulation of the native language, b) formal instruction in a heritage language,
c) language mixing practices in dense bilingual communities, d) the involvement
of the left and right cerebral hemispheres in bilingualsâ€™ judgments of learning,
e) the preservation of cognitive abilities in aging bilinguals, and f) the
connectivity of various brain regions associated with language and cognitive
processing in bilinguals with aphasia, a language disorder resulting from
neurological damage. Moreover, by investigating individual differences among
bilinguals in factors such as age of second-language acquisition, language
proficiency, and language use patterns, the researchers can explore how the
brain responds to diverse language experiences in childhood and adulthood. These
projects investigate the neural underpinnings of language and cognition across a
broad spectrum of adults across the lifespan, both neurologically healthy and
those with neurological damage. EEG allows us to study the online neural
processes that lead to the language and cognitive behaviors characteristic of
different language users, whose diversity is critical for developing
generalizable theories of language and cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.