* 2117502
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Brilliance X-Ray Diffractometer for Fundamental Materials and Catalysis Research and Education at Howard University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Raymond Butcher, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 378,682.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
dual-source single-crystal x-ray diffractometer at Howard University, a
Historically Black University (HBCU). This capability invigorates fundamental
materials and catalysis research at Howard University, offering application
opportunities in extending the benefits of single-crystal x-ray diffraction (SC-
XRD) analysis to non-crystalline systems such as liquids and amorphous solids,
decomposition of chemical warfare agents, analyte detection, energy storage,
fossil energy conversion, molecular switches, and memory storage. SC-XRD is one
of the most powerful techniques available to determine molecular structure. By
shining a focused x-ray beam on a crystal, one can determine how atoms are
connected in a molecule, how these atoms are spatially oriented, and how
molecules are packed together in a crystal. Knowledge of atomic and molecular
arrangement allows for a better understanding of how molecules function. This
can ultimately lead to designing new materials, to revealing how living
organisms operate, and to developing new therapeutics to alleviate human
suffering. The strength of the generated x-ray beams permits rapid analysis of
challenging samples. This instrument creates and fortifies existing
collaborations and enhances research capability in the Mid-Atlantic region. The
diffractometer also strengthens chemical education at Howard University and
provides trainees a foundation to use advanced facilities at US national
laboratories. These activities inspire underrepresented minorities to pursue
chemistry and crystallography leading to further diversification of the national
academic, governmental, and industrial workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
acquired high-brilliance single-crystal x-ray diffractometer features dual
microfocus Mo and Cu sources with multilayer optics, a pixel array detector that
operates in a shutterless data acquisition mode, and a temperature control
system for data collection within a range of 80–400 K. The dual-source
configuration allows for the rapid collection of high-quality diffraction data
to perform detailed analyses of microcrystalline and powder samples. The high-
flux monochromatic x-rays permits the analysis of weakly-diffracting
microcrystals. The projects that benefit from the new instrument involves the
study of: (1) novel metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) as preformed crystalline
matrices for use in molecular structure elucidation / mechanistic investigations
involving non-crystalline compounds through the “crystalline sponge method”, (2)
carboranyl ligand design for catalysis in applications such as the decomposition
of chemical warfare agents (CWA), (3) anisotropic nanoparticle composite
synthesis for use in analyte detection through surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy, (4) block copolymer strength for applications in dielectric energy
storage, (5) ligand synthesis for iron(II) oxide core-shell microparticle
generation through atmospheric pressure metal-organic chemical vapor deposition
(AP-MOCVD) for application in fossil energy conversion processes, (6)
investigation of spin crossover complexes for application in switches and memory
storage, and (7) design of catalytic sequential processes to derivatize
heterocyclic scaffolds for application in creating new spin crossover materials
and drug-like molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.