* 2117699
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alena Kubatova, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 438,862.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of North Dakota is acquiring a
400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with liquid
nitrogen cooled probe to support research of Guodong Du and colleagues Mikhail
Golovko, Alena Kubatova, Chad Wocken, and Feng Xiao. This spectrometer allows
research in a variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions
of significant economic importance, as well as permitting study of chemically
and biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. The probe uses nitrogen-cooled radiofrequency coils that deliver
greatly enhanced sensitivity. Access to a state-of-the-art NMR spectrometer is
essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is
an integral part of teaching as well as research and research training of
undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this
institution and the instrument will also serve collaborators from tribal
colleges and other neighboring institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award of
a 400 MHz NMR spectrometer with sensitivity-enhancing cryoprobe is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels at the University of North Dakota
(UND) and at collaborating institutions. Research projects at UND that is
expected to especially benefit from this instrument include the characterization
of biodegradable materials synthesized from renewable resources and the
construction of two-dimensional polymeric materials prepared from renewable
materials using photo-energy. The instrumentation for the characterization of
lignin and its degradation products as well as to structurally characterize
synthesized aminophosphines and related bidentate ligands for palladium. In
addition, the new high field NMR instrument will allow for the characterization
of species obtained by converting flare gas to carbon products using hybrid
plasma and catalyst reactors and to assist researchers in developing and
engineering polymeric membranes for gas separation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.