* 2117014
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Michael Mann, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 02/28/2023
* USD 252,841.00

This NSF MRI acquisition will assist the University of North Dakota (UND) in
acquiring an Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) in support of multi-disciplinary
research of national interest. The AFM has wide applications among faculty from
the science, engineering and medical fields. It will be used to advance
materials that can be used for prosthetics and surgical devices and to help
develop new biodegradable plastics and pavement materials. It will be used in
the development of renewable energy systems and to enhance the capture of
carbon. This acquisition directly impacts the careers of the eight primary
participants in this proposal, including two female, one Native American, and
one first-year faculty member. Users include faculty from the United Tribes
Technical College (UTTC). This proposed research activities will enhance
enrollment in STEM disciplines and prepare students for STEM careers. The
instrument will support faculty members from three separate colleges and
approximately 25 graduate and 35 undergraduate students, including students who
are women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bruker
NanoWizard 4XP AFM to be acquired features high-resolution imaging and
quantitative nanomechanic capabilities available for use with both top view and
inverted optical microscopy, crucial to the co-PIs with life and materials
science projects. PeakForce Tapping (PFT) based image acquisition techniques
enable control of imaging forces at the pN-level, increasing resolution.
Damaging lateral forces are eliminated, enabling high resolution scanning on
soft and fragile samples, even in liquid, making it ideal for both materials
research and biological samples. The minimum lateral force component of the PFT
makes it capable of imaging loosely bound samples on a substrate; therefore, the
use of a denaturing fixative or complicated surface chemistry for sample
fixation can be avoided. These features allow the team to study the correlation
between a polymer’s structure and its physical properties, examine the organic
matter in shale plays to determine the mechanisms of expulsion and storage of
hydrocarbons, examine how the incorporation of magnetic atoms affects the
thermoelectric properties of materials, and to investigate the physical and
chemical interactions between specific antibodies and antimicrobial coatings for
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.