* 2117439
* MRI: Acquisition of Artificial Intelligence Super Computer (AISC) for Accelerating Scientific Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Vipin Chaudhary, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 694,449.00

The project funds the acquisition of an Artificial Intelligence Super Computer
(AISC) which will enable researchers, entrepreneurs, educators, and policymakers
to leverage previously unimaginable resources to make intelligence-¬informed
decisions from data. AISC will enable transformative advances in myriad
scientific, engineering, and healthcare fields that rely on artificial
intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) techniques and high-performance
computing (HPC) technologies. AISC will support researchers from across Case
Western Reserve University and their collaborating institutions. The spectrum of
research enabled by AISC can be classified into four broad themes: (i)
Cyberinfrastructure (CI) and computer science; (ii) material science; (iii)
engineering systems; and (iv) biomedical engineering. In addition to supporting
a broad spectrum of research, the project will build a vibrant multidisciplinary
community around accelerating AI/ML computing and will conduct classes,
tutorials, and workshops to engage undergraduates, graduates, post-docs and
faculty in computer science and discipline sciences within the local Cleveland
area and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AISC adopts Tensor Core graphics
processing units (GPUs) with large, fast, and high bandwidth memory along with
cutting edge technologies such as Non-Volatile Memory Express (NVMe) based
storage, and a high-speed interconnect. AISC can be partitioned into multiple
instances each fully isolated with their own high-bandwidth memory, cache, and
compute cores allowing support of varying size jobs with guaranteed quality of
service (QoS) for every job, optimizing utilization and thereby extending the
reach of AISC to more users. Broader impacts from AISC include not only research
findings and new technologies, but transfer to practice and wide dissemination
of advances to broad communities beyond the CI, AI and specific scientific
domains. To fully realize the project’s broader impact vision, the following
activities are envisioned: (i) Build STEM talent and improve public interest in
science and computing; (ii) Advance discovery and understanding while promoting
teaching, training, and learning; (iii) CI workforce development that is
conversant with AI; (iv) Yearly domain-specific hackathons; and (v) Broaden
participation of underrepresented groups by partnering with multiple major NSF-
sponsored programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.