* 2117190
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Formal Verification Techniques For Microprocessor Security Vulnerabilities and Trojans
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sudarshan Srinivasan, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 352,167.00

Microprocessors are circuits used to execute software programs and are used in
important applications such as financial systems,ˇmedical devices, cars,ˇpower
plants etc. Recently a method called Spectre was found that could leak private
data from modern microprocessors. Several variations of Spectre have also been
discovered. Formal verification is a set of techniques that use mathematical
proofs to check if a design behaves correctly. Many such formal
verificationˇtechniques have been developed for microprocessors. The goal of
this project is to extend these formal verification techniques to check if
microprocessor designs are vulnerable to Spectre and its variations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of the project are the development
of formal properties to check invulnerability of microprocessor designs to
Spectre, Meltdown, and related security flaws. The checking of the properties
will also flag bugs or trojans that can induce these flaws. The project will
also study and develop refinement-maps, microprocessor-specific abstractions,
invariants, compositional reasoning, and functional instantiation techniques
required to ensure efficient and scalable verification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities of the project are in themselves
beneficial to society. Microprocessors are used pervasively and security is
becoming a big hassle in this expansion. In addition, the project will aim to
improve participation of women and underrepresented minorities in Computer
Engineering by offering two-week summer courses on "Digital Electronics and
Computer Design" with lab experience for high school students. The novel idea
proposed to improve recruitment and participation will be to exploit the wide
coverage of Spectre and Meltdown in the news media and the associated interest
generated among students in microprocessor design and Computer
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to generate the
following types of data: (1) Processor models and verification properties; (2)
Python scripts written to generate verification benchmarks; (3) Papers that will
be published in conferences and journals; and (4) Teaching materials such as
power point slides, instruction manuals, and assignments. The data will be
available on the project web page (see link below) hosted by North Dakota State
University as long as it is of use either for research or teaching purposes to
academics or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.