* 2117009
* Multimodal Signaling and Communication Analysis of World Leaders
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alistair Windsor, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

This project examines multimodal communication among world leaders from a
multicultural, interdisciplinary perspective using the Embodied Cognition (EC)
framework. This framework demonstrates how multimodal processes, such as
discourse, the acoustic production of speech, and nonverbal signals such as
gestures and facial expressions, are integrated into human communication. The EC
approach will be especially beneficial for understanding politics in opaque
environments, like authoritarian regimes, where it is difficult to observe true
preferences and priorities of leaders. The PIs' proposed research represents a
novel combination of computational linguistic analysis, multimodal signals
derived from audio and video analysis, and biometric audience data. To date,
multimodal analyses have not been deployed comprehensively on a representative
international corpus and extant research relies primarily on corpora from the
English-speaking world. Given seismic changes in the international system, this
analysis provides a way for scholars to better understand problems like state
stability, conflict processes, and regime transition. A multimodal approach to
analyzing the international system will help us know more than what leaders’
words alone convey. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project facilitates the
understanding of the importance of multimodal signals by providing a data set,
pedagogical materials, and academic publications to translate the meaning of
multimodal inputs through the Security and Preparedness program. Differences in
culture and language may lead to misunderstandings that can escalate to security
crises. By evaluating different communication channels, the PIs propose a
clearer picture of countries’ motivations and deeper insight into their
preferences and beliefs. Using biophysical indicators alongside language, this
project substantially improves the scientific community’s understanding of how
multimodal channels work in concert with language to convey meaning, especially
in international and multicultural contexts. To accomplish this work the
collaborators in this project prioritize hiring and training women and
minorities in social and computational social sciences, and STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.