* 2117129
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Teaching at Missouri State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nikolay Gerasimchuk, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 342,000.00

This award to Missouri State University at Springfield is supported by the Major
Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs to
improve research by Dr. Tiglet Besara and colleagues Nikolay Gerasimchuk, Gary
Michelfelder, Fei Wang and Natasha DeVore. The institution is acquiring a single
crystal diffractometer difffractometer (SCXRD). In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, geology and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry at this institution as well other departments such as Physics,
Astronomy, Materials Science, Geography, Geology and Planning. The
instrumentation provides direct research experience for students in a variety of
courses distributed in various departments. The institution serves as a hub for
materials characterization and provides crystallography services free of charge
to nearby institutions such as University of Missouri-Kansas City, Missouri
University of Science and Technology, University of Arkansas and the University
of Central Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The science enabled
by this instrument provides relevant societal benefits through the development
of new materials to address energy production, new catalysts to improve the
synthesis of commodity and industrial chemicals. The instrumentation is also
used for studying the growth of functional and quantum materials and exploring
and developing intermetallic materials for energy related applications. In
addition, it benefits structural biology studies of heme orphan cytochrome P450
and peroxidase proteins and the characterization of synthesized oxime-based
ligands and their metal complexes for possible biomedical applications. The
diffractometer is also used to characterize minerals and volcanic materials, and
halogen and hydrogen bonding in carbon-hydrogen compounds to manipulate arylene
ethynylene structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.