* 2117631
* MRI: Development of 350 GHz instrumentation to characterize Galactic dust polarization with CCAT-prime
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jason Austermann, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,346,976.00

This project looks to build a new instrument for the Fred Young Submillimeter
Telescope (FYST) in Chile that is part of the CCAT-prime project. The instrument
being developed will be installed on FYST to measure light at a wavelength of
0.9 millimeters (350 GHz). The measurements will help astronomers learn about
properties of dust and magnetic fields in the Milky Way galaxy. Understanding
the Milky Way better will help researchers remove those signals from the
foreground to study more distant light from the early Universe. Combining these
results with other data will help understand the evolution of the Universe soon
after the Big Bang. New research opportunities for students from
underrepresented backgrounds and from community colleges are
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument for FYST will enable 350 GHz
polarization measurements with the CCAT-prime project. It will be within an
instrument module that includes three arrays of kinetic inductance detectors
(KIDs) and will provide the first polarization-sensitive measurements to exceed
the current best 350 GHz data from the Planck satellite mission. This will be
one of the largest scale deployments of KIDs yet, which will help advance this
important technology for future applications. The instrument module will be
deployed in the Prime-Cam receiver cryostat on the six-meter aperture FYST at an
elevation of 18,400 feet on Cerro Chajnantor in Chile. Improved 350 GHz
polarization measurements are important for advancing our understanding of
Galactic dust parameters, magnetic field properties, and molecular clouds where
star formation occurs. Uncertainties in these Galactic foreground sources limit
constraints on the amplitude of primordial gravitational waves. Improving
measurements of galactic foregrounds has the potential to reduce bias in future
constraints on early Universe inflation. Developing and deploying the proposed
instrumentation in a first light receiver for the CCAT-prime project will
provide opportunities for training young researchers and lead to exciting
astrophysical measurements from one of the best sub-millimeter sites on
earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.