* 2117288
* Clean Growth and Comparative Advantage
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Konstantinos Arkolakis, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 190,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been significant progress in renewable
energy technology in recent decades. The remarkable decline of renewable costs
means that in much of the world, new construction of solar and wind projects is
now cheaper than continuing to pay the generation costs of fossil fuel assets to
produce electricity. As comparative advantage in energy use evolves, regional
and country specialization in specific sectors could change as energy costs
fall. These developments will likely affect the entire global production
network. This research is a major endeavor to trace and quantify the
implications of falling power prices for growth, production, and trade at both
global and regional scale. The project aims to utilize rich data on global power
grids, energy capital and renewable resources at a scale that has not been
utilized before in economic modeling. The results of the project will have
important implications for renewable electricity technology introduction and
distribution, which is vastly different that the fossil-fuel dependent system.
An additional aim of the project is to develop a cost benefit framework that
will serve as a roadmap to policymakers and the public, assessing the effects of
technological innovations in energy on the worldâ€™s ability to meet climate
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a comprehensive
macroeconomic, cross-country and regional analysis of renewable electricity
technology introduction and spatial distribution, using detailed granular data.
The data will be drawn from high-resolution satellite images and massive, open-
source grid mapping projects. The data will be harmonized to make suitable for
scientific and economic modeling, allowing a truly global view of the world
energy system. This information will be combined with a new spatial growth
framework featuring forward-looking decisions on energy adoption with a rich
geographic structure, as well as cross-border trade in power and goods. The
research aims to evaluate how the adoption of renewable energy will change
global production and trade patterns given the specialization of countries and
regions in different industries. The proposed theoretical framework is rich, yet
ideally simple enough to be combined with earth system models that describe the
complex interactions that lead to emissions and climate
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.