* 2117955
* MRI: Acquisition of a Benchtop X-ray Absorption and Emission Spectrometer for Sustainable Energy Research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Matthew Law, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 499,488.00

This award facilitates the acquisition of a benchtop X-ray absorption fine
structure (XAFS) and X-ray emission spectrometer (XES) for the development of
novel functional nanomaterials for breakthrough energy applications including
net-zero carbon reduction, solar energy conversion, sensors, and advanced
nuclear energy systems. The XAFS/XES instrument will provide a broad fundamental
understanding of nanomaterials research and extend the dissemination of the
research by providing atomistic-level understanding, thus supporting results of
existing user facilities at University of California, Irvine (UCI). The
instrument will be used in undergraduate and graduate level courses and
workshops to perform experiments with the students actively participating in
data collection, which will allow them to integrate theory and advanced data
analysis. Through the summer programs at UCI local high school and undergraduate
students will participate in facility tours and workshops to learn about various
applications of the instrument in energy research and how spectroscopic
techniques are pioneering the developments in nanomaterials research. The
outreach efforts will attract students from diverse backgrounds into UCI by
providing them with an opportunity to do research and encouraging them to pursue
a STEM degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The XAFS/XES instrument will allow users to
perform cutting-edge research on the design of functional nanomaterials. The
system will be used to answer fundamental questions across a broad range of
disciplines and applications, including CO2 activation, production of fuels and
chemicals from renewable energy sources, hydrocarbon cracking, chemical looping
combustion, photoelectrochemical production of oxygen from water, novel cathode
materials, electrolysis cells, novel battery materials, electrochemical
synthesis of chemicals, platinum group metal-free catalysts for oxygen reduction
reaction, lanthanide-transition metal complex oxides for electrochemical cells,
next-generation chemiresistive sensing platforms, advanced quantum computers,
modern nuclear fuel candidates and deep geological disposal of nuclear waste.
The in-situ and in-operando capabilities of the system will provide fundamental
information about the local dynamic environment of a material along with the
information about phase, surface chemistry, structural change, and adsorbate
chemistry. This new instrument will make XAFS a workhorse technique for the
development of advanced nanomaterials in sustainable energy production, which is
expected to lead to significant scientific advances in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.