* 2117225
* MRI: Acquisition of Photothermal Infrared Raman Microscope for High Resolution Label-free Chemical Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Olesik, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 339,084.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. The Ohio State University is
acquiring a photothermal Infrared-Raman microscope Fourier Transform Infrared
(FTIR) imaging microscope to support the research of Zachary Schultz and
colleagues Susan Olesik, Luis Rodriguez-Saona, Vicky Doan-Nguyen and Barbara
Dunlap. This instrument facilitates research in the areas of biochemistry and
cellular processes, electrochemistry, catalysis, and analytical chemistry. In
general, the infrared and Raman spectroscopies measure the intensity of the
absorbed and scattered radiation when it interacts with a sample, respectively.
When radiation interacts with a compound, the molecules can begin to vibrate or
rotate at certain frequencies. In a heterogeneous sample, this powerful
analytical tool helps identify chemical composition qualitatively. The
information can also be used to create an image of the material composition in a
sample. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and teaching efforts
of students at all levels in many departments as well as provides accessibility
for use at nearby institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award to acquire a
photothermal infrared-Raman microscope is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels, especially in chemistry and biochemistry. Studies
focused on chemically imaging sub-cellular microenvironments such as drug
targeting and lycopene metabolim in cellular models are pursued as are those
focused on using IR photoimaging for energy storage applications such as multi-
functional cathodes for electrochemical enhancement in Li-S batteries and
tracking polysulfude suppresion. Other applications involving characterizing
polymer nanoparticle composites and high throughput diagnostic screening are
also being pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.