* 2117621
* MRI: Acquisition of a New X-Ray Diffractometer to Advance Research and Education in Primarily Undergraduate/Minority Serving Institutions within the District of Columbia
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xueqing Song, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 321,627.00

This award to the University of the District of Columbia (UDC) is supported by
the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation
programs to support and improve research by Dr. Xueqing Song and colleagues Lei
Wang, Ozlem Dilek, Uche Udeochu and Alexandra Taraboletti. This institution is
acquiring a single crystal X-ray difffractometer (SCXRD). In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, geology and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry at this Historically Black College and University (HBCU) as well as
the other institution in the DC area such as the Catholic University of America,
American University, Gallaudet University and Trinity Washington University. The
instrumentation provides direct research experience for students in a variety of
courses distributed in various departments. A one-week summer institute is
designed to provide UDC and partner institutions formal and hands-on training in
crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The science enabled by
this instrument provides relevant societal benefits by associating biofunctional
and structural studies of the metalloenzymatic targets of the copper chelator
cuprizone that inhibits monoamine oxidase and causes liver and brain damage and
by exploring interfacial phenomena of materials and structure-activity dynamics
of biologically significant compounds. The instrumentation is also used for
studying interactions between triorganotin complexes and thiol containing
protease and fluorescent probes for imaging oxidative stress-induced lipid
peroxidation products of macrophages. The diffractometer is also employed to
carry out investigations of spin crossover complexes and regolith-based
geopolymerization for in-situ resource utilization. The instrument also serves
researchers studying antibacterial, antiviral agents and lipoprotein metabolism
modulators and those analyzing mineral precipitation techniques for biomediated
ground improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.