* 2117681
* MRI: Acquisition of Cutting-Edge GPU and MPI Nodes for the Interdisciplinary Pitt Center for Research Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lillian Chong, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,187,606.00

Computational science and engineering spans research and education across many
disciplines, and state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure resources are needed to
tackle large problems and enable innovative strategies in data-enabled science
and engineering. This project will greatly expand the interdisciplinary
University of Pittsburgh Center for Research Computing (CRC), the core facility
for scientific computing and research at Pitt. CRC supports the work of over 800
users in 59 departments across the entire university. The new expanded hardware
will advance both undergraduate and graduate courses and educational experience
across a similarly broad range of departments and courses. These expanded
resources will enable Pitt to expand a synergy between research and education at
all levels, reaching beyond the university to faculty, staff, and students at
Howard University, other historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs),
and many undergraduate faculty and students both regionally and nationwide. The
new resources will also expand scientific computing to students in the
Pittsburgh Public School district, including nearby Pittsburgh Science and
Technology Academy and Pittsburgh Public Allderdice, both urban schools with
diverse student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded resources will
consist of 16 state-of-the-art graphics processing unit (GPU) computing nodes
including NVIDIA Ampere A100 GPU accelerators. Each GPU node will be ~2x faster
than previous generation GPUs and 14-50x faster on scientific computing software
than current CPU nodes, and will enable increased machine learning productivity.
An additional 36 state-of-the-art MPI nodes containing AMD “Milan” cores and
high system memory will enable complex computational simulations. The
availability of the new resource will dramatically expand the access and
opportunity to GPU and message passing interface (MPI) computing, offering
significant speed improvements for an immense range of scientific computing,
from machine learning and big data, to quantum chemistry, protein molecular
dynamics, energy conversion, nanoparticle catalysis design, weather/wind
forecasting, astronomical data analysis, atomistic tunneling electron microscopy
measurements, and computer vision. Beyond simple acceleration, the resources
will enable transformative research with vastly more accurate weather grids, new
machine learning surrogates for quantum chemical calculations of molecular and
materials energies and properties, rare-event sampling in protein folding and
binding, fMRI neuroscience, and next generation digital astronomy. The resources
will immediately benefit over 30 NSF-funded research groups, leveraging over $18
million in research and training grants. The resources will support research in
all areas including Chemistry, Computational Biology, Chemical Engineering,
Materials Science, Psychology, Astrophysics, Weather Forecasting, Computer
Science, and research centers focusing on energy, sustainability, and other key
areas of science and engineering. Workshops and courses associated with the new
resources will focus on adapting existing software and developing new software
for MPI and GPU-computing including a wide range of machine learning methods
enabled by the transformation in numeric processing with these expanded
resources. These resources will be shared with collaborators at Howard
University, other HBCUs, and with regional and national undergraduate schools to
broaden participation in computational science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.