* 2117609
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next Generation Nanofabrication Dual-beam Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 699,038.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
supports the acquisition of a next-generation dual-beam nanofabrication platform
for rapid prototyping of materials and devices that enable quantum computing,
next-generation electronics, and the study of novel soft/hard matter systems.
This instrument enhances intellectual output by empowering researchers to make
new nanoscale devices and to modify materials, with greatly improved fidelity
and reproducibility, which are needed to bridge the gap between fundamental
science and engineering. The tool enables research through its novel ability to
fabricate structures with various liquid metals and is paired with scanning
electron microscopy for dynamic inspection of the fabrication process.
Furthermore, the integration of an ultra-precise stage will provide wafer scale
stitching-error-free continuous writing of large-device structures that was
previously not possible. Also, the equipped nanomanipulator can be used to test
circuits immediately after fabrication and adjust the patterning process
accordingly. The instrument will be included in several ongoing activities,
where K-12 students can experience scientific instrumentation first-hand. For
example, because traditional approaches to bring new students into science have
only been partially successful, the centerpiece of the educational outreach
program targets young students and the public by stimulating interest in science
through the visual arts using nanofabrication inspired by morpho butterflies.
With the broad spectrum of materials and systems that can be studied with the
instrument, the acquisition will impact research across departments at MIT and
the New England region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Direct nanoscale fabrication methods have led to dramatic
advancements in the development of new devices, modification of surfaces, and
the integration of novel or dissimilar materials. Advances in focused ion beams
(FIBs) formed from liquid metal alloy ion sources (LMAIS), in particular, have
great expanded direct-write capacities, and can now be exploited for the
nanofabrication of nanoplasmonics, fiber-tip optics, quantum devices,
electron/x-ray optics. In contrast with Ga-only FIB instruments, the LMAIS
provides Si, Ge, or Au beams, which can be used for milling of material with the
smallest possible linewidth as well as implanting qubits at targeted locations
without the need for masks or pre-processing. This patterning precision is
enhanced by simultaneous field emission scanning electron microscopy imaging for
in situ fabrication inspection, the inclusion of gas injection sources (Pt, C)
for patterning and sample protection, a laser interferometer stage for ultra-
precise positioning, wafer scale stitching-error-free continuous writing, a
nanomanipulator, and electron beam lithography capabilities. This instrument
will thus accelerate intellectual output by empowering researchers to make new,
nanoscale devices and modify materials, with greatly improved fidelity and
reproducibility, which are needed to bridge the gap between fundamental science
and engineering. In terms of research accessibility, the microscopy will be
managed by Characterization.nano, a shared experimental facility, which is part
of the newly built MIT.nano center. This centrally located facility functions as
a cross pollination hub and brings together expertise in nanofabrication,
electron microscopy, teaching, and maintenance. This open access center serves
local internal and external users, providing training and hands-on usage of the
instruments, and is open to researchers across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.