* 2117626
* MRI: Acquisition of a controllable pulse transcranial magnetic stimulator with robotic positioning and integrated EEG / EMG for engineering and neuroscience research and education
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dana Brooks, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 417,913.00

Understanding the brain’s role in behaviors such as movement, cognition and
emotion is paramount to progress in science and engineering, and to advancing
improvements in health and wellness. Invasive approaches in animals cannot be
readily adapted to humans, creating a technological barrier to causal study of
the brain in awake behaving humans. One promising approach in humans,
transcranial magnetic stimulation, uses magnetic pulses to noninvasively and
safely modulate brain activity. However, stimulators modulate brain cells
(neurons) indiscriminately, which prevents studying how distinct neurons drive
behavior. This award will facilitate the acquisition of a cutting-edge
stimulator that allows scientists to modulate specific neuron populations in the
brain. The system includes an integrated positioning robot for precise
localization and recording devices that read physiological signals from the
brain or muscles to objectively quantify the effects on different neural
populations and behavior. This instrumentation will enable discoveries that will
catalyze new research in the study of brain and behavior. Crucially, the
instrumentation paired with the proposed education plan will create unique
training opportunities for students in STEM and health science, lowering the
barrier of entry for underrepresented students, including persons of color and
women. The project leverages Northeastern University’s experiential education
model and various diversity/inclusion initiatives to support research by diverse
(under)graduate and K-12 students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes the acquisition of a controllable-pulse transcranial magnetic
stimulator capable of differentially modulating specific neural populations in
the human brain, with integrated robotic positioning and electroencephalography
and electromyography recording. This instrumentation will be the only such
system in the Northeastern US. As part of the Northeastern University Non-
Invasive Brain Stimulation Center, it will enable unprecedented basic science
research into human neurophysiology and brain-behavior relationships, and
significant advances in fundamental engineering research in stimulator
development, automated robotic positioning, stimulation-induced artifact removal
in physiological recordings, closed-loop stimulation, and artificial
intelligence / machine learning algorithms. Allowing researchers to control
stimulus waveforms and to differentially activate distinct neural populations
will enable a scientific scope of work that will transcend multiple disciplines
including motor and affective neuroscience, cognition, memory, development,
aging, and biophysical modeling of brain physiology. The proposed diversity and
education plan enabled by this instrument will lower barriers for
underrepresented minority students to engage in cutting-edge experiential STEM
education. The project’s impact will be profound on science and technology
innovation, as well as in training a new, diverse, interdisciplinary workforce
to drive this field forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.