* 2117214
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research at New Mexico Highlands University
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Tatiana Timofeeva, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,229.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project is jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Scientists at
New Mexico Highlands University, a Hispanic-serving institution in rural
Northern New Mexico, have acquired a Raman instrument. The instrument is both a
microscope and a spectrometer, utilizing laser light to obtain valuable
information about vibrational structure of molecules and crystals on the
micrometer scale. Such information helps scientists to understand the
relationship between structure and properties of various man-made materials or
minerals as well as to assist in the development of novel, improved materials
for semiconductor and pharmaceutical applications. This Raman instrument is also
used to provide state-of-the-art training to graduate and undergraduate students
in research and education. In addition, this instrument is available to other
researchers in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The key features of this instrument are: (i) microscopic
sampling; (ii) an ability to perform measurements over a wide range of sample
temperatures (77 K to 873 K); (iii) a high spectral resolution; and (iv)
multiple excitation lasers. Scientists employ this Raman microscope in a broad
range of research projects, such as structural studies of organic and
organometallic materials with promising photoelectronic properties; relating the
crystal structure to pharmaceutically and industrially relevant properties in
substituted acetamides, lactams and cyclic Imides; and multimode identification
and dating of minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.