* 2117297
* Collaborative Research: Intermediaries and Product Selection in the Municipal Bond Market
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Karam Kang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 237,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State and local governments rely on municipal
bonds to finance investments in infrastructure. They are often complex financial
products, specifying a variety of special provisions, such as flexible
maturities and unique redemption clauses. Such provisions in a bond may be
tailored to the financial needs of investors and the issuing local government,
but they may also make it difficult to evaluate and compare alternatives. Using
detailed data on bond transactions, the project will quantify the effects of
bond provisions on market liquidity, intermediary competition, and cost of local
government funding. The insight from this analysis will have implications for
policies on municipal bond market structure, the cost of local government
funding, and infrastructure investment costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will highlight the impact of product attributes on search frictions in the
municipal bond market. The research will document how financial institutions'
dual role as underwriters and dealers may affect product design, steering toward
highly customized and complex products. Exploiting variations in state
regulations to limit government officials' conflicts of interests, the project
will investigate how special provisions in a bond may increase both its
illiquidity and its underwriter’s market power in secondary trades. Building on
these findings, the research will construct and estimate a model of bond
issuance and trades, which accounts for rich heterogeneity in the factors that
affect bond design: Investor demand, dealer costs, and issuer preferences.
Employing the estimated model, the project will quantify market inefficiency and
discuss policy implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.