* 2117338
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer for Research and Training at Central Michigan University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Anja Mueller, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 344,393.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Central Michigan University is acquiring a
500 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer equipped with an automatic
sample loader and a temperature control system to support research of Dr.
Benjamin Swarts and colleagues Anja Mueller, Janice Tomasik, Choon Y Lee and
Wenjun Du. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields such as
those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic importance, as
well as permitting study of chemically and biologically relevant species. In
general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most
powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of
molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific
arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of
interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to
state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out
frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students in
chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as collaborators from
regional community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts studies of carbohydrate/lipid synthesis, creating chemical
tools to study bacteria and generating polysaccharide-based renewable materials.
The instrumentation is also used to search for antioxidant materials obtained
from dendrimer and characterizing products for the synthesis of polymer
(including polysaccharide)-based fuel cells and skin scaffolds. In addition, it
allows the characterization of polymeric nitric oxide release architectures and
exploration of redox enzyme mechanisms. The instrument also serves researchers
creating polymer/dendrimer-based materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.