* 2117811
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) for Multidisciplinary Materials Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Shanthi Iyer, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 422,242.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of an
X-ray Diffractometer (XRD) for microstructural and crystallographic
characterization of powders, thin films, fibers, nanomaterials, polymers and
biomaterials. This instrument will provide critical advanced characterization
capability to twenty four primary faculty from thirteen departments and four
colleges at North Carolina A&amp;T State University and neighboring institutions
to conduct transformative materials research in NSF 10 Big Ideas (Convergence,
Quantum Leap, and Understanding Rules of Life) and in other areas of research
including energy, medicine, and sustainability. This instrument will be housed
in the Joint School of Nanoscience and Nanoengineering (JSNN) core facility,
which is part of Southeastern Nanotechnology Infrastructure Corridor (SENIC)
site in the NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI)
program. In addition, this instrument will be an integral part of teaching,
research training and outreach programs at NCA&amp;T. Combined with other
existing open access facilities at JSNN, this instrument will enhance student
training, productivity and their ability to generate high-quality data for high-
impact publications and contribute to their STEM career success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the XRD instrument will enable transformative
research, research training and the ability to characterize variety of
materials, including powdered catalysts, nanomaterials, polymeric materials,
semiconductors, biomaterials, and thin-films. XRD characterization capabilities
include small- and wide-angle diffraction, reflectometry and transmission
studies, in addition to in-situ studies to track for example, catalyst phase
transitions, modes of catalyst deactivation, or to optimize catalyst synthesis.
In general, the XRD will enable transformative research in areas such as Energy
&amp; Environment, Next-Gen Electronics, Biomedical &amp; Food, and Materials
&amp; Sustainability. Energy &amp; Environmental research span from development
of bi-metallic/multi-metallic nanocatalysts for bioenergy to electrodes for ion
batteries and CO2 electrolysis. Biomedical &amp; Food research span from 3D
printing for enhancing pharmaceutical research to hydrogel studies for better
understanding of brain physiology and food science research to produce healthier
food. Next-Gen Electronics research include GaAsSb nanowires for photodetectors,
titanium oxynitrides for light harvesting, and 2D MoS2 monolayers. Materials
&amp; Sustainability research include hollow fiber bioreactor for wastewater
treatment, cementitious, swine-waste biochar materials, 3D printing of metal-
ceramic composites and mesoporous polymers for sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.