* 2117424
* MRI: Acquisition of Ultra-High Speed Data Characterization System for Convergent Research in Big Data Era
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Anh-Vu Pham, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 475,821.00

The relentless and exponential increase in data generation and processing,
especially real-time data, imposes grand challenges to society and demands
significant research advancements to create new opportunities in the Big Data
Era. To that end, this proposed MRI acquisition project will purchase an ultra-
high speed data characterization system, including a high sampling rate
arbitrary waveform generator for ultra-high speed data generation and a wide
bandwidth, high resolution oscilloscope as the signal analyzer. Besides
significant and long-term impacts in corresponding research fields, this
instrument will foster strategic and long-term collaborations with industry
including new companies with their development of high impact, innovative
products. This instrument will also help train future engineers and scientists
for the fast-growing industries in this field. It will allow new course and
instructional materials to be developed for new/existing courses to bring
advanced and up-to-date knowledge and experience to students. The PIs will
integrate research with education and outreach programs and publish scientific
conference and journal papers to broadly disseminate the research results. The
PIs will further extend outreach to local high schools to inspire local
students, especially minorities to the engineering
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed instrument acquisition of an ultra-
high speed data characterization system will enable advancements over a variety
of research activities at University of California, Davis and nearby companies
and institutions to inspire/materialize innovations across disciplines for long-
term economical and societal impacts. For example, it will support research on
ultra-high speed mm-wave/THz integrated circuits and systems, THz semiconductor
devices and ultra-fast electronics and photonics, micro/nano 2-D
materials/metamaterial based THz devices and circuits, wide bandwidth and
flexible optical networking, data-mining and machine learning, hardware
security, etc. Potential applications include wireless and wireline
communications, internet of things (IoT), artificial intelligence, autonomous
driving, virtual/augmented realities, cyber security, to name just a few.
Besides the impacts in engineering and science research, the instrument will
likely benefit the data analysis and understanding from all scales of human
lives, such as social and behavioral science, medical and biomedical
informatics, environment sensing, life understanding and universe exploration.
In addition, this instrument will also benefit research communities and human
societies in the long run by providing adaptive/agile high-speed
information/data analysis for fast-changing industries and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.