* 2117694
* Source Credibility, Political Identity, and Factual Belief Revision
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jonathan Woon, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 260,944.00

How do people learn about facts and revise their beliefs about the world when
they learn from others who vary in their political identities and expertise? Can
opposing partisans learn effectively from one another? Or do identities
interfere with learning because they increase group-based biases? This research
broadens our understanding of the potential causes of the polarization of
opinion and their cognitive and emotional bases. The research has the potential
to lead to more effective means of reducing the spread of misinformation by
developing more effective interventions to de-bias learning processes and
improve the accuracy of beliefs. As polarized opinions about facts are often at
the core of conflicts over important public policies pertaining to the
environment, health, technology, and economic welfare, this project contributes
knowledge that can increase public support for beneficial policies, the
likelihood of policy conflict resolution, and trust in science. The findings
also have the potential to improve science communication by designing strategies
tailored to address the identity-based biases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to measure partisan source credibility effects on factual
learning and to generate evidence disentangling instrumental and social identity
mechanisms underlying the political and social dimensions of belief revision
processes. The researchers also aim to develop a reliable and simple method for
eliciting the dynamics of belief revision through online surveys. In the
incentivized experimental framework, the team measures a source’s credibility in
terms of the extent to which beliefs change as a function of information from
that source, incorporating sources’ identities and characteristics (with real
people as information sources) into the structure of a belief updating task. The
scholars apply this framework in a series of related studies. Study 1 measures
baseline levels of source credibility as a function of partisanship and examines
how these baseline levels are correlated with attitudinal measures of partisan
identity strength, knowledge, and affective polarization. Study 2 experimentally
tests whether partisan bias results from instrumental or social identity
mechanisms, disentangling cognition from affect. Study 3 extends our framework
to expert sources and beliefs about scientific facts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.