* 2117530
* MRI: Development of a Next-Generation Modular Ion-Trap Quantum Computer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christopher Monroe, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,712,082.00

Quantum computers can tackle some computational problems that are intractable
using conventional computers, ranging from hard optimization problems to the
modeling of physical phenomena such as complex chemistry and advanced materials.
The instrumentation to be developed here will support the design and fabrication
of a next-generation quantum computer system with a modular and scalable
architecture. The new system features an interconnection between two smaller
quantum computers in a way that can be extended to many more modules. This
architecture is based on two clusters of interacting individual atoms controlled
with laser beams, with the interconnection between modules provided by
individual photons in an optical fiber. The goals in this project are to (i)
advance the systems engineering of juxtaposing individual atom quantum memories
with optical fiber interfaces, (ii) show the way toward a large-scale quantum
computer with many modules and controlled with photonic switches, and (iii)
deploy quantum applications and algorithms that exploit the modular connection
pattern of the system. The new quantum computer will be used by local and
visiting scientists and engineers at Duke for running scientific applications in
fields ranging from machine learning and optimization to simulations of
chemistry and many body phenomena in materials and nuclear physics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computers hold great promise for solving many classes of
problems that are intractable using conventional computers. This instrumentation
project will support the design, fabrication, and testing of a next-generation
quantum computer system to be used by the quantum information community for
scientific research. The system is composed of two separated ion trap quantum
computers, each controlled with laser beams and connected with single photons
traversing optical fibers. This modular architecture can be extended to more
than two modules for the scaling to quantum computers large enough to challenge
or supersede the performance of conventional computers when applied to
particular problems. The device envisioned in this project will leverage
existing control technology, ion trap chips, and the latest photonic technology
to build and operate this next generation research quantum computer. The
instrument will be available to scientists and engineers to test quantum
protocols in areas such as molecular and material simulation, quantum error
correction, and quantum machine learning. The use of this device will bring
together scientists and engineers from many disparate areas to co-design quantum
computers to their applications and propel this new form of
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.