* 2117043
* MRI: Acquisition of an ABI 3500xL Genetic Analyzer for the WVU Genomics Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ryan Percifield, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 189,831.00

An award is made to West Virginia University (WVU) to replace and upgrade the
existing Applied Biosystems 3130xL genetic analyzer with the ABI 3500xL,
allowing enhancements to the current services provided by the WVU Genomics and
Bioinformatics Core Facility (WVU-GBCF). Specifically, this replacement will
improve turn-around time, result in higher quality output, and create the
capacity for multiplexing, all of which will strengthen ongoing local and
regional research and teaching efforts. As the state of West Virginiaâ€™s land
grant institution, WVU and the WVU-GBCF are committed to providing training and
support at both the university and statewide levels. There is strong interest in
general genomics-related research and coursework, and as such, the WVU-GBCF
provides numerous cutting-edge hands-on educational and training opportunities
for students from all WVU campuses and the greater Appalachian region.
Specifically, the facility provides training, troubleshooting, and services for
students and instructors where DNA sequencing and/or fragment analysis is
conducted as part of undergraduate laboratory courses. Moreover, the
capabilities and resources provided by the WVU-GBCF are central to numerous
undergraduate and graduate student thesis and dissertation projects ranging from
the genomic responses to climate change in agronomically important crop plants
to the genetics of opioid and psychostimulant abuse, topics of vital relevance
for both West Virginia and the nation. The ABI 3500xL genetic analyzer will
ensure the provision of educational and training opportunities in the
development of a diverse and well-qualified workforce capable of confronting
pressing environmental, medical, and ecological
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WVU is home to a vibrant, productive, and
interdisciplinary research community, with genetic research efforts from a
diverse set of disciplines including biochemistry, plant biology, evolution and
speciation, ecology, wildlife conservation, infectious disease, microbiology,
climate change, pharmacology, and physiology. The resources available at the WVU
Genomics and Bioinformatics Core Facility (WVU-GBCF) provide the high-quality,
affordable, and efficient DNA sequencing, fragment analysis, and cell-line
authentication services that are crucial to the success of genetic and genomic-
related efforts at WVU. Further, the WVU-GBCF supports several universities in
the region and across the state that rely on DNA sequencing and consultation
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.