* 2117780
* MRI: Acquisition of a Three Dimensional Raman Imaging System for the Integrated Science Center of SUNY Geneseo
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kazushige Yokoyama, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 210,132.00

This award to SUNY Geneseo is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation
and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs to support and improve
research by Professor Kazushige Yokoyama and colleagues Jani Lewis, Dori
Farthing, Nicholas Warner and Rabeka Alam. This institution is acquiring a
three-dimensional Raman imaging system. In general, a Raman microscope begins
with a standard optical microscope but then uses a laser to scan the surface of
a sample to implement a chemical image over the whole field of view. The laser
wavelengths probe the surface and produce a spectrum which identifies chemical
components in the material. This gives useful information on the properties of
the components. This is a powerful analytical tool for identifying chemical
composition qualitatively and semi-quantitatively of various materials. It is
being used in several important research areas. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry, biochemistry and geology at this Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI) as well as St John Fisher College. The instrumentation
provides direct research experience for students in a variety of courses
distributed in various departments and other neighboring
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this Raman imaging system is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The science enabled by
this instrument provides relevant societal benefits by directly characterizing
protein folding over a nanoscale metal interface to detect peptide, self-
assembly, delivery, or molecular motor for RNA packaging and by identifying
morphologically similar but chemically different proteins at a cellular
junction. The instrumentation is also used for characterizing the
devitrification process in metallurgical slag to understand potential
environmental impacts of slag disposal and for characterizing Mars analogue
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.