* 2117782
* MRI: Development of a fully automated, 1,000-MicroChemostat microfluidic system for parallel, independent, long-duration, machine-guided experiments
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Eric Spivey, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,810.00

An award is made to Vanderbilt University to develop Genesis, a fully automated
microfluidic system containing 1,000 microchemostats for parallel, independent,
long-duration, machine-guided experiments to study microbial cells. Microbes
such as the baker’s and brewer’s yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae are expected to
play an ever-increasing role in the production of vaccines, cancer therapies and
other pharmaceuticals, food protein, and feedstock for the chemical industry,
and sequestration of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, all areas of pressing
societal need. Genesis will use machine learning and artificial intelligence
(AI) to serve as a “robot scientist” or “self-driving laboratory” to accelerate
the development of mathematical models that describe microbial metabolism and
growth. These will help us understand, and possibly optimize, for example, the
interactions between the many different microbial species that comprise the
human microbiome and contribute to both health and disease. The ability of
Genesis to create computational models of cellular signaling and metabolism on
its own should advance medicine, biotechnology, and fundamental biological
knowledge, since such models are required to optimize experiments and interpret
data to reveal the rules that govern biological processes. The Genesis project
will involve three established research and training programs at Vanderbilt, all
of which are active in the recruitment and involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students and postdoctoral trainees in their research projects. Genesis
offers a breadth of very attractive technical challenges and scientific and
social opportunities ideal for interdisciplinary research training in AI, swarm
robotics, machine learning, the exploration of signaling and metabolic pathways
in microbes and suspended mammalian cells, and addressing how the complexity of
biology could in fact be utilized to solve societal problems in nutrition,
health, and medicine. Genesis will allow scientists and engineers and their
trainees to address a number of important scientific, commercial, and societal
problems by advancing our understanding of biology and disease and improving the
efficiency of industrial production of biochemicals and pharmaceuticals. Genesis
also provides additional impact as a tool for classroom instruction, in that
ultimately it will allow students to pose questions and ask Genesis to design
and conduct the experiments needed to answer them. Genesis will be designed to
be mass produced at low cost, so that small laboratories could afford a small-
scale system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In common use, yeast does its work in
batches, where it grows and multiplies until it runs out of food or creates an
environment where it can no longer thrive. A small batch of yeast grown in a
research laboratory might require a milliliter of growth media in one well of a
multi-well plate, whereas a yeast bioreactor at a pharmaceutical company could
hold a few thousand liters, and one in a brewery a million liters. As an
alternative to batches, a continuous-flow bioreactor, termed a chemostat,
provides a steady supply of food and continuously removes excess yeast or even
suspended mammalian cells and their metabolites to maintain steady-state growth.
There is a growing recognition that chemostats can provide reproducible,
reliable, and biologically homogeneous datasets that are well suited for probing
the metabolism and signaling of living cells. However, the application of “self-
driving” and machine-learning technologies to advancing biological knowledge
will benefit from a thousand or more chemostats operating in parallel under
computer control. Neither commercial production nor research chemostats have the
correct combination of size, cost, and automated instrumentation. The Genesis
system will address this need by using state-of-the-art, multi-channel
microfluidic pumps and valves to control all of the microchemostats over a wide
range of conditions with different strains of yeast, swarm robots to move 48
microchemostats at a time, and very high-throughput mass spectrometers to make a
broad metabolic measurement every 10 or 15 seconds that will generate terabytes
of data that exceed the ability of humans to control, process, and interpret.
The resulting computational models could have thousands of equations. Genesis
will provide, for the first time, an efficient means to design and conduct the
massive number of biological experiments needed to parameterize, validate, and
utilize these models to probe and even control biological systems for specific
applications. Projects that will be pursued as soon as Genesis is operational
include basic research in cell signaling and metabolism, quantitative
explorations of the metabolomic interactions of co-cultured bacterial species
that together could produce protein for food and chemical feedstocks, tracking
multiple, parallel evolutionary histories to determine which environmental and
genetic factors are important for the evolution of microbial cooperation, and
improved methods to use mammalian cells to produce therapeutic antibodies. The
parallel development of two Genesis instruments, one funded by NSF and the other
by the Chalmers University of Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden, integrates
Vanderbilt’s expertise in microfluidics and mass spectrometry with Chalmers’
expertise in AI, machine learning, and yeast to create a pair of robot
scientists that will accelerate inquiries into the rules of life and the
discovery of new solutions to some of society’s pressing
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.