* 2117446
* Macroevolutionary Consequences of Staminode Evolution in Integrated Floral Systems of Mentzelia section Bartonia (Loasaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Schenk, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 517,624.00

A major initiative in plant biology is focused on understanding the evolutionary
processes that have generated the seemingly endless forms of flowers. Flowers
can be viewed as integrated systems of specialized structures that function to
optimize reproductive success, including pollen dispersal, pollen reception, and
seed production. Flowers have experienced extraordinary morphological changes
through evolutionary time, including multiple origins of novel, non-fertile
structures, including staminodes. Staminodes are rudimentary stamens or sterile
stamens that were co-opted from pollen production to perform novel functions,
such as nectar production, pollinator attraction, or enhanced pollen dispersal
or deposition. These structures therefore provide an ideal system to study
integrated-trait evolution in response to functional co-option. This project
will test whether there is an evolutionary response to compensate for the loss
of reproductive function when a structure is co-opted to perform a novel
function by studying floral evolution in the blazingstars. Numerous trainees
will participate in the project, and a collaboration with the Ohio First Scholar
program will integrate two first-generation students from underrepresented
groups into the research program. Forty-eight early career scientists will be
trained in phylogenetic comparative methods through two workshops at a national
research conference. An educational video and learning module focused on plant
evolution will be created to promote science literacy in this important but
poorly understood concept that requires innovative
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flowers are composed of integrated parts that
function to maximize reproduction, but little is known about the
macroevolutionary consequences when one part of the flower is co-opted to
perform a novel function. In Mentzelia section Bartonia (Loasaceae), stamen
filaments have repeatedly evolved to become sterile, petal-like staminodes,
providing an exceptional system to determine the evolutionary response of
functional co-option. This project will apply phylogenetic comparative
approaches to provide key insights into the evolutionary consequences of
staminode co-option on floral structures, including interactions within and
among the male, female, and petal structures. The project addresses five main
research questions: (1) What is the evolutionary history of staminodes in
Mentzelia section Bartonia; (2) are staminodes integrated with the remaining
floral structures; (3) does evolution favor compensation of reproductive outputs
when staminodes evolve; (4) are staminodes correlated with environmental
factors; and (5) how do staminodes affect male and female fitness across
different floral forms? To answer those questions, the evolutionary history of
the group will be inferred with genomic data and combined with environmental and
floral data to determine how traits vary and covary, as well as their level of
integration across evolutionary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.