* 2117494
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Stefan Kanzok, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 394,713.00

An award is made to Loyola University Chicago (LUC) to purchase a Transmission
Electron&lt;br/&gt;Microscope (TEM) in support of research, teaching, and
outreach. This equipment will be used&lt;br/&gt;by LUC researchers as well as
graduate and undergraduate students in STEM fields. Through&lt;br/&gt;didactic
courses and research mentorship, over 100 LUC undergraduate students will
gain&lt;br/&gt;valuable training on this machine annually. Two undergraduate
courses at LUC will utilize the&lt;br/&gt;TEM as will two courses at neighboring
undergraduate institutions. The TEM will have the&lt;br/&gt;greatest impact on
high school students engaged in summer research at LUC. Each year,
LUC&lt;br/&gt;investigators host 40+ aspiring scientists from Chicago area high
schools. This high school&lt;br/&gt;research experience will include training
and hands-on exploration using the TEM. Thus, the&lt;br/&gt;TEM will promote
student training both at LUC and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This TEM enhances
research at all levels. It enables imaging, sizing, and elemental mapping
of&lt;br/&gt;samples for a diverse ensemble of scientific fields ranging from
biology to materials chemistry to&lt;br/&gt;environmental sustainability.
Representative examples include imaging of bacteriophages,
the&lt;br/&gt;cellular structural stability of malaria parasites, microscopic
structures of lizard scales, bacterial&lt;br/&gt;biofilm formation, cartilage
and bone formation in fish embryos, and peripheral nervous
system&lt;br/&gt;structure. Furthermore, this machine can examine the chemistry
that occurs at the surface of&lt;br/&gt;prototypical small molecule organic
semiconductors as well as element-specific measurements&lt;br/&gt;of metal
accumulation in living tissue. Thus, the TEM instrument will stimulate the
productivity of&lt;br/&gt;the existing research projects as well as train the
next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.