* 2117703
* MRI: Acquisition of Tekran mercury speciation system for mercury biotransformation and ecotoxicology research and training at UT Tyler
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anil Somenahally, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 112,576.00

This award will permit the acquisition of a Mercury Speciation System that would
advance the research fields of the PI and co-PIs by enabling them to analyze
different chemical forms of Hg in environmental samples, microbial cultures, and
aquatic and avian organisms. Emissions from coal-fired power plants are the
leading cause of Hg contamination in fish and wildlife especially in Texas. East
Texas is home to four coal-fired power plants that are ranked in the nation's
top six point sources of atmospheric Hg emissions in 2009. Hg contamination is
widespread in fishes in East Texas and found at significantly high levels in
eastern brown pelican in the northern Gulf of Mexico. Despite these impacts to
fish and wildlife species and human health, no MeHg analysis instrument has been
available for conducting needed research to address the problem in these
regions. Funding of the acquisition of the Mercury Speciation System would
facilitate research of the PI and co-PIs that addresses the gaps in knowledge
about the microbial transformation mechanisms, speciation and fate,
bioavailability and ecotoxicology of Hg that would help develop potential Hg
abatement and remediation applications to create healthier aquatic ecosystems
that support fish that are safe for human and wildlife consumption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemical fate analyses of Hg are crucial for the
studies on microbial Hg methylation and MeHg degradation mechanisms in the PI’s
lab. The research programs enabled by this instrument system will help unravel
new Hg methylation mechanisms in methanogens and their syntrophy in freshwater
lakes which are impacted directly by industrial source of Hg. The comparison of
microbial Hg methylation mechanisms between the organic carbon poor and organic
rich-lakes will likely derive the interaction patterns of the Hg methylating
microbes with sediment organic carbon. Other studies which benefit from this
system include MeHg degradation pathways by Pseudomonas spp., Hg
biotransformation in rice paddies, Hg residues in brown pelican birds and Hg
methylation source in their breeding ground sediments along south Texas coasts,
effects of gold mining and Hg contamination on fish and food webs in South
America from the PI and co-PI’s labs. Results of the research conducted could
assist federal and state environmental regulators in developing Hg contamination
monitoring program from air emission and in the lakes, and provide the
scientific basis for establishing air Hg emission control strategies to address
Hg contamination regionally and nationally. The PI and co-PIs would use this
instrument system in the teaching and lab training activities of up to seven
environmental sciences-related courses. Knowledge gained from the studies will
be disseminated to high school students to encourage them to acquire college
education and careers in STEM fields, and will help educate the public about the
problems associated with Hg contamination, the relationship between atmospheric
Hg emission and climate change, food safety concerns from toxic metal food chain
transfer, and environmental stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.