* 2117239
* MRI: Acquisition of a LC-High Resolution Mass Spectrometer for Characterization of Environmental Organic Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christopher James, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 797,107.00

Pollution discharged by industrial processes impacts human health and the health
of ecosystems, and mitigating their effects requires considerable cost in time,
effort, and dollars. This project will use advanced instrumentation to
characterize contaminants in the environment and biological systems, enabling
the design of appropriate mitigation strategies. It will support undergraduate,
graduate, and professional education and training in environmental and
analytical chemistry, environmental engineering, environmental health, and data
science; and (3) foster new collaboration and community engagement
opportunities, especially with the regional Native American communities, local
and state government agencies, and industries impacting stormwater quality. UW-
Tacoma is a primarily undergraduate institution, a non-PhD granting institution,
an urban serving, a Carnegie community engaged, and an Asian American and Native
American Pacific Islander Serving Institution. It has a student body comprised
of many underrepresented minorities, veterans, and first-generation college
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system to be acquired is a Liquid
Chromatograph-High Resolution Mass Spectrometer, specifically an Agilent 6546
UPLC-QTOF-HRMS instrument. The instrument will be used to understand and improve
management of various forms of pollution, especially for stormwater and roadway
systems, innovative treatment materials development, ecotoxicology and bioassay
development, and water disinfection. For example, the instrument will be used to
identify toxic transformation products from stormwater and quantify sources.
Another use is to study the oxidation of persistent organic compounds in urban
stormwater using ferrate-coated sand media and PFAS defluorination. Yet another
study focuses on the fate of organic pollutants in the aquatic environment and
their occurrence and impacts in the marine environment. With so many potential
environmental pollutants, high throughput, analytical capacity, and reliability
are critical limiting factors to research effectiveness. Because of the
richness, depth and breadth of the data generated, screening techniques
employing high resolution mass spectrometry have now become key methodologies
for environmental chemistry and engineering studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.