* 2117776
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Narayan Hosmane, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 341,653.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Northern Illinois University is acquiring a
400 MHz nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer to support research of
Professor Evgueni Nesterov and colleagues Narayan Hosmane, Ralph Wheeler,
Douglas Klumpp and Timothy Hagen. This spectrometer allows research in a variety
of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant
economic importance, as well as permitting study of chemically and biologically
relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is
one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the elucidation of the
structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown substances, to
characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and to study the
dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral part of teaching
as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students
in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as collaborators from
regional primarily undergraduate institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
the NMR spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels.
It especially impacts studies developing synthetic organic methodology and
transition metal and super-acid catalyzed reactions. The instrumentation is also
used for fundamental studies in organic photochemistry and the design and study
of small-molecule ligands for protein binding. In addition, it allows the
development of an analytical platform for fluorescent screening of enzyme
inhibitors and studies on the methods of controlled preparation of
semiconducting polymer materials and advanced dual-function organic light-
emitting diode (OLED) compounds. The instrument also serves researchers
developing environmentally friendly industrially relevant catalytic processes
and reactions and those designing oligonucleotide-based molecular switches. The
NMR spectrometer is employed in the characterization of synthesized boron-carbon
cage compounds which are used in neutron-capture
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.