* 2117665
* Collaborative Research: A longitudinal approach to examining perception-production links in second language speech sound learning.
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Melissa Baese-Berk, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 133,166.00

One of the main challenges of learning another language is learning how to
pronounce the constituent sounds. For adult learners, the native language acts
like a filter, which may prevent them from perceiving the sounds of the new
language correctly. If they don’t perceive those sounds correctly, they may not
produce them correctly. These pronunciation problems can affect learners’
ability to understand the new language and their ability to communicate in it.
For example, when they listen to the new language, they may struggle to
distinguish similar words and when they speak it, they may produce words that
listeners don’t understand. Researchers know that perceiving sounds accurately
is a prerequisite for producing them accurately, but little is known about how
sound perception and sound production develop and influence one another.
Understanding how these skills develop and interact is a necessary first step
toward developing better models of pronunciation learning and better training
procedures that can help students learn new languages more quickly and
effectively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators examine
how the relationship between the ability to differentiate and produce sounds in
a new language develops over time. This will be accomplished by training
participants on sound perception, sound production, or both. Performance in both
skills will be measured at multiple points throughout training to investigate
how performance in each area changes over time and how the relationship between
them evolves over time. Participants’ ability to apply the knowledge they
learned during training to new words and to words spoken in a new voice will
also be tested, as a means of investigating how different types of training help
second language learners deal with variability in speech. The results will lay
the foundation for developing a more comprehensive model of second language
sound learning. Additionally, findings will provide insight into how
pronunciation instruction can be optimized to help learners perceive and produce
the sounds and words of other languages accurately, forming the basis for
effective second language communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.