* 2117197
* Understanding the Effects of Government Procurement Methods on Prices: an Empirical Study of Inmate Telecommunications Services
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Nathan Miller, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 59,436.00

The project will collect data and use the data to test a model of how government
procurement can affect the price of a service. The research team will examine
why the rates that inmates pay for telecommunications are much higher than the
cost of providing the service. The project will make three specific
contributions. The first is to collect, organize, and publish information about
the rates charged to inmates and the contracts negotiated between the private
companies providing telecommunications services and the procuring government
entities (e.g., a state-level Department of Corrections). The second is to
analyze the information through the lens of economic theory to understand why
rates are set at a high level. Among the factors that may contribute to elevated
rates are a high willingness-to-pay for calls, limited competition among the
providers of telecommunications services, and revenue-sharing agreements between
providers and the procuring entities. Finally, the project will explore the
efficacy of various policy remedies that have been proposed by interested
nonprofit organizations. The results will help us understand how the specific
rules used for government procurement affect procurement outcomes. The result
could be new insights into how to improve procurement methods to meet important
societal goals such as overall economic efficiency and consumer
fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an empirical study of inmate
telecommunications services (ITS) in the United States. It is widely known that
inmates pay very high rates, that the market for ITS is highly concentrated, and
that the procuring government entity typically negotiates to obtain a portion of
the revenues obtained from inmates. To support empirical inquiry, data will be
collected on the procurement process, taking advantage of public information
laws that make documentation available upon request in many states. A structural
model of procurement will be developed based on the second-score auction
framework of Asker and Cantillon (2008), and the parameters of the model will be
estimated or calibrated using the data obtained from the data requests. With
counterfactual simulations, the contributions of market power and revenue-
sharing agreements to the rates charged to inmates will be quantified. Further,
the efficacy of enhanced antitrust enforcement, contraction restrictions, and
rate regulation will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.