* 2117727
* MRI: Acquisition of a NanoRaman Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) System for Multi-Property Measurements in Electronic and Other Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Horacio Espinosa, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 455,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This major research instrumentation award
supports the acquisition of a NanoRaman AFM (atomic force microscopy) system at
Northwestern University (NU). The instrument integrates scanning probe
microscopy (SPM) for measurements of nanoscale material properties (topography,
friction, surface potential, electrical and thermal conductivity, etc.) with
optical spectroscopy tools including confocal Raman, tip-enhanced Raman (TERS),
and photoluminescence (TEPL) spectroscopy. The instrument enables correlated
multi-property measurements of structural, physical, and chemical properties of
nanoscale materials by researchers from broad backgrounds at NU including,
Mechanical Engineering, Civil and Environmental Engineering, Materials Science
and Engineering, Chemistry, and Earth and Planetary Sciences, and users outside
of NU. The instrument facilitates the discovery of new electronic materials and
the development of novel devices that range from transistors, photodetectors to
advanced brain-inspired computing technologies. In addition, the instrument is
integrated into existing graduate and undergraduate curricula at NU to
facilitate hands-on experimentation of the multi-physics of nanoscale materials.
The instrument also provides opportunities for educating the next generation of
nano-scientists and engineers and diversifying the Nation's STEM workforce
through multidisciplinary training for underrepresented students at grade
school, undergraduate, and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The NanoRaman AFM system offers a versatile platform for
correlated multi-property measurements with 10 nm lateral spatial resolution and
high measurement precision. The instrument facilitates integrating multi-
dimensional electronic materials to leverage interfaces and defects to enable
novel electronic, optoelectronic, and thermoelectric phenomena. Through SPM,
TERS, TEPL, and second harmonic generation measurements, the instrument allows
studies of thermal, mechanical, electronic, and optical properties in mixed-
dimensional heterostructures and how defects can control these properties.
Specifically, researchers use the instrument to characterize carrier
concentration and band-edge energy modulation in low-dimensional ferroelectrics
with polarizable nanoscale domains, heat dissipation across individual grain
boundaries and defects in 2D semiconducting crystals, excitonic and nonlinear
optical properties emissions in 2D van der Waals crystals coupled to plasmonic
lattices, and local studies of photophysical phenomena in perovskite compounds
that impact the performance of electronic devices. In addition, this instrument
facilitates measurements outside the scope of electronic materials. Scientists
study, for example, soil and sedimentary organics at microscale and nanoscale
interfaces for carbon sequestration applications, tunable metal-organic
frameworks for chemical sensing, and nanoscale composite materials for enhanced
performance of construction materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.