* 2117144
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Raman Microscope to Advance Research and Undergraduate Teaching in Southern Colorado
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Neena Grover, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 177,696.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation program. Colorado
College is acquiring a confocal Raman microspectrometer system to support the
research of Professor Eli Fahrenkrug and colleagues Neena Grover, Amanda Bowman,
Adam Light and Donald Clayton from Colorado College. This microspectrometer
allows research in a variety of fields such as polymorph crystallization and
bipolar electrochemistry, solid-state ionics and nanolaminates, nucleic acid
metal binding, cold plasma physics, in-vivo sensors, surface chemistry,
virology, and spin-crossover behavior. In general, Raman spectromicroscopy is a
powerful tool to probe chemical reactions and the chemistry of surfaces. Raman
spectroscopy is based on the scattering of light by chemical species based on
their electronic and vibrational properties, and spectromicroscopy takes
advantage of these light scattering properties to perform microscopy on a very
wide range of chemical samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the Raman
microspectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
is the only instrument of this type in Southern Colorado, and a wide range of
institutions that serve undergraduate and underrepresented students are
participants in research and teaching plans involving the instrument. The Raman
microspectrometer particularly provides chemical analysis to projects spanning
heterogenous catalysis, geochemistry, crystal growth, plasma physics, structural
biology, biophysics, plasmonics, and thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.