* 2117445
* MRI: Acquisition of an Advanced Multi-Functional Wide-Wavelength-Range Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer for Multi-Materials Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Steve Martin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 293,560.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project is jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;An infrared
spectrometer with a wide range of measuring capabilities benefits the research
and teaching needs of faculty and students at Iowa State University and nearby
4-year Coe College and is a Midwest regional research resource for infrared
spectroscopy and microscopy. This instrument supports a broad range of
interdisciplinary research in fields that include materials science, chemistry,
physics, agriculture, civil engineering, electrical engineering, and chemical
engineering. Application areas for the instrument are solid-state batteries,
solid-state materials, cell membranes, plant genome editing, characterization of
diseased tissues, optical materials, additive manufacturing, and glass science.
This instrument advances these research fields and provides training to
postdoctoral fellows and graduate and undergraduate student researchers. The
infrared spectrometer facilitates courses in materials characterization, cement
concrete, and engineering design and enables activities that introduce infrared
spectroscopy to secondary school students locally and across the US in measuring
greenhouse gas concentrations across various
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The infrared
spectrometer purchased with this Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant has
four major attributes, wide wavelength range from deep far-infrared to
ultraviolet for probing the full optical response of a material, high
sensitivity for probing small but critical chemical differences in materials,
high spectral resolution for probing and separating similar but distinct
chemical species, and infrared microscopy and surface reflectance capabilities
for probing materials surface chemistry and topologies. At least seven research
projects at Iowa State University benefit from this acquisition and include
mixed oxy-sulfide-nitride glassy solid electrolytes that expand the
understanding of solid electrolyte chemistry of solid-state batteries;
biomechanical form, function, and performance in hierarchical bone and enamel
biological materials; interactions of different structures and mechanisms in
improved delivery systems used for CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing; studies of hybrid
1D and 2D magnetic materials; biological tissues which improve the
discrimination of disease transfection in agricultural animals; chemical signal
encoded infrared spectra to correlate the cell membrane composition with the
biophysical measurements performed by fluorescence microscopy; and quantum
charge dynamics and excitations in novel two-dimensional materials. This
instrument also benefits the research of Physics faculty and undergraduate
students from 4-year Coe College in ionic transport in glass, laser modification
of vanadate glasses, high alkali borate glasses, and high energy particle
detection using novel scintillating materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.