* 2117219
* MRI: Acquisition of a Leading-edge Portable Geoprobe System with Subsurface Sampling, Logging and Imaging capabilities for Geoscience Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Hussain Abdulla, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,818.00

The acquisition of a Geoprobe 7822DT system with direct-push (DP) soil,
sediment, and groundwater sampling tools and logging and imaging capabilities
will serve the research and educational needs of TAMU-CC and South Texas. The
tightly coupled local and regional economic interplay of the Gulf Coast's
natural resources (i.e., regional oil/gas and commercial and recreational
fishing industries) has increased prosperity and resulted in industry and
population growth in South Texas. This comes with concerns over contamination of
the already limited groundwater resources and questions about ecosystem and
environmental health. The geoprobe is the industry benchmark equipment that
improves the investigator's capacity to adapt to changing research problems,
whether they are focused on environmental, geotechnical, or exploration work.
The new mobile, small footprint geoprobe systems, accommodating a variety of
tooling and imaging capabilities, offer capabilities for obtaining high-
resolution geologic, hydrogeologic and geochemical information of the shallow
subsurface soils and rocks. An understanding of vertical changes in sediment
types, water content, and conductivity, and the high-resolution chemical makeup
of water stored in the ground, helps determine prominent water and pollutant
migration pathways and locate areas that need attention for remediation
purposes, for instance. The geoprobe system will provide students in the region,
with a large majority from underrepresented minority groups in STEM fields, with
hands-on experience and practical training necessary to make them competitive in
the job market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This leading-edge geoprobe system includes
DP drilling capabilities for well/piezometer installation and coring, discrete
aseptic water and sediment sampling, and DP mapping instrumentation for
formation permeability, lithology, and water content. This geoprobe system will
complement the efforts by researchers (faculty and students) at TAMUCC, and
other South Texas academic institutions, using ultrahigh performance chemical
and biological analytical instrumentation, by increasing their capability to
obtain discrete and aseptic samples in a variety of environments. There are many
benefits to obtaining high-quality and high-resolution field data using the
Geoprobe 7822DT with auxiliary coring, aseptic sampling, probing and logging
tools, including among others: an understanding of the detailed
microstratigraphy that controls flow and solute migration; the provision of
samples from which accurate physical, microbial and chemical properties can be
determined; an in situ determination of contaminant mass distributions and
partitioning, particularly within highly heterogeneous substrates and enabling
unambiguous and precise characterization of the water storage and pore structure
characteristics of any earth formations. These high-resolution depth profile
physical characterizations will lead to advances in the scientific understanding
of mobilization and transport of contaminants from soils to groundwater to
surface water and the long-term chemical cycling within the groundwater-surface
water/seawater transition zone. In TAMUCC's region, there has been sparse
research on the presence, fate and impacts of anthropogenic chemicals in the
soil and groundwater from domestic, agricultural, and industrial uses. An in-
house Geoprobe will drastically enhance the capabilities of both researchers at
TAMU-CC and those within the region leading to integrated holistic approaches to
environmental research. Data obtained from these capabilities is foundational
for scientific research in different STEM fields such as geology,
biogeochemistry, and engineering. By supplementing the existing chemical
characterization capabilities with the proposed Geoprobe System, the scope of
research that can be conducted at this Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) will
be expanded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.