* 2117775
* MRI: Acquisition of an Electron-Beam Lithography Tool for Research, Education and Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Bo Zhen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
state-of-the-art Electron-Beam Lithography (EBL) tool to meet the nanoscale
research and teaching needs of the University of Pennsylvania and its academic
and industrial neighbors in the Mid-Atlantic region. The EBL instrument enables
a wide range of materials and devices to be patterned on the scale of tens of
nanometers. The capabilities of this advanced instrument are central to
advancing research at the forefront of diverse science and engineering
disciplines, including the fundamental exploration of the behavior of charge,
spin, light, heat, and motion with applications in photonics and electronics,
quantum computation and communication, wearable and implantable health
monitoring, micro- and macro-scale energy technologies, and chemo-/bio- and
motion sensing. Participating faculty members use the EBL system in educational
and outreach activities to broaden participation from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering. Undergraduate and graduate students in the engineering
and science disciplines will gain valuable research experience and practical
knowledge in nanofabrication techniques. The instrument is housed in the
Quattrone Nanofabrication Facility, a multi-user research and training facility
within the Singh Center for Nanotechnology at the University of Pennsylvania and
home to the Mid-Atlantic Nanotechnology Hub (MANTH), an NSF National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EBL system is equipped with a dynamic clock for multipass exposure with high-
fidelity programmable writing order control, which enables high-throughput, high
placement accuracy, high-dose resolution accuracy to pattern structures with
nanometer-scale features and desired complexity. The instrument is essential to
developing innovative methods to structure materials into architectures for a
broad range of topics: photonic and plasmonic light emitters, topological
photonic and quantum logical gates, and integrated photonics for high capacity
information transmission and processing; quantum materials with exotic band
structures for dynamically tunable electronic, optoelectronic, and sensing
devices; oxide and halide perovskites with intriguing ferro-, piezo-, and pyro-
electricity and the manipulation of their nanoscale interfaces for novel
structure and physical properties; large-scale ultralow weight, robust
mechanical metamaterials; and 2D to 3D foldable structures of interest for
micro- and nano-scale robots, resonators, and sensors. This high-impact research
has applications that span computing, communication, health, food-energy-water
security, national security, to human-machine
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.