* 2117655
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research Needs with Undergraduates at Hope College
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Hampton, Hope College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 321,363.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a field-
emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM) with low-vacuum, low-voltage,
energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and scanning transmission electron
microscopy (STEM) capabilities for Hope College. The FESEM greatly enhances the
current suite of microscopy techniques available at Hope College, provides
training to a large number of undergraduate STEM students in modern
instrumentation, and will lead to meaningful data in diverse scientific fields
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations.
The PIs' research spans five departments: Biology, Chemistry, Engineering,
Geological &amp; Environmental Sciences, and Physics. Three co-PIs and five
Senior Personnel are early-career faculty. This equipment will strengthen their
research and provide valuable skills for their students who will become an
essential part of the nation’s workforce. Undergraduate researchers at Hope
College, 15% of whom are underrepresented minorities, will be using this
advanced equipment for transformative, cutting-edge research, thus building STEM
talent and workforce. This instrument will have a regional impact by providing
access to sophisticated instrumentation to local companies and academic
institutions. In addition to collaborative research, a wider audience will be
engaged through programs such as ExploreHope, which provides summer science and
academic-year outreach activities that reach over 2,000 K-12 students and
teachers per year. The PIs will integrate the FESEM into the ExploreHope
curriculum so that K-12 students will interact with the instrument. This FESEM
will transform research at Hope College, enhance undergraduate education, and
promote community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FESEM allows researchers
to investigate (a) the synthesis of multifunctional nanomaterials for water
remediation and energy-related applications, (b) the design of thermochromic
photovoltaics that could lead to improved solar cells (c) techniques for the
facile alignment and synthesis of responsive liquid crystalline polymers that
will enable the design of adaptive, shape-programmable structures and devices,
(d) the morphological differences of functionalized polymer thin films for
sensing applications, and (e) the effect of wear on the morphology and
composition of advanced lubrication schemes. Additionally, the FESEM will
enhance several areas of environmental research. The instrument will allow
investigation of (a) the degradation mechanisms at play in organic matter in
peatlands, (b) how suspended fine particles affect water quality, and (c) the
effects of nanoparticles on sensory processing and behavior in animals. Finally,
the FESEM will enable biological research projects from virology to ecology. The
requested instrument will provide insight into (a) the structure and formation
of viral replication complexes that will lead to novel therapeutic strategies,
(b) mitochondrial genetics and biosynthetic pathways that play fundamental roles
in human health, (c) regulation of anti-oxidant defense pathways in the central
nervous system that may be involved in cancer and neurodegenerative diseases,
(d) the evolution of maple trees during periods of climatic change, (e) how the
immune system influences animal behavior, and (f) neuronal degeneration and
repair following damage. The FESEM will increase the research capabilities in
materials, environmental, and biological characterization at Hope College by
providing an instrument with high-resolution, high magnification, and low-vacuum
capabilities. Data provided by this instrument promises to increase the
publication rate and funding success for faculty who otherwise have limited
access to similar quality instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.