* 2117344
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Corporate Venture Capital and Its Impact on Young Firm Growth
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,05/31/2022
* L Luminita Stevens, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 0.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-growth young firms contribute
considerably to U.S. job creation and productivity growth. While institutional
venture capital (IVC) is a key factor in the financing of high-growth young
firms, a quarter of U.S. venture investments are made by industrial firms in the
form of corporate venture capital (CVC). Unlike IVC as a form of financial
intermediation, CVC entails a match between industrial firms that are likely
motivated by product market or technological synergies beyond a pure financing
relationship. This project will investigate whether and how CVC contributes to
young firm growth relative to IVC. Using detailed data, the project will compare
young firm growth across industries with varying degrees of CVC presence. The
project will then explore the mechanisms through which CVC influences young firm
outcomes. Results from the project will have potential policy implications on
entrepreneurship and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
assemble a micro-level dataset that links venture capital funded firms to their
funders as well as to their patenting activity and exit outcome (via an initial
public offering or an acquisition). The empirical model will explore the
outcomes of funded firms in an industry in relation to a measure of lagged CVC
presence in that industry, conditioning on a rich set of fixed effects and
covariates including IVC investments. The empirical model will feature a shift-
share style research design that predicts CVC (and IVC) investments using the
interaction of the initial market shares of different funders and several
instruments for funder supply shifts. An endogenous growth model of firm
innovation incorporating CVC investments hypothesizes that CVC enhances a young
firmâ€™s innovation effort, hence growth outcomes, when the two parties share
strong demand-side or technological linkages. The hypothesis will be tested
empirically using the industry input-output matrix and the patent citation
matrix.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.