* 2117138
* MRI: Acquisition of a 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) for Research at Arkansas State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Fabricio Medina-Bolivar, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,935.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and Chemical Research
Instrumentation programs. Arkansas State University is acquiring a 400 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer that has the capabilities to
perform both routine analysis and more complex experiments to help elucidate
molecular structures of chemical compounds. The instrument supports the research
of Professor M. Abrar Alam and colleagues Fabricio Medina-Bolivar, Hashim Ali,
John Hershberger and Allyn Ontko. The spectrometer allows research in a variety
of fields such as developing synthetic methodologies to synthesize scaffolds and
molecules having potential biological activity, and studying biosynthetic
pathways of plant-based stilbenoids. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for
the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in solution or in the
solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is essential to
chemists who are carrying out frontier research. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry. Students from local high schools and student
participating in on-campus research programs for underrepresented minorities
also benefit from using this state of the art
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the
development of methodologies to facilitate the structure elucidation of small
and medium-sized molecules. The instrumentation is also used to study persistent
emerging organic contaminants and polymeric asphalt
binders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.