* 2117040
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Xianhui Bu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 354,871.00

This award to California State University-Long Beach is supported by the Major
Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs to
support and improve research by professor Xianhui Bu from and colleagues Michael
Schramm, Young-Seok Shon and Fangyuan Tian. The institution is acquiring a
single crystal X-ray difffractometer (SCXRD). In general, an X-ray
diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full three-
dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles, and
provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, geology and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry at this Hispanic Serving Institution as well as California State
University Los Angeles. The instrumentation provides direct research experience
for students in a variety of courses distributed in various departments and
other neighboring universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray
diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The
science enabled by this instrument provides relevant societal benefits through
the development of new materials to address energy production, new catalysts to
improve the synthesis of commodity and industrial chemicals. The instrumentation
is also used for studying amino-acid-based homochiral porous materials with
zeolite-type frameworks and for developing acid-base stable metal-organic
framework materials (MOFs). In addition, it benefits the exploration of mono and
bisgold resorcinarenes as supramolecular catalysts and for investigating
mechanisms of MOF catalysis based on structures of MOFs and trapped reaction
intermediates (in collaboration with California State University Los Angeles).
The diffractometer is also used to characterize fluorescent metal-organic
frameworks for sensing explosive compounds. Additionally, the diffractometer is
utilized for the structural characterization of non-heme iron nitrosyl complexes
and catalysis made from monometallic palladium, platinum and iridium
nanoclusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.