* 2117975
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hawaii Statewide Mesonet
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Abby Frazier, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,434,481.00

The Hawaiian Islands have tremendous climatic variability over a small land
area, with complex topography and extreme differences in rainfall and
vegetation. Long-term observations of rainfall, temperature, and soil conditions
are currently unavailable in many areas of Hawaii that are relevant to
atmospheric science, hydrology, and ecosystems science. Through this Major
Research Instrumentation award, the Hawaii Mesonet will be established. A
Mesonet (mesoscale network) is a densely located set of observational stations,
in this case focusing on surface weather and land observations. The Mesonet will
enable a wide variety of scientific studies with relevance to the people of
Hawaii and in other topographically diverse regions. The award has clear
societal relevance as evidenced through the partner organizations, such as water
and natural resource managers, fire departments, and state and federal
organizations. Students and post-doctoral researchers will gain field experience
in instrument installation, calibration and maintenance, and data from the
Mesonet will be incorporated in classes to expand the impact of the acquisition.
The research team will also work with programs intended to boost the involvement
of native Hawaiian students in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation acquisition award is for the deployment of a statewide
network of state-of-the-art climate monitoring stations. The Hawaii Mesonet will
consist of 84 climate stations with sensors for rainfall, air temperature and
humidity, wind speed and direction, solar and net radiation, and soil moisture,
heat flux and temperature. The stations will each have a data logger, power
supply with solar charging, and data telecom device allowing for real-time data
transmission. Three example studies that will be conducted using the Hawaii
Mesonet include: 1) Convective initiation in mountainous environments, 2)
Identifying critical basin water storage thresholds to enable prediction of high
flow extremes in a diverse range of watersheds, and 3) Interactive effects of
temperature, moisture, and solar radiation on ecosystem carbon fluxes across
diverse ecosystem types and conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Physical and Dynamic Meteorology (PDM) program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.