* 2117236
* MRI: Development of Telescope Arrays to Image the Optical Counterparts of Mergers within Two Seconds of Gravitational-Wave Detection and Observe Supernovae at the Time of Explosion
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Patrick Kelly, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,853.00

The merger of a pair of black holes or neutron stars creates gravitational
waves. Mergers that lead to explosions also emit light, which conveys
information about the heavy elements that are created. Since 2015, astronomers
have recorded the gravitational waves from fifty mergers. However, visible light
from only a single merger has been clearly pinpointed. This project will develop
telescopes in New Mexico and Greece that can image a large region of the sky
within just two seconds of an alert. By searching more quickly than existing
facilities can do, the telescopes will identify new, brightening sources on the
sky and obtain early data. The project will also monitor nearby galaxies for
very young supernovae. Undergraduates from Minnesota and New Mexico as well as
citizen scientists will participate. The inclusion of underrepresented
minorities, notably Native Americans and Hispanics, is planned in various
aspects of the work that will provide broad training suitable for future
academic or private industry careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At each site, the
Total-Coverage Ultra-Fast Response to Binary Mergers Observatory (TURBO) will
consist of large-format CMOS detectors mounted on sixteen 0.20-meter diameter
optical telescopes. Within two seconds of a trigger alert, TURBO will begin
obtaining continuous, multi-band images of up to 240 square degrees. A prototype
telescope in St. Paul, Minnesota has been implemented that can acquire images
within two seconds of an alert. Counterparts to gravitational-wave detections of
mergers will multiply the information available from just the gravitational
waves alone by revealing the mergersâ€™ distances, environments, and
nucleosynthetic products. Given its unique sensitivity to prompt emission, TURBO
may detect novel types of counterparts, yielding potential insights, for
example, into the poorly understood observed population of binary black-hole
mergers. Observations of supernovae in nearby galaxies at the time of explosion
(4-6 events each year) can be expected to provide new understanding of their
stellar progenitor populations and explosion mechanisms. The opportunity to
included numerous undergraduate students in research projects and the use of
Zooinverse in analysis of the data is
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the goals of the
Windows on the Universe Big Idea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.