* 2117222
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Understanding the Perceptions of Urban Residents in the U.S. Gulf Coast Region towards Green Infrastructure
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Gerard Kyle, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 08/31/2022
* USD 18,871.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flooding continues to pose
significant threats to the physical, social, and economic well-being of the
communities in the Gulf Coast region. In urban coastal communities that have
increasingly dense development and growing populations, more and more people,
infrastructure, and property are put at risk from chronic, disruptive flooding
events. Traditional structural mitigation and protection measures, such as flood
barriers and levees, often require extensive investment in buildings and
infrastructure and sometimes result in unintended consequences caused by
interruption to natural processes, inadequate protection, and even failure
during disaster events. A potentially complementary approach is the development
of green infrastructure (GI) that has been demonstrated to be an efficient flood
mitigation measure and an effective approach for building community resilience.
Despite governmental efforts in promoting GI, at the local level, urban
residents sometimes lack the motivation to adopt GI or contribute to the
development of GI within their communities. Even when GI is provided at no cost
or with incentives, resident participation rates in GI projects have been low.
The lack of acceptance and adoption of GI may prevent coastal communities from
taking full advantage of the array of services afforded by GI and miss
opportunities to build resilience and protect themselves from future extreme
flood events. This research aims to better understand public perceptions of GI
by examining the attitudes, preferences, and actions related to GI of residents
living in cities in the Texas Gulf Coast region. A combination of methods, such
as survey research, multivariate statistical analysis, Public Participation
Geographic Information System (PPGIS), and spatial analyses provide a
comprehensive analysis of public perceptions towards GI within the Texas Gulf
Coast. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research implements novel interdisciplinary
methods to examine the perceptions of residents towards GI from several Texas
Gulf Coast cities. First, the research applies Protection Motivation Theory as a
theoretical framework to explore factors shaping residents’ evaluations and
attitudes toward GI practices. These factors include residents’ perceptions of
flood risk, their previous flood experience, their reliance on public flood
protection, the efficacy and costs of GI practices, and their perceived ability
to perform these actions. Second, the study conducts an online map-based survey
through PPGIS which provides spatial detail about residents’ perceptions of the
current urban green space network (the key component of GI) and needs for green
space development within the broader community. The PPGIS method complements
conventional survey techniques to expand understandings of how local residents
perceive their urban green spaces and surrounding community in addition to
providing insight on the extent to which the public’s perceptions of flood
vulnerability align with experts opinion of local planning agencies. Findings
can directly support local governments, decision makers, and urban planners in
their effort to identify more effective GI planning and policy that can meet the
needs of their residents and encourage implementation. In turn, the work assists
communities' efforts to build capacity to mitigate future flood hazards
resulting in more resilient Gulf Coast communities. Applications of this work
could be implemented in many other coastal communities vulnerable to flood
hazards in the United States and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.