* 2117687
* MRI: Development of the SABRE Silicon Array for Branching Ratio Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Manoel Couder, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 505,291.00

Two of the most compelling questions in science are: how were the elements
created and how are they continuing to be synthesized today. Understanding the
origins of the elements explains the origins of Earth. Exotic nuclei are often
created in the astrophysical cauldrons of explosive alchemy, and the
probabilities that these newly synthesized nuclei can retain the charged
particles that created them determines whether heavier nuclei can be formed in
the process. The origin of the elements is ultimately tied to this competition
between particle emission and absorption. This MRI development award will
provide funds to build SABRE (Silicon Array for Branching Ratio Experiments)
that will be combined with the unique TriSol facility at the Notre Dame Nuclear
Science Lab (NSL) – and that new instrumentation will be used to measure
particle-emission probabilities for nuclei critical to explosive
nucleosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proton and alpha-induced reactions on
exotic nuclei dominate the heavy-element nucleosynthesis in explosive
environments such as novae, supernovae, and X-ray bursts. The new SABRE array in
the TriSol facility at NSL will allow scientists to measure proton and α
branching ratios as small as 10e−5. The key feature of this spectrometer is that
it will allow experimenters to select specific reaction products that identify
individual states of the resulting nucleus in a spectrum that is essentially
background free. That capability is what will allow the group to measure such
low branching ratios and have significant impacts on understanding capture
reactions at stellar temperatures. A prime example is the 15O(α, γ)19Ne reaction
because of its key importance in triggering heavy element nucleosynthesis via
the rapid proton-capture process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.