* 2117393
* Collaborative Research: Sustainability in the Food-Energy-Water nexus; integrated hydrologic modeling of tradeoffs between food and hydropower in large scale Chinese and US basins
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Reed Maxwell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 174,247.00

Water is critical for growing food and generating power. This study deals with
two globally important agricultural systems, the Heihe River Basin in China and
the Central Valley of California, USA, that exemplify the complexities of large
scale water-energy systems. The Heihe and the Central Valley represent billions
of dollars in economic productivity and produce billions of kilowatt hours of
electricity every year. While the two basins are in many ways similar (water
flows from high in the mountains to nourish crops below), there are key
differences in their history and management that provides many important
information. This project brings together researchers from the US and China to
better understand tradeoffs between water and energy supply in these complex
agricultural systems. Advantage is taken of computer simulations, datasets and
research from US and Chinese teams in their local basins and collaborate to
advance our shared understanding of these basins. The state of the art computer
simulation platforms developed and applied here are designed to capture
connections between humans and natural systems not possible with previous
modeling approaches. This project also seeks to educate the next generation of
water users, planners and scientists on groundwater sustainability by developing
K-12 education materials for both the US and China that will be piloted in real
classrooms in both countries. This project will help us better understand
weaknesses in managed food-water-energy systems like the Heihe and Central
Valley to strengthen them moving forward. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water connects
food production, energy demand and energy production in irrigated agricultural
systems. Intensively managed basins routinely have surface water irrigation,
groundwater irrigation and hydropower production operating in tandem. While
there have been many operational studies of large scale irrigated systems, the
majority of tools applied to these problems focus on the human systems and
simplify the natural hydrology. This study bridges this gap developing novel
tools that can simulate FEW interactions in complex human and natural systems.
In this project leverage of international advances in physically based
integrated numerical modeling is accomplished by bringing together two teams of
modelers from the US and China. The goal is to explore the tradeoffs between
agricultural water supply, hydropower production and environmental degradation
in two globally important agricultural systems: the Central Valley of California
(USA) and the Heihe River basin in China. Specifically, exploring (1) how the
vulnerabilities of food and energy systems differ, (2) where conflicting
interests can lead to system inefficiency and environmental degradation, and (3)
the advantages of applying integrated hydrologic models to these human systems.
The project also seeks to educate the next generation of water users, planners
and scientists on groundwater sustainability. Project outputs will be used to
develop K-12 education materials for both the US and China that will be piloted
in real classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.