* 2117722
* Sustainable Agricultural Land Use Practices in Large-scale Landscape Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Paul Ferraro, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 395,248.00

How farmers use and manage their fields impacts the environment at local, state,
national, and global levels. The public and the private sectors have invested
billions of dollars each year as short-term financial incentives to encourage
the initial adoption of sustainable agricultural land use practices to reduce
negative environmental impacts. Many agri-environmental programs promote using
cover crops during the winter, a practice that reduces erosion, prevents
fertilizer runoff from polluting waterways, provides pollinator services, and
improves soil health. While long-term persistent use is required for sustainable
agricultural land use practices to generate their public benefits, very little
is known about whether short-term financial incentives can lead to long-term
persistent change. This project investigates how the persistent application of
cover crops varies over time and space, and assesses how this sustainable
agricultural land use practice has resulted in the adoption of best management
practices that promote sustainability. The findings enable scientists to better
model the environmental impacts of changes in land use practices, and to provide
advice on how to create landscapes that promote environmental sustainability and
societal well-being by incentivizing and contracting for sustainable land use
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in local-level land use practices can
accumulate to shape landscape patterns and have important lasting impacts on the
environment. To study how individual-level sustainable land use decisions
aggregate to form large-scale landscape patterns that yield environmental
benefits, this project analyzes a large, national dataset (2010-2020) with about
374 million observations of agricultural fields that together cover
approximately 95% of planted acres for major commodities, along with state-level
longitudinal data and expert opinions. The project generates new insights using
machine learning techniques to identify associations between characteristics of
related natural and human systems and field-level persistence of the sustainable
practice. The insights can be translated for practitioners at federal and state
agencies to better design incentive programs to yield the most public benefits
per dollar invested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.