* 2117527
* MRI: Acquisition of a Normal Phase Single Quadrupole High Performance Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometer (HPLC-MS) for Innovative Paleoclimate and Paleoenvironmental Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jason McLachlan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 201,803.00

The acquisition of a high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer
(HPLC-MS) will support environmental research and educational activities led by
Professor Melissa Berke and colleagues Adrian Rocha and Jason McLachlan at the
University of Notre Dame. The HPLC-MS will be configured for state-of-the-art
microbial membrane lipid analysis, optimized for the best reproducibility and
resolution, innovations that have significantly changed the fields of
paleoclimatology and paleoecology. HPLC-MS has propelled the growth of rapid,
sensitive, and more economical detection of compounds that are harder to measure
using earlier methods and instrumentation. The acquisition of this instrument
strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and within the Midwest
and in addition promotes multi-disciplinary collaborations. The instrument will
help broaden participation by involving undergraduate and graduate students from
diverse backgrounds who can use this analytical tool and resulting proxies in
environmental change research. The new instrument will be available for use by
other researchers at Notre Dame and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
supports the acquisition a new high performance liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometer (HPLC-MS) for measurement of microbial membrane lipids, glycerol
dialkyl glycerol tetraethers (GDGTs) at the University of Notre Dame. The Single
Quad HPLC-MS will run in normal phase with solvent eluents, have an atmospheric
pressure chemical ionization (APCI) source, a thermostatted column compartment
that can fit multiple columns in tandem, a fraction collector for preparative
mode, and an autosampler. Improvements in HPLC-MS have propelled the growth of
rapid, sensitive, and more economical detection of higher molecular weight and
polar compounds. Further, recent advances in microbial ecology and organic
geochemistry have expanded our understanding of microbial lipid synthesis and
spatial distribution, particularly with respect to membrane lipids of Bacteria
and Archaea, known as GDGTs, some of the most ubiquitous lipids on Earth.
Together, these innovations in analytical chemistry and understanding of
microbial processes have led to proxy development using GDGT distributions and
abundances to revolutionize research pertaining to changing environmental
conditions, critical to understanding
paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.