* 2117304
* MRI: Acquisition of a benchtop cell sorter to advance undergraduate research and training in biology at Lewis &amp; Clark College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Greg Hermann, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 125,000.00

An award is made to Lewis &amp; Clark College to acquire a benchtop cell sorter,
which will facilitate innovative and cutting-edge research in at least three
laboratories on campus. Cell sorting is a method used to characterize, separate,
and collect cells or organelles from a heterogeneous population based on
physical, chemical and/or molecular properties. The acquisition of a cell sorter
will support the Biology Department in providing meaningful research experiences
and training in the biological sciences to undergraduate students. By expanding
the range of approaches available on campus, this instrument will broaden the
research capacity at Lewis &amp; Clark College and enhance opportunities for
undergraduate students working in faculty research labs. The cell sorter also
will be incorporated into laboratory courses, even at the introductory-level, in
which students are trained to design and carry out their own original,
independent research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cell sorting has becoming
increasingly common and necessary in biological research, due to advancements in
experimental methods and a deeper appreciation for studying unique cell-types
and organelles. Genomics and proteomics technologies are now more sensitive,
efficient, and affordable, creating new opportunities to analyze specific cells
and organelles that are collected by cell sorting. Recent developments also have
made gene editing easier and more accessible, and best practices employ a cell
sorter to select genetically altered cells. The availability of a cell sorter,
therefore, will support and advance research in at least three laboratories at
Lewis &amp; Clark College to employ these modern methods towards gaining new
insight into biological processes. These include studies into the mechanisms of
cell-specific gene regulation, the effects of developmental nicotine exposure in
D. melanogaster, and the functions of lysosome-related organelles in C.
elegans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.