* 2117629
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscopy-Infrared Spectroscopy (AFM-IR) System for Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ruihua Cheng, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 450,100.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;An Atomic Force Microscopy-Infrared
Spectroscopy (AFM-IR) system enables researchers to image samples with nanometer
precision while collecting chemical, optical, mechanical and surface morphology
information at the same time. This opens exciting new possibilities for
multidisciplinary analysis and allows investigators to extend their research
into new scientific directions and answer advanced fundamental science and
engineering questions at the nanoscale. The instrument's versatility, non-
destructive nature, and ability to operate under controlled conditions (e.g.,
temperature, hydration, etc.) make it suitable for widespread use with materials
that range from delicate biological systems to rigid and engineered materials.
AFM-IR represents a new and emerging technology. At Indiana University-Purdue
University Indianapolis (IUPUI), the instrument supports faculty and students
from four schools (Science, Engineering &amp; Technology, Medicine, and
Dentistry) by providing capabilities for interdisciplinary scientific discovery,
workforce training, and use in teaching and K-12 outreach efforts. Importantly,
its placement within the Integrated Nanosystems Development Institute's shared
nanoscale characterization facility at IUPUI allows the AFM-IR to serve as a
resource for external and industry users to boost innovation and collaboration
throughout the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;By
combining atomic force microscopy, nanoscale infrared spectroscopy, and
scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy in a single platform, the
acquired AFM-IR system enables ultrafast imaging and nanoscale mapping of
morphological and mechanical characteristics, as well as chemical and optical
properties. The latter are the result of an IR beam being focused onto an AFM
tip, and either the dissipation of the material (via cantilever deflection
caused by photothermal expansion) or the backscattered signal is detected to
yield nanoscale spectroscopic data. Deflection is easily induced in soft and/or
biological samples, whereas harder samples can scatter a sufficient amount of
light. Together, this creates a powerful tool for characterizing samples that
span soft to rigid, and enables the ability to perform hyperspectral imaging
(where a complete infrared spectrum is obtained at every pixel, at a spatial
resolution of 10nm) or absorption maps at different wavenumbers, all while
retaining the capabilities of the full-featured atomic force microscope that the
system is built around. As a result, the AFM-IR serves a team of investigators
with current research spanning the design/characterization of novel
bionanosensors, nanocarriers, and nanomaterials for energy applications, to the
fundamental biology of ligand damage, bone loading, and wound healing, to
industrial process development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.