* 2117732
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed Digital Image Correlation System for Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Meilin Yu, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 283,796.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
three-dimensional (3D) high-speed digital image correlation (DIC) system that
provides 3D full-field nonintrusive measurements of deformation, vibration and
strain. The instrument will enable new research, education and outreach
activities, and collaboration among universities, industry and national labs.
Research on structural health monitoring of critical components and
infrastructure can enable enhanced public safety in aircraft and buildings. A
better understanding of nonlinear wave propagation can lead to new sensing
capabilities for metamaterials -- paving the way for enhanced medical devices,
more productive manufacturing systems and more sophisticated entertainment
systems, and inspiring new technologies for data encryption and damage
detection. The instrumentation will be incorporated into various undergraduate
and graduate courses and students in the Meyerhoff Scholars Program and K-12
outreach activities will have an opportunity to use the instrument.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 3D high-speed DIC system will enable researchers to
tackle challenging problems in dynamic systems, such as nonlinear wave
propagation and metamaterials, structural health monitoring, fluid-structure
interaction (FSI), nonlinear dynamics, and thermal modal parameter
identification. Fundamental knowledge gaps to be addressed include experimental
characterization of amplitude-dependent dispersion shifts in nonlinear lattices
and wave motion stability, development of damage-sensitive vibration-based
methods for sandwich panels and of advanced FSI diagnostic technologies with
simultaneous flow and structural measurement capabilities, and the understanding
of quasi-periodic nonlinear dynamic behaviors of structures and the effects of
geometric imperfections and temperatures on natural frequencies of structures.
The 3D high-speed DIC system will also provide an important tool for validation
of numerical models of FSI and other problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.