* 2117638
* MRI: Acquisition of High Frequency Electron Paramagnetic Spectrometer – cutting edge tool for modern research
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lavrent Khachatryan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,462,820.00

This award enables the acquisition of the most modern instrumentation (high
frequency/high field electron paramagnetic spectrometer) to study structure of
compounds that contain unpaired electrons. Such molecules are called
“paramagnetic” and have critical functions in living organisms and in the
environment. This instrument will provide a cutting edge tool for studies in
medicine and biology (new drug development, understanding of protein activity
and interactions, and development of new molecules used for disease
diagnostics), informatics and engineering (development of new class of memory
chips, green energy materials) and will allow for significant technological jump
that enables advanced studies of such systems. Studies of paramagnetic compounds
have been hampered due to poor resolution of existing technology and this
technique has not traditionally been used as a common tool for research due to
its technological limitations and low availability. This instrument will not
only add a completely new dimension to the research capabilities for many
regional and national researchers, but also provide an essential learning tool
for a new generation of scientists. Training will be provided to students and
postdoctoral associates nationwide through an open house program advertised at
research institutions throughout the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
seeks to purchase the Bruker ELEXYS E780, the first commercially manufactured
high frequency/high field electron paramagnetic spectrometer in the United
States, operating at 263 GHz. This would be the second instrument operating
above 250 GHz; and the only high frequency instrument with electron-nuclear
resonance capabilities. The ELEXYS E780 can perform experiments at both
continuous wave and pulse wave mode, with electron-nuclear double resonance and
electron-nuclear-nuclear resonance techniques and at temperatures down to 4 K.
As a result, a significant increase in sensitivity and resolution of the spin
orientation in the magnetic field can be achieved, which provides detailed
structural information of the paramagnetic center. Detailed information
regarding the nuclear distances from the paramagnetic centers and high spectral
resolution can be achieved in solids, gases, liquids, cells, and in vivo.
Projects that will immediately benefit from the acquisition of this instrument
include research to understand changes in mitochondria function in diseases;
photosystem II operation and development of man-made photosynthesis systems;
conversion of biomass into valuable products; engineering of better polymers;
development of new bioimaging molecules; and understanding the origin and fate
of many environmental pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.