* 2117588
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS DynaCool) for Quantum Materials Research and Education at NSU
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Doyle Temple, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2023
* USD 741,571.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award
will enable the purchase and installation of a Cryogen-Free Physical Property
Measurement System (PPMS) that will be used for research and education training
in fabrication and characterization of new quantum materials and devices. The
instrument will be located in the Norfolk State University McDemmond Center for
Applied Research (MCAR) and will be available for use by faculty and students.
It will also be the only instrument of its kind in the Hampton Roads area with
MCAR being centrally a location within a 45 minute drive of six other
universities, four community colleges, the Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator
Facility, the NASA Langley Research Center, and the Eastern Virginia Medical
School, none of which have local access to this type of equipment. The PPMS
system will be used to characterize both basic materials properties and device
performance in an accurately controlled environment including temperature and
applied magnetic field. This system will have a direct impact on the education,
research training, and professional development of at least 20 MS and PhD
students in the NSU material science and engineering graduate programs, and over
30 NSU undergraduate STEM majors with the majority of all the participants
coming from groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. The impact on
undergraduates will result from individual student research projects and
research training through modules developed for advanced laboratory
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This major
instrumentation is an important addition to Norfolk State Universityâ€™s materials
research infrastructure and will support diverse interdisciplinary materials
research projects ranging from fundamental studies of quantum materials,
signatures of novel spin-textures in noncentrosymmetric magnets, topological
effects and critical phenomena, characterization of novel organic semiconductor
and hybrid materials, magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications and
thin films of rare-earth magnetocaloric and magneto-elastic materials. The
Physical Properties Measurement System is equipped with an integrated
conduction-cooled superconducting 14 Tesla magnet which is recognized as state-
of-the-art high magnetic field and low-temperature system with exceptional
stability and sensitivity. This system can cool the sample chamber from room-
temperature down to 1.9 K in less than 40 minutes. A dilution refrigerator
insert provides the capability to conduct measurements down to 50 mK, essential
for probing quantum mechanical phenomena in materials. The sample chamber
accommodates a wide range of measurement inserts, all of which allow fully
automated data acquisition under computer control over the full range of
magnetic field and temperature. A multi-function probe accommodates custom
experiments, and a horizontal sample rotator allows magnetoresistance
measurements as a function of sample orientation relative to magnetic field.
This system provides the capability to measure electrical resistivity, thermal
conductivity, Hall Effect, and other thermoelectric properties, as well as
susceptibility and magnetization. The closed-cycle cryogen-free feature of this
system ensures cost-effective and reliable long-term operation of the
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.