* 2117294
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Research and STEM Education Across the South Puget Sound
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Marc Nahmani, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 652,602.00

An award is made to the University of Puget Sound to acquire a state-of-the-art
transmission electron microscope to advance the nanoscale research of over 18
investigators at three primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs): the
University of Puget Sound, the University of Washingtonâ€“Tacoma, and Pacific
Lutheran University. Additionally, the TEM will offer a unique training
opportunity for an estimated 200 undergraduate students annually who will use
the instrument for research and in laboratory courses at their respective
institutions. The procurement of this TEM will enable a collaboratively designed
and run summer multimodal microscopy course-based research experience class, in
which students across five local institutions will participate. This TEM will
also play a central role in collaborative authentic research experiences with an
estimated 60-80 local high school students each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
user-friendly and versatile microscope will be the only TEM in the South Puget
Sound and will drive a host of research projects across labs within this region.
These projects hold the potential to produce innovative results that could (1)
lead to a comprehensive understanding of how bacterial biofilms are created; (2)
create crucial new antibodies able to efficiently traverse the blood-brain
barrier and remain in the brain; (3) revolutionize the manufacturing of solar
cells and LEDs through uniform nanocrystal formation; (4) discover and
characterize a novel form of neuronal communication and synapse stability; (5)
lead to breakthroughs in bismuth nanoparticle synthesis and their biomolecular
interactions; and (6) uncover the link between taste receptor function and motor
behavior. This TEM will enable research that will result in numerous high-
impact, undergraduate driven publications. Overall, the acquisition of this TEM
will have a transformative effect on research and undergraduate education across
disciplines and institutions in the South Puget Sound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.