* 2117251
* MRI: Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatograph QToF Mass Spectrometer to Support Research and Training at Hofstra University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kevin Bisceglia, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 526,267.00

An award is made to Hofstra University to support the acquisition of a liquid
chromatograph quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (LC-MS) and a nitrogen
generator. The acquisition brings the first high-resolution mass spectrometer to
an academic institution in Nassau County (Pop: 1.36 million). LC-MS is an
important analytical technique for separating and characterizing complex
mixtures of chemical and biological molecules, and has broad applications across
science and engineering. The instrument will be incorporated into multiple
courses in the STEM curriculum at Hofstra University, providing undergraduates
with exposure to this crucially important technology. Outside the classroom,
students will receive in-depth training in LC-MS through faculty-guided research
across four disciplines at Hofstra and nearby Adelphi University and the State
University of New York â€“ Old Westbury. Hofstra and its partner institutions
successfully recruit and train diverse student bodies through a variety of
community outreach and support programs. Experience with cutting edge LC-MS
instrumentation will benefit that diverse group of students when they seek
employment or pursue graduate studies in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new LC-MS will greatly enhance research capabilities in biology, biochemistry,
and biotechnology. Research projects enabled by the instrument vary widely, from
studying the occurrence and transformation of pollutants in environmental
systems, to characterizing chemical modifications in RNA/protein complexes
essential to mRNA transport. The instrument will be used to conduct proteomic
analyses of protein export in polymicrobial communities and for metabolomic
analyses of plant-microbe interactions of beachgrass and grapevines. It will be
used to characterize newly synthesized molecules for studying fatty acid
recycling and for investigating new approaches for carbon-carbon bond formation.
The instrument will also be used for analyzing protein derivatization in the
osteodifferentiation of stem cells and the dephosphorylation of signaling
networks involved in cancer development. The results of these research efforts
will be disseminated by students and faculty at scientific conferences,
symposia, and in peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.