* 2117380
* MRI:  Acquisition of LUMICKS C-Trap Ultra-High-Resolution Optical Tweezer System
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robert Raphael, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,043,000.00

Optical tweezers use light to non-invasively manipulate tiny objects (typically
smaller than can be seen with the naked eye) including cells, nanoparticles, and
individual molecules. The ability to hold, move, and stretch microscale objects
with nanometer precision while simultaneously measuring fluorescence signals
enables new scientific discoveries in biology, chemistry, and engineering. The
Lumicks C-Trap system is state-of-the art optical tweezer system will support
advanced experiments by a variety of researchers including single-molecule
manipulation, mechanical properties of proteins and lipid membranes, and the
study of forces governing colloidal and polymer assemblies. The knowledge
obtained from optical tweezer studies have the potential to impact applications
of national interest, ranging from new therapeutics and clinical treatments for
various diseases to advanced materials for energy and sustainability needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Widescale adoption of optical tweezers has been limited
due to the difficulty in constructing and maintaining a robust optical tweezer
system that can correctly measure nanoscale forces. The objective of this MRI
proposal is to acquire a Lumicks C-Trap to add optical tweezer capabilities to
the shared research instrumentation facility at Rice University. The Lumicks
C-Trap is a user-friendly optical tweezer instrument that combines wide-field
and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy to provide state-of-the-
art imaging with simultaneous single-molecule manipulation. Additionally, the
Lumicks C-Trap incorporates a novel microfluidic accessory that streamlines
workflow and enables experiments to be performed under laminar flow in a
temperature-controlled environment. Proposed experiments include tracking
cellular processes, measuring protein and polymer surface interactions, probing
the mechanical properties of biological membranes, and designing novel colloidal
molecules. With the Lumicks C-Trap system, researchers and students will be
trained to make sensitive force measurements, probe single-molecules, and
manipulate materials with nanoscale precision. Acquisition of the C-Trap will
advance the growing field of soft condensed matter and biophysical research at
Rice University and lead to collaborative research with institutions in the
greater Houston region, including the Texas Medical
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.