* 2117954
* MRI: Acquisition of a Field Emission Gun Scanning Electron Microscope for Cal State Northridge Scanning Microscopy Lab
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Elena Miranda, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 800,200.00

The purpose of the project is to acquire a high-performance scanning electron
microscope (SEM) with superior imaging and analytical capability for use by
geology, chemistry, physics, and biology faculty and students at California
State University Northridge (CSUN), one of the largest campuses in the 23 campus
California State University (CSU) system. CSUN is a federally designated
Hispanic-serving public university granting Master of Science (M.S.) degrees.
The acquisition of the new SEM will distinguish CSUN within the 23-campus, non-
Ph.D.-granting CSU system and will have transformative effects on faculty and
student research at institutional, regional, and state levels. At the
institutional level, research programs of nearly a dozen CSUN science faculty
and their students will be transformed by the analytical capability of the new
SEM that are made possible by the field emission source of the electrons used
for imaging, and the add-on detectors that allow for structural and chemical
characterization of samples. At the state level, this caliber of field emission
SEM (FE-SEM) would be unique within the CSU system, representing an elevation in
the research infrastructure of M.S.-granting institutions. The Co-PIs have
concrete plans to run the FE-SEM lab as a multi-user facility that supports both
virtual and physical access for other CSU students and faculty. At the regional
level, the Microscopy Lab has partnered with the CSU Chancellor’s Office
Research Department to formalize its status as a center and to create and grow a
CSU-wide community of faculty and student users of the new microscopy facility
through a series of system-wide webinars showcasing the instrument and potential
research and student training uses. The FE-SEM will enhance the full
participation of underrepresented people through the involvement of diverse
faculty (two out of three Co-PIs are from underrepresented groups in the
geosciences) and students at a M.S.-granting, Hispanic-serving institution
(HSI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, CSUN will acquire a field
emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) that offers nano-scale resolution
and state-of-the-art analytical capabilities, including: 1) high speed electron
backscatter diffraction (EBSD), 2) energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS)
analysis, and 3) cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging. These capabilities are
essential for leading-edge research for a team at California State University
Northridge (CSUN) comprising 3 geoscientist Co-PIs and 8 other faculty
colleagues from geology, chemistry, biology, and physics. Most importantly, the
acquisition of the FE-SEM will revolutionize the research training of
undergraduate and M.S. students who would typically need to travel to a
Ph.D.-granting institution where they are granted sporadic access to
instrumentation with these capabilities. The FE-SEM will be housed in the
Department of Geological Sciences at CSUN, where it will be supported by the
Department’s dedicated instrument technician and maintained by service contract
with funding gifted annually by a private donor. The FE-SEM will enhance the
research infrastructure at a M.S.-granting HSI, which is an important step in
creating access to research training for students who are unable to attend or
afford an education at better-instrumented Ph.D.-granting institutions. Given
that terminal geoscience M.S. degree recipients consistently outnumber Ph.D.
recipients nationwide, this is critical training for a significant part of the
future STEM workforce. The FE-SEM will improve the research training of students
through 1) mentored research projects, 2) coursework, 3) an innovative post-M.S.
degree training program, and 4) a microscopy lecture series. The latter two
items specifically promote the development of a competitive workforce and
partnerships between academia and industry,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.