* 2117094
* MRI: Acquisition of multi-use cryostat/magnet “Physical Properties Measurement System” for studying quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 543,878.00

Searching for new materials and engineering systems with desired quantum
properties holds promise to enable leaps not only in fundamental solid-state
physics but also in quantum information processing and quantum sensing. This
project acquires a versatile shared-use system for studying the physical
properties of new quantum-mechanical devices and materials at low temperatures
and high magnetic fields. The modular and extensible nature of the system allows
for a wide range of effects to be examined. At the same time, the turnkey nature
of the system makes it well suited as a platform for training the next
generation of scientific researchers, both in the context of classwork in
experimental materials science and condensed-matter physics and for
undergraduate and high-school students performing summer research programs in
the laboratories of the scientists involved in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project acquires a multi-use cryostat, with
temperatures ranging from 1.8 to 400 K in its standard configuration and to 50
mK with an included dilution-refrigeration insert. Combined with a 14 T magnet,
this enables measuring materials over a broad range of parameter space. The base
capabilities of the system are leveraged by several measurement modules
including magnetization, specific heat, and susceptibility to perform multimodal
measurements of new quantum materials. Research projects include an extensive
program on van der Waals heterostructures, where engineering strain into
monolayer graphene has been shown to provide a wide range of control over the
electronic correlation and magnetic states, and the construction of Moire
superlattices built from multilayer graphene and transition metal
dichalcogenides lead to exotic quantum phases. Magnetic susceptibility
measurements in the sub-Kelvin regime characterize rare-earth antiferromagnets
for use in high-efficiency quantum transduction devices. Another platform for
quantum transduction, field-tuned superconducting resonators, are characterized
via microwave impedance measurements. Rapid-cycle testing of magnetization and
resistivity support characterizing a wide variety of correlated electronic and
magnetic materials prior to ultra-fast optical measurements. Temperature-
dependent Hall Effect measurements on patterned 2D plasmonic materials yield
insight into the mobilities and damping pathways of the resonances. Combined
electrical and magnetic measurements probe the electrochemistry of candidate
materials for future battery cathode designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.