* 2117233
* MRI: Acquisition of an EEG for Examination of Brain-Behavior Relationships Across the Lifespan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jin Bo, Eastern Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,919.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an
Electroencephalography (EEG) system (ANT Neuro eego mylab128-channel) to
establish the first EEG laboratory for brain imaging at Eastern Michigan
University (EMU). EEG is a non-invasive human brain imaging method that measures
neural electrical activity in the human brain arising from thinking and behavior
with millisecond accuracy. The EEG laboratory critically expands neuroscience
training and research in the Departments of Psychology, Communication Sciences
and Disorders, and the interdisciplinary Neuroscience Program (Psychology,
Biology, Chemistry). The EEG laboratory also has a substantial regional impact
on the institutional community. EMU is recognized as one of the most diverse
universities in the Midwest. The EEG laboratory allows EMU to contribute to the
broader aims of the scientific community to recruit, retain, and promote members
of minoritized groups into STEM fields. The laboratory allows for workshops to
train local and regional faculty and students on neuroimaging, serve as a
catalyst for the development of research assistantships and fellowships targeted
for underrepresented students, including those from rural communities, and be
central in creating a mentoring partnership with the McNair Scholars Program for
students interested in EEG research. The EEG laboratory enhances collaborative
research efforts within EMU, with partnering regional institutions, and foster
national collaborations in developmental
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge of the brain mechanisms underlying
fundamental cognitive and behavioral processes (e.g. attention and language) in
infants/children and older adults, the precise timing of developmental changes,
and knowledge of crucial environmental factors that impact this timing has
lagged behind research with younger adults and remains a frontier of
investigation. EEG is non-invasive and well-tolerated by infants and children.
This team examines the EEG signals and developmental timing of key cognitive and
behavioral processes including attention and working memory, motor control,
self-regulation, sleep, and communication. EEG event-related potentials,
frequency (power), and brain connectivity in developing neural networks are
explored. The electrophysiological mechanisms (spectral power and connectivity)
underpinning the development of the default mode and dorsal attention networks
and orienting system in infancy/toddlerhood are examined to clarify the
relationships between attention and social-communication. The neural correlates
of change of bimanual and unimanual motor control across the lifespan as well as
the neural underpinnings of inconsistent hand preference and hand dominance are
being investigated. Investigators are examining developmental changes and
environmental precursors of event-related potentials hypothesized to underlie
self-regulation. Investigation of the functions of napping, including
neurophysiology and behavior, in early childhood provide vital information on
reciprocal relations between the development of sleep-wake regulation and the
development of attention. Finally, few studies have examined the
neurophysiological mechanisms underlying working memory-linguistic processes in
older adults. EEG is being used to explore the long-term learning effects and
the compensatory processes that occur in older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.