* 2117934
* MRI: Acquisition of an Open Access Shared-Use MALDI-TOF/TOF Mass Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Travis Bailey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Colorado State University is acquiring a
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization tandem time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF-
TOF) mass spectrometer to support Professor Travis Bailey and colleagues Claudia
Boot, Karolien Denef and Garrett Miyake. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is
one of the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small
quantities of chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle
ionization (ideal for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic
acids, carbohydrates, synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized species)
with a detection mode that offers an excellent balance between sensitivity and
accuracy across a wide mass range. This highly sensitive technique allows
identification and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex
mixture. In the time-of-flight (TOF) method of mass spectrometry, the mass-to-
charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way in which ions are accelerated by
an electric field of known strength. The velocity of the ion depends on the
mass-to-charge ratio (heavier ions of the same charge reach lower speeds). The
time that the ions take to reach a detector at a known distance is measured.
This time depends on the velocity of the ion, and therefore is a measure of its
mass-to-charge ratio. From this ratio and known experimental parameters, the ion
can be characterized. The tandem capabilities (TOF-TOF) increase the
characterization capabilities. The acquisition strengthens the research
infrastructure at the university and regional area. The instrument broadens
participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. It is also used by collaborators at the various campuses and other
regional institutions. The MALDI-TOF-TOF is also employed by undergraduate and
graduate students. It is also used in a postdoc instrumentalist training program
and annual schools on instrumental methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
the MALDI-TOF-TOF mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels. It is especially useful for studies in the development of
biological imaging tools and identifying synthesized biological tissues. The
instrumentation is also used for controling pharmaceutical delivery agents and
nanocarriers and studying heat-reflective coatings. The instrument serves
researchers preparing metal-free catalysts and high-value self-sustainable
polymers and those using diagnostics and drugs to potentially fight infectious
disease. The mass spectrometer is also utilized in the preparation of efficient
carbon capture membranes and for the study of blood compatible surfaces and
polymeric wound healing scaffolds. Additionally, it is employed in
characterizing prepared advanced hydrogel networks and for studying energy
storage materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.