* 2117641
* MRI Consortium: Development of Upgraded Stellar Intensity Interferometry Instrumentation for the VERITAS Observatory
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Kieda, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,774.00

Very-high energy (VHE) gamma-rays are produced in the particle accelerations
that occur in some of the most extreme environments in the Universe. As
astrophysical messengers, their observation provides an important window to
study the conditions and processes underway in these energetic events. This
award supports the instrument development for upgrades to the mirror and camera
systems of the VERITAS gamma-ray observatory located at Amado, AZ. In operation
since 2007, the VERITAS imaging air Cherenkov telescopes are directly exposed to
the Arizona elements, impacting the response of the 12 meter mirror systems over
time. New developments in mirror resurfacing and advanced protective coatings
make it possible to restore the reflectivity of the telescopes to nearly their
original state, significantly enhancing the observatory’s sensitivity to VHE
gamma rays across the full range of accessible energies. A complementary suite
of focal plane instrumentation for enhanced collimation and bandpass filtering
will also improve the effective mirror area observed by the telescopes by
approximately a factor of two. Combined, the upgrades will significantly augment
the on-going VERITAS observing missions of VHE gamma-rays from astrophysical
optics, including real-time multi-messenger follow-ups, and the recently
implemented novel stellar intensity interferometry (SII) program. The award
provides unique opportunities for training of student and postdoctoral
researchers in developing these new technologies that will enhance the existing
VERITAS observatory and are critical to extending the techniques to the next
generation Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mirror and
focal plane upgrades will be installed on the existing four VERITAS telescopes
in operation in Arizona. In cooperation with the original mirror manufacturer,
the existing mirror coatings will be stripped and a new aluminum and hafnium
coating will be applied to the mirror surface, with a quartz (SiO2) overcoat
added for protection from the harsh Arizona elements. An accelerated program to
rapidly recoat as many mirrors as possible is planned that will quickly bring
the telescopes' reflectivity to 80-85%, providing a 30-35% average increase in
light that will improve the observatory’s sensitivity to soft spectrum sources
by approximately a factor of 2. It is anticipated that this overcoat technology
will prove to be more durable and last longer (up to 5 years), reducing long-
term maintenance for VERITAS and future instruments. The focal plane optics
activities will allow for the development of the radial-gradient interference
filter technology and a substantial reduction in focal plane noise. These
developments may provide future transformational capacity for improving the
sensitivity of large Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov observatories, such as
VERITAS and CTA, for future astrophysics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.