* 2117860
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in DRMS:  Connecting Artificial Intelligence Literacy and Human-AI Decision Making Outcomes in Organizational Hiring
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Keri Stephens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 27,963.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organizations are increasingly
incorporating artificial intelligence (AI)-based technologies into decision-
making processes. For example, hiring teams may use AI-based tools that analyze
application data, such as resumes and interview recordings, to provide hiring
recommendations. AI-based algorithms can process large amounts of data and
generate recommendations that inform decisions that used to be made solely by
human decision-makers. Despite the widespread use of AI-based technologies,
everyday non-expert users of these technologies may not have sufficient
knowledge about AI, or AI literacy, to make fair decisions using AI-based
recommendations. This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement Grant (DDRIG)
examines whether receiving recommendations from an AI-based source impacts
outcomes when decision-makers vary in their AI literacy. This project has two
primary purposes: 1) to develop a measure for people's AI literacy within the
context of decision-making, and 2) to test this measure in a hiring scenario
experiment. This research supports NSF’s mission to promote the progress of
science by contributing tools that support further research on human-AI
interaction, a subject becoming more relevant as organizations continue to
introduce new AI-based technologies into the workplace. This work helps people,
regardless of technical background, become better informed and thoughtful human-
AI decision-makers. The findings from this research advance a validated measure
for AI literacy that researchers, individuals, and organizations can use to
measure individuals' general understanding of AI-based technologies and identify
potential gaps in knowledge that can impact how they use AI-based information to
make decisions. This research also informs the development of educational
resources that help job seekers navigate the AI-based hiring
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research entails two phases. Phase I involves
a scale development effort that uses past research and pilot interview data to
develop and test scale items for an AI literacy measure. To determine whether
people's AI literacy plays a significant role in how people use AI-based
information to make hiring recommendations, phase II involves a hiring scenario
experiment. In the experiment, participants evaluate a mock job application and
use input from a secondary evaluation to decide whether the applicant should
move forward in the hiring process, and participants' AI literacy (as measured
by the scale developed in phase I) is used as a control variable. The results
from this investigation may help various stakeholders better understand how
people's understanding of AI influences decision-making outcomes. The findings
have the potential to contribute to work on AI training and education at large.
Furthermore, the experiment is the first application of the AI literacy measure
that catalyzes future research exploring the relationship between AI literacy
and human-AI decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.