* 2117826
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Power 2-um Laser System as the Backbone of an Utrafast X-Ray/THz Facility
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zenghu Chang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,214,571.00

This project, Acquiring a High-peak-power High-repetition-rate Ultrafast
Infrared Laser System at 2 µm Wavelength, provides the backbone of a multi-user
facility named, "User Facility for Attosecond Soft x-rays and Terahertz
(UFAST)". With the highest average power of its kind anywhere in the world
today, this laser system will enable a tabletop attosecond (a billionth of a
billionth of a second) soft-x-ray photon source at record high flux with
sufficient photon energies for directly exciting, at the deepest level,
essential atoms, such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, and also enable long-
wavelength-infrared and terahertz sources of high-field and few – single cycle
pulse duration. These photon sources and the pump laser will be utilized to
carry out frontier research projects where facility users develop the world’s
fastest x-ray photon source, track electron motion at its natural time scale
with atomic spatial resolution, monitor quantum/topological phase transition
dynamics, investigate new photo-induced physical and chemical processes in
materials, test a new theory for a novel cold-nanoplasma source, and further
improve a terahertz spectroscopic tool for probing uncharted regions of the
universe. Results of these research projects will advance knowledge and
technologies in physical, chemical, and planetary sciences, as well as optical
engineering. UFAST delivers unique parameters that are not available around the
world and will enhance US competitiveness in high-flux ultrafast technologies
and attosecond science. The engineering and research activities at UFAST will
grant graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral scholars,
access to frontier ultrafast research and technologies, and particularly promote
training of minority students in cutting-edge research projects. The future
generation of work force will be trained in the construction and operation of a
unique facility involving advanced photon sources and detectors, and will obtain
research, teamwork, and leadership skills. In addition to the multidisciplinary
nature of its applications, the facility will be accessible to users across the
US and from around the world and will stimulate collaborations across research
fields and institutions, as well as between experimentalists and
theorists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The laser system to be acquired will deliver
2-µm-wavelength and few-cycle-duration pulses with carrier envelope phase (CEP)
stabilization at a repetition rate of 100 kHz. It will be used to pump a table-
top photon source of isolated attosecond pulses in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV)
and water window (284 – 543 eV) range, and to pump photon sources of few –
single-cycle pulses in the long wavelength infrared (8 – 15 m) and terahertz
(0.6 – 60 THz) range. This new capability will enable research advances in
several areas: time-resolved investigation of processes driven by or involving
electronic dynamics, such as electron correlation, charge migration and
transfer, in gas and condensed phase targets, quantum and topological systems as
well as at surfaces; investigation of strong-field phenomena, particularly the
intensity-demanding quasistatic regime, in solids over a variety of laser
parameters; investigation of new optical breakdown mechanisms and optimization
of laser machining quality; experimentally demonstrating photon-induced low-
temperature non-equilibrium nanoplasmas; and extending laboratory spectral
library with terahertz time-domain spectroscopy to fill a knowledge gap
regarding the composition and evolution of the solar
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.