* 2117368
* Collaborative Research: Using herbivore kairomones to assess short-term and legacy risk responses in the early life stages of long-lived woody plants
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Colin Orians, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,651.00

Even though plants cannot move, they are far from defenseless against their
herbivores. While research exploring how plants protect themselves has focused
largely on changes in plant defense that occur in response to herbivore attack,
it has recently been shown that plants can detect and respond to herbivore cues
(referred to as ‘kairomones’) even before an attack begins. Mucus from snails
and slugs, herbivores that attack seeds and seedlings, triggers defensive
responses in seedlings that help the plants survive subsequent attack by slugs
or other herbivores. Such defenses may be particularly important for seedling
sugar maple trees, an iconic tree in the northeastern US critical to the maple
sugar industry that is declining throughout its range. An invasive slug, the
dusky Arion, poses a major threat to newly germinated sugar maple seedlings;
this project addresses how mucus from this slug affects the anti-herbivore
defenses of sugar maples ranging in age from seedlings to saplings. It also
evaluates whether early-life exposure to mucus can help protect sugar maples
against later-arriving herbivores ranging from gypsy moths to white-tailed deer.
The project also funds work by the Rhode Island-based Science and Math
Investigative Learning (SMILE) program, a classroom-based organization that
works with kids grades 4-12 to increase the numbers of educationally
disadvantaged students who graduate from high school prepared to enter higher
education and pursue STEM careers. Students work with project scientists on
field- and classroom-based experiences that employ inquiry-based learning to
reveal ecological principles and explore local
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite substantial research exploring plant
defense induction during and after herbivore attack, little is known about
whether and how plants use pre-attack cues such as kairomones (herbivore-emitted
chemicals not associated with attack that are detected by - and thus provide
benefits to - a plant) to preemptively induce defense. Herbivore kairomones have
recently been documented in multiple systems; slug/snail mucus, an easily
obtained and manipulable kairomone, can be used to ask novel questions about
plant risk perception and induced responses. The fact that slugs preferentially
attack seedlings, a highly vulnerable life history stage, highlights the
selective advantage of pre-attack mucus detection and response. The following
questions are addressed in a long-lived woody plant system: How do different
risk cues affect growth and defense of different-aged seedlings?; How do
ontogenetic shifts in susceptibility determine patterns of responses?; What are
the immediate and legacy consequences of risk perception and ontogeny in the
field? These questions are asked using the slug Arion subfuscus and the sugar
maple Acer saccharum in experiments exploring interactions between risk cue
quality and seedling age over both short (~1 month) and long (&gt;1 yr.) time
periods. This is the first study of how kairomones affect woody plant defense,
growth, and subsequent herbivore vulnerability. The manipulation of herbivore
cues, ontogeny, and differential susceptibility within and across seasons
explores whether current plant defense reflects the ‘ghost of herbivory risk
past’; present-day defense may often only make sense considering past
information received by plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.