* 2117602
* MRI: Acquisition of an advanced scanning electron microscope for in situ and in operando materials characterization and education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lin Han, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 687,320.00

This Major Research Instrumentation supports Drexel University with the
acquisition of a state-of-the-art scanning electron microscope (SEM) designed
for advanced imaging and analysis. The instrument placed in the Materials
Characterization Core (MCC) shared-instrumentation facility provides all-around
performance for imaging and analysis. The SEM replaces an outdated instrument
and enhances research outcomes for a broad user base including over 40 research
groups at Drexel and several users from nearby universities and businesses. The
instrument significantly benefits researchers at Drexel University and promotes
collaboration between Drexel and nearby institutions such as Villanova
University, Temple University, and Rowan University. In addition to the
versatile research activities enabled by the proposed SEM, the new SEM enhances
Drexel’s education and training experience considerably. The SEM is housed in
and managed by an established core facility with full-time technical staff, with
15-year record for excellent stewardship of major instrumentation. The MCC
promotes technical training of users such that they become proficient and
independent users and partners with the University’s academic units to provide
undergraduate and graduate students with hands-on experiences integrated into
course curricula. It contributes to the outreach program sponsored by the MCC
and academic units to introduce young people to nanoscience, engineering, and
technological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a state-of-the-
art scanning electron microscope (SEM) significantly strengthens the strong in
situ electron microscopy capability at Drexel, and helps accelerate/facilitate
research and educational activities in four critical areas: (1) New Materials
for Energy and Sustainability – Temperature control and in operando
electrochemistry in the SEM drive the discovery of new materials, materials
systems, and structures to optimize next-generation battery technologies. (2)
Advanced Mechanical Property Characterization – In situ mechanical testing at
controlled temperatures combined with high-resolution imaging and chemical
mapping to advance understanding of deformation mechanisms in novel layered
crystalline solids and biomaterials. (3) Engineering Soft Materials and
Biomaterials – High spatial resolution chemical mapping and low-current, low-
vacuum imaging to expand research into liquid-free conformal polymer coatings
and enable characterization and taxonomic classification of rare, historic
collections of microscopic, fossilized diatoms. In situ mechanical testing at
controlled temperatures will advance the development of new adhesives, polymer
nanocomposites, and hydrogels. (4) Advanced Electronic Materials – In situ
heating stages combined with charge-free imaging of insulating samples will
enable new experiments on complex oxide heterostructures designed. Similarly, in
situ heating will advance efforts to understand and design efficient fabrication
processes for novel quantum materials and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.