* 2117896
* MRI Consortium: Development of Dynamic PicoProbe for Multi-Modal, Multi-Dimensional HyperSpectral Imaging of Soft/Hard Matter and Interfaces in Environmental Media
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chong Liu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,021,603.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award by both the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical
Sciences (MPS) and the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) supports the
development of a nanoscale metrological resource, the Dynamic PicoProbe, to
enable quantitative investigations of liquid/solid/hard/soft matter interfaces
for time-resolved high-resolution in-situ environmental observations using
advanced analytical electron microscopy. Funding this instrument development
allows advancement in several areas relevant to engineering and materials
research with applications in the water-energy nexus, catalysis, quantum
electronics, bioelectronics, cancer therapy, and protein engineering. The
project creates a national user-accessible resource and offers unique
opportunities to train students, postdocs, novice and experienced researchers
through collaborative investigations. Central to this instrument-development
project is training next-generation instrumentalists with targeted technical and
professional skillsets critical to their career advancements.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The Dynamic PicoProbe instrument features new structured illumination
optics and machine learning/artificial intelligence analysis software for real-
time data processing to improve temporal measurement capabilities at the
nanoscale in environmental media by one order of magnitude. Both optics and
software are integrated with state-of-the-art detectors into an existing best-
of-class analytical microscope. The project leads to an electron-optical beam
line having the elemental sensitivity (&lt; 1% minimum mass fraction) and image
resolution (&lt; 0.1 nm) required to capture localized and individual dynamic
events (&lt; 3 ms) at solid-liquid or solid-gas interfaces. Such measurements
are critical to advance multiple frontiers in science and engineering, such as
engineered nanomaterials, organic/inorganic heterostructures, biointerfaces,
macromolecular complexes, and quantum electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.