* 2117273
* In-situ Collaborative Experiment for the Collection of Hail In the Plains (ICECHIP)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Andrew Heymsfield, Atmospheric and Environmental Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 11,793.00

This award represents a small planning grant for a potential future field
experiment for the study of hail. The In-Situ Collaborative Experiment for the
Collection of Hail in the Plains (ICECHIP) study would make use of a host of
instrumentation to study hail processes in thunderstorms in the Great Plains and
Front Range of the Rocky Mountains, the US locations that most commonly
experience hail. The project would engage with stakeholders such as the
insurance industry and operational weather forecasters to ensure broad societal
impact. Significant student participation would ensure the training and
education of the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICECHIP
field campaign would make use of research aircraft, a set of ground-based
radars, unmanned aerial systems, surface and upper-air instrumentation, and
ground observations of hail. The research team has identified 5 major science
themes that they plan to address: 1) improve understanding of hailstone
development, in storm characteristics, and fall behavior; 2) examine in-storm
hail trajectory and convective updraft relationships; 3) assess the impact of
differing environmental thermodynamic and kinetic regimes and geographic
location on hail processes and predictability; 4) summarize surface properties
of hailstones and associated impacts; 5) characterize hailstone physical
properties and their relationship to radar
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.