* 2117549
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X­-ray Diffractometer (SC-XRD) to Strengthen Research in RI and Greater New­ England
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lai-Sheng Wang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 290,046.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Brown University is acquiring a single
crystal X-ray diffractometer (SCXRD) to support Professor Jerome Robinson and
colleagues Lai-Sheng Wang, Ming Xian, Eunsuk Kim and Paul Williard. In general,
an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the full
three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and angles,
and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a molecule
relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact many areas,
including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching, research and
research training of undergraduate and graduate students in chemistry and
biochemistry as well as collaborators from eleven regional universities in the
New England area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this diffractometer is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas. It
especially impacts the elucidation of the structures of reactive multinuclear
reduced oxygen species of copper and catalysts for the synthesis of
biodegradable polymers and the characterization of reactive intermediates
relevant to iron-sulfur clusters and their reactivity with hydrogen sulfide,
nitrous oxide, and oxygen species. The instrumentation is also used for
determining the structure of gold and gold hydride clusters and the absolute
structure of species derived from biorthogonal reactive sulfur species. The
instrument also serves researchers establishing the structure of organolithium
aggregates which are key to understand selectivity for abundant carbon–carbon
bond forming reactions. Some projects using the diffractometer fro neighboring
institutions involve elucidation of the structures of metal-based small-peptide
with possible therapeutic properties (U Rhode Island) and determining the
structure of small molecule inhibitors of the enzyme O-GlcNacase (Bryant U) and
identifying potential catalytic intermediates of iron-based carbon dioxide
reduction catalysts (Providence College). Two additional projects from U Conn
that also utilize the diffractometer are the determination of the structure of
catalyst intermediates involved in electrocatalytic and photocatalytic reduction
of carbon dioxide and the establishment of the solid-state structure-function
relationships for complexes of copper and the lanthanides which display some of
the brightest circularly-polarized luminescence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.