* 2117812
* MRI: Acquisition of a Micro-Transfer Printer for Heterogeneous Integration of Electronic/Photonic Microsystems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Karl Hirschman, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,500.00

Micro-transfer printing (µTP) is a recently developed technique that enables the
integration of various micro-device technologies that cannot be easily
manufactured on a common substrate. For example, laser light sources could be
integrated onto a silicon photonics chip rather than fiber coupled. This
proposal requests funds for the acquisition of an X-Celeprint (XDC) µTP system
well suited for research and development, and prototype fabrication, with the
capability of seamless technology transfer to pilot-line or high-volume
production using larger XDC automated systems. The proposed instrument will
support next-generation research activities in technology areas such as display
devices, computing, energy conversion, quantum photonics, 2D materials, and
biosensors. Results from the supported research will provide significant
contributions to the literature in relevant and emerging scientific fields.
Participants will include graduate and undergraduate student researchers in
several disciplines of engineering and science, with a particular emphasis on
diversity and inclusion. The proposed investigations will advance scientific
knowledge and support activities that contribute to the betterment of society.
These include preparing a diverse workforce for next-generation engineers and
scientists, outreach activities with K-12 programs in the Rochester, NY region
to promote STEM, and professional development opportunities for high school
teachers and industry partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous integration
involves the combination of separately fabricated micro-devices (e.g.,
transistors, LEDs, sensors) or device components (e.g., interface layer, porous
membrane) at the pre-package stage. The µTP system uses an elastomer stamp
typically made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), which is deformable and surface-
compliant, transparent, and adhesive; all characteristics needed to transfer
devices with precise alignment. The devices must be singulated and released
using an undercut etch of sacrificial material, yet still anchored to the source
substrate with one or more tethers at the perimeter. Sacrificial release layers
are engineered such that tethers will be overcome by the pickup force, which
allows device coupons to be removed from their native substrate. The stamp
adhesion is pull-rate sensitive, or kinetically modulated, allowing it to remove
anchored or tethered devices using a high pull-rate, and release the same device
onto a destination substrate using a low pull-rate. The formation of local
electrical/optical interconnects between mixed-technology devices in close
proximity allows them to interact at an intimate level, realizing microsystems
that are otherwise not possible. The investigators propose to utilize the µTP
system for the heterogeneous integration of device components in several areas
of research. These are listed (with specific applications) as follows: Silicon
CMOS and thin-film electronics (backplane platforms, back-end devices); display
devices (III V and III N micro-LEDs); photovoltaics and power conversion (III V
multi junction cells); integrated photonics (lasers, electro-optic materials,
modulators); quantum integrated photonics (quantum emitters, single photon
detectors, photonic cavities); mixed-dimensional hybrid nanosystems (III-V
devices on 2D monolayers); nanoporous biodevices (electrode transfer, sensor
arrays). The µTP system will enable the realization of “monolithic-like”
microsystems, with associated advantages in electronic/photonic system
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.