* 2117429
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Research and Teaching at Rutgers University-Newark
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* James von Oehsen, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2024
* USD 559,288.00

This award to Rutgers University-Newark supports the acquisition and deployment
of a High-Performance Computing (HPC) cluster (named PRICE) dedicated to
research, teaching and societal outreach efforts. PRICE will have 60 general
compute (CPU) nodes and one graphical processing unit (GPU) node as well as
storage appropriate for the planned usage over the lifetime of the machine. The
enabled research develops along three main directions: atomistic modeling,
neuroscience, and data science. Some atomistic models enabled by PRICE will
study the structure and dynamics of proteins to address questions related to
diseases such as Alzheimer’s. New materials modeling and design is enabled both
by PRICE and by the development of new quantum simulation methods. The enabled
simulations will also regard new materials design by way of genetic algorithms.
The enabled neuroscience research regards computational analysis of experimental
data to understand brain function, connectivity, and human behavior. Enabled
data science research includes the formulation of novel cooperative artificial
intelligence (AI) algorithms that will improve the outcome of machine learning
(ML) models of broad applicability. In addition to enabling new science, the
project realizes several societal broader impacts including broadening HPC
literacy of underrepresented minorities and training the future NJ workforce
using HPC in the classroom and development of new undergraduate and graduate
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PRICE will comprise 60 compute nodes (52
cores/node), 700 TB of redundant storage and one GPU node (4 GPUs/node) to be
housed at Rutgers University-Newark. PRICE will enable several additional
research projects carried out by the PI, co-PIs, and major users at Rutgers-
Newark and NJIT. The GPU portion enables state-of-the-art molecular dynamics
simulations that elucidate structure and dynamics of proteins for the
understanding of diseases, such as Alzheimer’s. GPUs also enable the efficient
and timely execution of cooperative AI algorithms aimed at improving
predictivity. The CPU nodes will enable quantum simulations aimed at materials
engineering through density-functional theory calculations. These simulations
facilitate the development of quantum models based on density functional theory,
its subsystem formulation (which parallelizes efficiently over PRICE’s low-
latency network) as well as quantum mechanical frameworks based on the exact
factorization of the Schrödinger equation for multicomponent systems. CPU and
GPU nodes will enable data analysis associated with neuroscience experiments
aimed at uncovering how the brain modulates behavior and vision-related tasks as
well as the study of neuron connectivity to understand brain function. Data from
these experiments is growing exponentially due to increased instrument data flow
from new fMRI units and improved technology allowing recordings of local field
potentials from hundreds on neurons. The project also enables new science as
well as the realization of societal broader impacts, such as broadening high-
performance computing literacy of underrepresented minorities, training the
future NJ workforce and recruitment of new faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.