* 2117397
* Collaborative Research: GP-UP: Geo-Launchpad: Engaging Community College Students in Geoscience-STEM Career Pathways
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Donna Charlevoix, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 202,295.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration
between Front Range Community College (FRCC) and UNAVCO, operator of the
National Science Foundation-Earth Sciences GAGE Facility (Geodesy Advancing
Geosciences). The Geo-Launchpad program is designed to help students from two-
year colleges (2YC) discover and prepare for careers in Science, Technology,
Engineering, or Mathematics (STEM), in particular, the geosciences, though
mentoring programs, curriculum, and internships. The program focuses on
involving 2YC students in academic opportunities and career paths in geosciences
through local university and federal agency partners. The program design relies
on faculty to mentor students through this process. The PIs assert that faculty
are a critical element to students being aware of and applying to internship
programs in the geosciences, especially at the 2YC level where formal geoscience
majors are often not offered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this 3-year project,
faculty participate in professional development programs focused on mentoring
students. Students are encouraged to apply to geoscience internships including
one offered through this program, allowing students to gain valuable work
experience as they prepare to transfer to a four-year college. Focusing on two-
year college faculty and students in Colorado, New Mexico, and Wyoming, the
program engages in three primary activities: (1) creating academic course
opportunities for students to learn about geoscience research and careers, (2)
supporting students with a geoscience internship and, (3) working with 2YC STEM
faculty to increase their awareness of geosciences and improve their mentoring
skills. The program entails further building partnerships with the United States
Geological Survey and community colleges across the three-state area, as well as
increasing support of faculty through a Whole Student Mentoring workshop.
Results will be documented and made public, with best practices shared with 2YC
faculty across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.