* 2117141
* MRI: Acquisition of a MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer to Advance Research and Undergraduate Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ernest Nolen, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Colgate University is acquiring a matrix-
assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass
spectrometer to support Professor George Geier and colleagues Ernest Nolen,
Jacob Goldberg and Jennifer Peeler. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of
the key analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species in complex samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal
for producing intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates,
synthetic polymers, and other similarly sized species) with a detection mode
that offers an excellent balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide
mass range. This highly sensitive technique allows identification and
determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the university and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse
students with this modern analytical technique. It is also used by collaborators
at Hamilton College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is
especially useful to determine masses of synthetic glycopeptide mimics and their
synthetic intermediates and for the development of chemical probes tethered to
short peptides to detect zinc(II) ions in the nervous system. The
instrumentation is also used for monitoring the progress of peptide synthesis
reactions, as well as for identifying products obtained via high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC)-based separations emanating from synthetic
ventures. The instrument also serves researchers assessing expression of human
selenoproteins via genetic code expansion, and carrying out assays of
selenoprotein enzymatic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.