* 2117002
* MRI: Development of the Next Generation 211-373 GHz Receiver for the Arizona Radio Observatory’s Sub-mm Telescope
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lucy Ziurys, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 08/31/2024
* USD 982,845.00

Our atmosphere is transparent to some radio frequencies through which
astronomers can collect important astrophysical information. Through these radio
windows we can observe the earliest stages of star formation, the creation of
dust and complex molecules that seed stars, planets, and possibly even life
itself, and make the sharpest pictures of black holes. The Sub-millimeter
Telescope (SMT) of the Arizona Radio Observatory, located on Mt. Graham, AZ, is
an extremely capable radio telescope at a good site, but its ability to observe
is limited by its aging systems. This project will develop a new receiving
system for the SMT. The improvements will both increase the observing speed of
the SMT and use cutting edge commercial signal processing technology to broaden
by a factor 16 the range of frequencies recorded. This project is a
collaboration between a national research organization and a university group to
enhance the technical and scientific capabilities of both, and of the nation, by
advancing submillimeter technology. It will provide new opportunities for
research and education to students from high school through graduate school, as
well as postdoctoral fellows. It will fund new outreach tools and educational
opportunities at Eastern Arizona College, which serves rural Graham County and
the San Carlos Apache Reservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new SMT receiver
will incorporate new, state-of-the-art sideband-separating mixers for the 0.8mm
(275-373 GHz) band. These will be developed by a long-running collaboration
between the University of Arizona and the National Radio Astronomy Observatory
(NRAO) Central Development Lab, and will be fabricated at the University of
Virginia’s Multifunctional Microfabrication and Scalable Biomanufacturing
Facility (IFAB). The mixers will be coupled in a “sideband-separating”
configuration, allowing for &gt;15 dB rejection of the image sideband, greatly
reducing the noise temperatures and removing unwanted image line contamination.
The new 0.8 mm and current 1.3 mm mixers will be mounted in a common dewar,
enabling simultaneous observations in the two bands. The receiver dewar will
feed a new spectrometer backend built using novel, commercial radio frequency
system on chip (RFSoC) devices, that will digitize up to 32 GHz of instantaneous
spectral bandwidth (8 GHz per sideband/polarization). Compared to the existing
system, the improvements in receiver noise and spectrometer bandwidth will
increase the survey speed of the SMT by a factor of ~50 in the 0.8mm band. This
will enable new measurements in many areas of astrophysics, including the
structure of cold cores on the verge of collapse, the late stages of massive
stars and the outflows of planetary nebulae, and the processing of elements
critical to life. The new receiver will provide enhanced observational
capabilities for a large number of astronomers at many US and foreign
institutions, as well as to the EHT consortium. In addition, a substantial
number of graduate students will be involved in the construction of the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.