* 2117484
* MRI: Acquisition of a Zeiss LSM980 Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope with Airyscan 2 for Microscopy Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tracy Tran, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 554,499.00

An award is made to Rutgers University – Newark to acquire a Zeiss LSM980 Laser
Scanning Confocal Microscope with Airyscan 2. The Zeiss LSM 980 will be
integrated into the Advanced Imaging Core Facility (AICF), of the Department of
Biological Sciences (DBS), a core university facility that serves Rutgers and
institutions of higher education in Newark. Installation of the microscope
provides critically needed instrumentation that will have an unquestionable
positive impact at Rutgers-Newark as an anchor institution with broad mission to
improve and advance STEM education, training, and outreach. Acquisition of the
Zeiss LSM 980 will initiate improvement in the undergraduate curriculum in
Biology by stimulating development of a six-week long biological imaging
laboratory series in a core biology course that enrolls 600 students annually.
Using in-person and virtual teaching/learning strategies, students will be able
to have an exhilarating first-hand experience at multi-dimensional imaging. DBS
will add hands-on laser confocal imaging to a capstone upper division laboratory
course in microscopy. To reach a broader undergraduate and graduate student
audience, the leadership team will work with NSF-LSAMP, NIH-G-RISE, and Rutgers-
NASA Space Grant Consortium programs at Rutgers-Newark to introduce multi-
dimensional imaging using the Zeiss LSM 980. It is anticipated that this
approach will encourage increased undergraduate participation in research,
particularly URM students, and encourage pursuit of STEM careers. STEM faculty
at Rutgers-Newark have a long-standing tradition of partnering with American
Chemical Society Project SEED and Newark Public Schools to provide urban high
school students with hands-on laboratory experience. Microscopy is often a key
part of that experience. The leadership team is invested in bringing the wonder
of fluorescence imaging to local high school students through the 4-week summer
immersion program RUN-IMAGE and the academic year program Aim High NPS-NorthStar
Academy. Each of these programs will benefit from both hands-on and virtual
imaging relying upon the Zeiss LSM 980 and other microscopes in the AICF. The
addition of the Zeiss LSM 980 to the AICF will have societal impacts on multiple
fronts. Introducing advanced imaging to students at all levels will improve
science literacy and build an understanding of the process of scientific
discovery and application. This will have a future positive impact as US
citizens are asked to make important societal decisions dependent upon an
understanding of science. Further, the Zeiss LSM 980 will strengthen the ability
of Rutgers-Newark to hire and retain top-shelf faculty whose research and
teaching skills will add to education, training, and outreach at Rutgers-Newark.
The LSM 980 will provide new faculty in the biological science with an essential
modern-day research instrument that is vital for success in obtaining extramural
grant funding and in publishing peer-reviewed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Zeiss LSM 980 with Airyscan 2 provides a state-of-the-art microscopy workstation
that provides multi-dimensional fluorescence imaging as well as super-resolution
research capacity. The microscope will support fundamental research examining
the mechanisms of cell signaling and membrane-protein sorting in neural,
intestinal epithelial, and bacterial cells. The Zeiss LSM 980 will enable
researchers will use novel fluorescent-reporter proteins in conjunction with
innovative genetic animal and in vitro cell/organoid models to follow the
dynamics and regulatory function of small GTPases and transcription factors in
regulating cell and tissue differentiation and maintenance. Super-resolution
fluorescence imaging and photo-manipulation will be used to discover novel
protein-membrane and protein-protein interactions in the assembly of
macromolecular complexes that regulate lipid transport, assembly of cell surface
receptors, and intracellular sorting of signaling complexes in bacterial
membranes, during myelin formation in peripheral nervous system, and embryonic
development in mammalian central. The Zeiss LSM980 will be used in state-of-the-
art optogenetic experimentation on the important role of cytoskeleton-chromatin
interactions on gene expression and epigenetics. Additionally, the microscope
will be used to provide multi-dimensional fluorescence imaging of cell signaling
and remodeling pathways activated in response to tissue and cell injury from
trauma including, impact, stretch, radiation, and chemical insult. All the
research projects are fully integrated with STEM education/training of high
school, undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral students serving as
the foundation for improved STEM literacy and future
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.