* 2117614
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer for Quantitative Elemental Analysis of Natural and Engineered Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Krista McGuire, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 122,856.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Oregon at Eugene is
acquiring an ion chromatograph, inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometer
(IC-ICP-MS) to support Professor Shannon Boettcher and colleagues Krista McGuire
and Matthew Polizzotto. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key
analytical methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of
chemical species in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components
flow into a mass spectrometer where they are ionized, and the ion masses are
measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection and determination of
the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The ionization using the
inductively coupled plasma allows detection of metal ions and several non-metals
present in very small concentrations. The ion chromatograph component allows
separation of metal ions from mixtures, thus improving the characterization of
the various components. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure
at the university and regional area since this technology is accessible to
students, faculty and researchers throughout several departments such as
Chemistry, Biochemistry, Materials Science Institute, Earth Sciences, Biological
Sciences and Anthropological Sciences. The team is designing a research program
to train new PhD students to be mentors to K-12 students, by showing them how to
quantify metal ion content in soil and water sources and a plan to support
academic and industrial partnerships through the facility denominated Center for
Advanced Material Characterization at Oregon (CAMCOR) where the instrument is
located.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the IC-ICP-mass spectrometer is aimed
at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially useful to
determine species that function as electrocatalysts and for the study of aquifer
mineral complexity and redox reactivity. The instrumentation is also used to
investigate processes underlying biotransformation of arsenic and other
contaminants in aquifers as well as plant-soil-microbial associations
contributing to maintenance of tree diversity and nutrient cycling in tropical
forests. The instrument also serves researchers assessing interactions of metal
ions with nucleic-acid biomolecules and the preparation of precision-engineered
nanoparticles. The mass spectrometer aids characterization of trace elements in
volcanic and hydrothermal minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.