* 2117785
* MRI: Development of High-Confidence Medical Cyber-Physical System Research Instrument with Benchmark Security Software
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zhongqi Pan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,134,297.00

Medical cyber-physical systems (MCPS) require high reliability and security
because they are safety critical. The lack of test benchmarks, suitable
hardware-software interfaces, and easy-to-test hardware platforms makes it
challenging to evaluate, verify, and validate the security mechanisms and
reliability of high-confidence MCPS (HC-MCPS). This project aims to develop a
configurable, extendable, opensource, reliable, human-in-the-loop HC-MCPS
testbed. The HC-MCPS testbed will advance the ability to simulate attack/defense
models. It will provide a simulation platform for cyber-physical attacks,
artificial intelligence (AI) attacks, control instability detectors, and allow
the researchers to conduct multidisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument will enable researchers to make medical cyber-physical systems more
reliable and secure, ultimately improving the quality of healthcare. It will
contribute to research, training, and teaching at the home institution in an
EPSCoR state by enabling a large number of federally and state-funded projects
in the areas of Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, Robotic Telesurgery, and Nursing. The instrument will also be used
outside of the home institution to support cyber-enabled collaborative
operations and data sharing among over twenty
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.