* 2117783
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Absorption Fine Structure (XAFS) source for Chemical and Spectroscopic Research and Training at the University of Pennsylvania
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marisa Kozlowski, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 283,850.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. The University of Pennsylvania is
acquiring an X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) source with synchrotron-
quality spectra capabilities to support the research of Professor Daniel
Mindiola and colleagues Marisa Kozlowski, Eric Detsi and Neil C. Tomson. This
instrument facilitates research in the areas of chemistry, engineering, and
materials science. XAFS reveals local structural analysis and collecton
information about the unoccupied local electronic states of solid and solution
state materials. XAFS is the spectroscopic method of choice for characterizing
the structural and electronic properties of new molecules as well as for
predicting and explaining resulting reactivity. Spectra reveal information about
oxidation state assignments and the degree of covalency in bonding and
coordination environments, while allowing for the characterization of bulk
material in solid and solution state phases. This instrument enhances the
educational, research, and teaching efforts of students at all levels in many
departments as well as provides accessibility for use at nearby institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the XAFS source is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as chemistry,
engineering, and materials science. Research focuses on nitrogen activation by
iron compounds; precatalysts, oxidized precatalysts, and isolated reaction
species for paramagnetic species; and model surface investigations are pursued.
In addition, other investigations include nanomaterial preparation and the study
of electrochemical energy storage systems involving nanoporous electrodes, and
liquid electrodes. It also assists in the use of electrocatalysts for the
reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon-containing organic compounds, the
characterization of exsolution-synthesized stable and coking-resistant
heterogeneous catalysts, exploration of nickel catalyzed carbon-carbon bond
forming reactions, and the study of catalytic systems for energy relevant
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.