* 2117596
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research, Education, and Regional Use
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* KV Lakshmi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 304,084.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
single-crystal x-ray diffractometer for research, educational, and regional use.
The instrument serves the needs of interdisciplinary researchers in the
Materials Science and Engineering, Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Physics,
Applied Physics and Astronomy, Earth and Environmental Science, Biology, and
Chemical and Biological Engineering departments at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute (RPI), as well as research and undergraduate programs throughout the
region including Union College, Skidmore College, and Fairfield University.
Acquisition of this instrument plays a significant role in the research,
education, and training of approximately 10-15 postdocs, 80 graduate students,
and 65 undergraduate students, comprised of women, underprivileged and
underrepresented minorities in STEM, over the next two years. It allows for the
development of new courses at RPI and enhancement of existing courses in the
areas of nanoscale x-ray scattering and imaging, protein structure
determination, and experimental inorganic chemistry through hands-on training in
single-crystal characterization methods. Outside RPI and across the Capital
Region of Upstate New York, the x-ray diffractometer enables crystallographic
services to be offered to local and regional small liberal arts colleges and
universities lacking x-ray instrumentation of their own.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This single-crystal x-ray diffractometer
provides unparalleled capabilities for analyzing crystal structures, phases, and
defects in advanced interface and multi-domain materials. This award also allows
for transformative research and characterization studies on (a) structurally
engineered crystals featuring negative thermal expansion using Prussian blue
analogs, (b) non-traditional photovoltaic and chiral bulk crystalline materials,
(c) bio-inspired organometallic homogeneous catalysts for water splitting and
carbon dioxide/nitrogen fixation, (d) ultra-thin crystalline-flake metallic
transition metal dichalcogenides, (e) biological macromolecules (proteins,
nucleic acids, and viruses), (f) drug discovery and (g) anisotropic crystal
orientations in semi-crystalline block copolymer-based ion exchange membranes
for energy applications. New knowledge and basic understandings gained in these
subjects enabled by the use of the single crystal x-ray diffractometer will help
advance the design and development of novel or improved solutions for logic
computing/memory, healthcare, energy conversion, and
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.