* 2117242
* MRI: Acquisition of a powder X-ray diffractometer for Research and Educational Training in Crystallographic Characterization of Nanostructured materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,848.00

Non-Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
(MRI) award is to acquire a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD) for research and
educational training in the crystallographic characterization of nanostructured
materials. This new XRD will strengthen Tuskegee University’s research
capabilities in the emerging field of sustainable and advanced nanomaterials.
This advanced multipurpose XRD will foster collaborations between several
departments at Tuskegee University, partnering institutions and local industry.
With the capabilities of this instrument, researchers aim to gain a fundamental
understanding of the crystal structure of various nanomaterials including next
generation advanced sustainable green materials that would help reduce carbon
footprint and alleviate global warming concerns and will have significant impact
in education and student training in advanced research methodologies. The
proposed instrumentation will improve existing curriculum in Materials Science
and Engineering (MSE) at Tuskegee University. This instrument, along with other
state-of-the-art facilities which exist at Tuskegee University, will boost the
university’s efforts to recruit promising students to its graduate programs in
MSE and undergraduate minor program in MSE. This is expected to help produce a
large number of African-American graduates, from undergraduates through Ph.D
students. This diverse group of students will receive transdisciplinary training
through research, hands-on learning modules, and interactions across multiple
universities. Integration of research and educational activities will help train
next generation of globally competitive African-American scientists, engineers,
and entrepreneurs. These research and training activities will enhance the
R&amp;D enterprise and infrastructure at Tuskegee University, making it
nationally competitive in the emerging fields of sustainable and advanced
nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At
Tuskegee University, significant efforts and resources have been invested in
synthesizing a variety of nanomaterials from natural waste resources for
biological, pharmaceutical, energy and polymer filler applications. For example,
nanoporous carbon, and nanoparticles of calcium silicates, hydroxyapatite, and
calcium carbonate have been developed in-house with precise control on the
shape, size and growth patterns. In addition, efforts are ongoing to develop
advanced green nanocomposites and multiferroic composite materials.
Incorporation of nanoparticles will help in improving the properties of
composites only when there is good dispersion and excellent interaction between
the nanoparticles and host materials such as polymers and biological cells,
which can and need to be ascertained through nanocrystalline structural
analysis. This state of art X-ray diffraction instrument will enhance research
capabilities and allow fundamental understanding of the science of crystal phase
of nanoparticles and nanocomposites for structural, biological and energy
applications. The proposed research instrumentation will have significant impact
on education and human resources development through: a) Development of
multiferroic nanomaterials for electronic applications, b) Development of nano-
biomaterials from agricultural wastes, c) Studies on effect of low temperature
plasma treatment on modification of polycaprolactone, d) Development of
nanofiber mats by force spinning for tissue engineering applications, e)
Development of 3D printed scaffolds for tissue engineering applications, f)
Characterization of drug excipient blends in the preparation of novel 3D printed
implantable drug delivery systems, g) Studies on crystal structures of
cellulosic biomass products, h) Low temperature growth of high quality gallium
oxide thin films by magnetron sputtering, and i) Improvement of existing
curriculum in materials science and engineering at Tuskegee University (TU). A
diverse group of students will receive transdisciplinary training through
research, hands-on learning modules, and interactions across multiple
universities. Integration of research and educational activities will help train
next generation of globally competitive African-American scientists, engineers,
and entrepreneurs. These research and training activities will enhance the
R&amp;D enterprise and infrastructure at TU, making it nationally competitive in
the emerging fields of sustainable and advanced
nanomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.