* 2117942
* MRI: Acquisition of a field emission electron microprobe for Caltech Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* George Rossman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will enable the purchase,
installation, and commissioning of a state-of-the-art instrument for chemical
analysis of natural and engineered solid materials down to the nanometer (one
billionth of a meter) scale. The instrument will be available to all science and
engineering programs across the Caltech campus, NASAâ€™s Jet Propulsion
Laboratory, as well as to outside users. The instrument may be operated remotely
and will be made available via the Remotely Accessible Instruments in
Nanotechnology (RAIN) consortium for free access by student researchers and
classes at minority-serving institutions nationwide ranging from community and
technical colleges to high schools and even elementary schools. The electron
microprobe is a basic tool of solid Earth geology and geochemistry as well as
related fields such as meteoritics and planetary sample return, environmental
microbiology, material science and nanotechnology. The advanced electron source
included in this instrument provides a very bright, focused beam that enables
imaging at high spatial resolution and excitation of characteristic X-rays from
a very small analytical volume. Each chemical element emits X-rays at particular
wavelengths; the count rate of X-ray photons emitted by a sample at these
characteristic wavelengths is proportional to the concentration of that element
in the sample. The electron probe automates the job of separating X-rays by
wavelength, counting the number of X-ray photons emitted at particular
wavelengths, and comparing the count rate in an unknown material to that in
standard materials. This allows the electron microprobe to detect when an
element is present above a low detection limit and to determine the abundance of
each element in a sample with about 1% relative precision. Initial applications
will include characterization of tiny mineral grains in meteorites that date
back to (or even precede) the origin of the Solar system, experimental samples
that reproduce conditions in the deep Earth or during collisions in the asteroid
belt, and functional materials for batteries and energy
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key capabilities that the new instrument
will bring are the field emission electron source, the Si-drift detector energy
dispersive X-ray spectrometer, and the high-resolution cathodoluminescence
sensor. While nanoscale imaging resolution, essential for targeting analyses and
ensuring sample homogeneity, is straightforward, optimizing the spatial
resolution of quantitative analysis without sacrificing accuracy or precision,
requires special care. The new instrument will support a study of new approaches
to unsupported thin specimen analysis as a path to high-resolution analysis.
Challenges to be overcome include holding unsupported specimens in the beam
path, updated software that accounts accurately for thin samples, and an
extensive campaign of verification against well-characterized standards. Turning
to more of the applications of the new instrument and its improved imaging and
analysis capabilities, researchers will focus on several goals. These include:
(1) analysis of experimental samples to probe diffusion at short length scales,
fine-grained multiphase assemblages, and synthesized starting materials whose
homogeneity at the nano-scale is essential information; (2) analysis of
terrestrial igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary rocks including basaltic
glasses that may contain nano-inclusions, zircons for geochronology, and redox-
sensitive tracers with unknown hosting phases; (3) analysis of meteorites and
new nano-minerals including refractory inclusions, high-pressure shock-induced
phases, non-destructive bulk analysis, and bio-synthetic single-domain magnetic
crystals; and (4) analysis of microbiological specimens from the environment and
culture, with single-cell resolution of the distribution of key macro- and
micro-nutrient elements. This award was co-funded by the MRI program and the
Instrumentation and Facilities program in the Earth Science
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.