* 2117523
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Automated X-Ray Scattering Instrument for in situ Multiscale Studies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tomasz Kowalewski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 992,182.00

The development of cutting-edge nanostructured materials for applications like
smart surfaces, batteries, and synthetic tissues requires highly
interdisciplinary teams as well as tools that can characterize materials across
scales. Advanced functional materials have the potential to drive advances in
sensing (for uses such as environmental monitoring, disease diagnosis and
advanced manufacturing), energy storage for enhanced energy sustainability and
robotics (with applications ranging from providing support to amputees and
stroke victims to disaster response). The behavior of materials that have
nanostructural features from Angstroms to hundreds of nanometers in size must be
measured under realistic conditions to characterize their structural properties
during use. This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award will support the
acquisition of a Small to Wide Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS/WAXS) system at
Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) to address these needs, enabling high-
throughput studies at a variety of length scales and under a variety of
stimulation conditions. By customizing the system to enable high-throughput and
robotic control of experiments, this instrument will facilitate the broadening
of participation in X-ray scattering research to users across science and
engineering. Through an “Initiative for fully-automated high-throughput
SAXS/WAXS” and annual meetings of the Western PA SAXS/WAXS Interest Group, this
project will seed new collaborations that enable next-generation robotics
applications and developing methodologies for machine learning-based discovery.
Short courses and case studies in existing courses will support the integration
of research and teaching, and outreach on SAXS/WAXS will target women and
underrepresented groups. Ease of use, automation and remote operation
capabilities will facilitate utilization at a national
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research enabled by this instrumentation seeks
to link material function to structure from the atomic to micron scales. The
SAXS/WAXS system will enable researchers to conduct in situ and in operando
studies across these scales to address a variety of important fundamental
knowledge gaps. Specific goals include the use of the instrument to develop
research contributions in the following areas: (1) solution-dependent
conformation and dynamics of responsive nucleic acid nanosystems, (2)
understanding and mitigating the structural evolutions in lithium ion battery
electrodes that eventually lead to damage and catastrophic battery failure, (3)
linking structure to function for novel antibacterial peptides, (4) elucidating
the interplay between ion clustering and molecular packing/morphology of polymer
matrix in governing the efficient transport in ion-transport membranes, and (5)
the development of novel copolymer-based architectures in which lock-and-key
interactions facilitate self-healing properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.