* 2117574
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Micro-Raman Spectrometer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Tomce Runcevski, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 204,846.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award is to acquire a Raman spectrometer for
research, education, and broader impacts in the Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex.
Raman spectroscopy uses the inelastic scattering of light to probe the energy of
molecular vibrations in gases, liquids, and solids. The energy of these
vibrations can reveal a wealth of knowledge on the chemical, structural, and
thermal properties of matter, with nanoscale resolution. Such details are
essential to overcoming some of the greatest challenges in many fields of
science and engineering, spanning from planetary sciences to nanotechnology. The
instrument will be located at Southern Methodist University, in the heart of the
Metroplex, providing research and educational opportunities to nearby academic,
industrial, and cultural institutions. At Southern Methodist University,
knowledge distilled from the instrument will support K-12 science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics programs through the Caruth Institute for
Engineering Education. In addition to this, it will bolster artwork conservation
efforts at the many museums in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Raman
spectroscopy will contribute to fundamental and applied research in areas of
computational chemistry, planetary sciences, paleontology, and nanoelectronics.
In the field of computational chemistry, it will provide an experimental
counterpart to theoretical research on vibrational spectra, including new
methods of computing spectra with extreme accuracy or decoding the underlying
chemical bonds in complex spectra. In the field of planetary sciences, it will
provide details on nanoscale geological features, unlocking insights into
dramatic events like the evolution of continental crust and large meteorite
impacts. Raman spectroscopy will also aide in exploring the mineralogy of
celestial bodies, like Saturn’s moon, Titan, which possesses striking
similarities to Earth’s atmosphere. In the field of paleontology, it will
identify biomolecules, which can infer new knowledge on the color, body
temperature, and prehistoric environment of fossils. In the field of
nanotechnology, it will support the development of new two-dimensional crystals
and heterostructures for electron and quantum devices. Raman thermometry will
also enable researchers to probe self-heating and heat dissipation in these
devices, which is perhaps the largest obstacle to progressing modern
nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.