* 2117585
* MRI: Acquisition of a Universal Optical Tweezer Platform to Probe Nanoscale Structure and Function of Single Polymers Using Force and Optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Rothschild, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 255,850.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs. Boston University is acquiring an
optical tweezer instrument for nano-manipulation and force spectroscopy of
nanoscale objects to support the research of Maria Kamenetska and colleagues
Kenneth Rothschild and Keith Brown. This instrument facilitates research in the
areas of chemistry, materials science, nanoscience, and biology. In general,
optical tweezers are used for nano-manipulation and force spectroscopy of
nanoscale objects in solution. Optical tweezers help isolate and manipulate
single target molecules in an optical trap. Because trapping occurs at the focal
plane of an optical microscope, light emission by the isolated molecule can be
detected simultaneously with force. This allows for manipulation of materials so
that mechanistic understanding of processes down to the single molecule level
can be developed. This instrument enhances the educational, research, and
teaching efforts of students at all levels in many departments as well as
provides accessibility to this specialized science to nearby institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of an optical tweezer (OT) instrument for the
nano-manipulation and force spectroscopy of nanoscale objects is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in areas such as
chemistry, materials and nanomaterials, and biological systems. Research in
chemistry and nanomaterials focus on probing the mechanical properties of and
electron transport in one dimensional nanowires and two dimensional flakes.
Conformational changes of single molecules in light-activated transmembrane ion
channels, pumps, and sensors are studied as are structure-mechanics
relationships of polymer microfibrils. Biological systems are also studied by
quantifying defects in nucleosome stability at telomeric
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.