* 2117908
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confined Bi-Directional Cyclic Shear Apparatus for Research and Education on Earthquake-Resilient Infrastructure
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Tufenkjian, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 452,243.00

Liquefaction is one of the major causes of extensive wide-spread damage during
major seismic events, threatening the integrity of foundation systems for
buildings, infrastructure and lifelines such as water and gas pipes, dams, and
port facilities. This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the
acquisition of a confined bi-directional simple shear apparatus to simulate
conditions that represent the actual soil stress state in the field-- allowing
more effective design of structures to mitigate earthquake hazards. The PI will
also develop a unique add-on system to control saturation drainage of the soil
specimen enabling, for the first-time, laboratory research with realistic
boundary and loading conditions on the effect of partial drainage on the
response of sands. The device will promote research collaborations between
faculty at Cal State LA and their partners in academia and industry. The
instrument will also provide training opportunities for underrepresented
minority students in Southern California who otherwise would not be exposed to
advanced hands-on laboratory research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although much
research has been carried out on the cyclic response of sands to understand the
phenomenon of liquefaction, a number of fundamental questions remain unanswered,
especially in relating laboratory results to field performance. The researched
testing program can identify factors that explain the discrepancies between lab
and site, allowing the development of more robust prediction tools to complement
empirical relationships to assess whether the ground will liquefy during the
expected seismic excitation, thus enabling more effective design of structures
and mitigation of the hazard. The instrument will enable researchers to
characterize soil response subjected to unique stress paths and partial drainage
conditions. The data will be used to investigate the feasibility of using
boundary-control tests to simulate soil partial drainage tests. The new
apparatus will also support investigations on soil responses in ground slope as
well as the pile drift phenomenon. The test results will be used to advance
understandings in post-cyclic clay reconsolidation and stress-strain behavior,
and soil-pile interaction under lateral loading with varying shearing
directions. Studies using the instrument will generate valuable data sets for
numerical modelers when calibrating and validating their constitutive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.