* 2117667
* MRI: Acquisition of MicroCT for Research and Training in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Alan Savitzky, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 402,500.00

An award is made to Utah State University to acquire an X-ray microCT scanner,
which will allow investigators to analyze the interior structure of objects in
three dimensions, nondestructively. The instrument will support a wide range of
biological research, as well as other scientific and engineering studies, and
faculty researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates will be trained in
the use of this important technology. Native American students from the
University’s Blanding Campus, 400 miles south of the main campus in Logan, will
use the instrument as participants in summer mentorship programs and will be
able to continue studying and analyzing the digital images after they return to
their home campus. Importantly, the instrument will be used to generate digital
images of certain species of animals that, for cultural reasons, cannot be
studied by those students from physical specimens, providing a wider range of
potential research projects. The instrument will also generate images of fossils
in the University’s Prehistoric Museum, which can then be displayed alongside
the specimens themselves in the Museum’s public exhibits in the rural town of
Price. On the main campus faculty and students in the university’s renowned
ceramics program will use the instrument to conduct studies of novel glazing and
firing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists at Utah State University will
apply microCT technology to a diverse array of research projects, generating 3D
images of both animals and plants to investigate a wide range of phenomena.
Among its many applications, the instrument will be used to study evolutionary
changes in anatomical features, such as the middle ear structure of frogs (which
has consequences for their vocal communication), blood vessels that supply
specialized defensive organs and endocrine glands in chemically defended snakes,
and changes in brain structure associated with the evolution of social behavior
in bees. Other researchers will examine the reproductive condition and immune
tissues of lizards exposed to environmental stressors in urban areas, the impact
of genetics on inflammatory processes in mammalian bone, the structure of
biologically engineered fibers, the geometry of plant root systems, and
specializations that permit an invasive aquatic fern to harbor nitrogen-fixing
bacteria. The digital images that are produced will be used in scientific
publications, educational resources (including digital images for use by
veterinary students), and public outreach. Beyond the biological sciences,
faculty and students in other departments at Utah State University will apply
microCT technology to their research on geological faults, microbial mats that
form in highly saline waters, and the manufacture and safety of engineered
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.