* 2117253
* MRI: Acquisition of a Phase Stabilized Optical Frequency Comb for Precision Metrology, Quantum Sensing, Information Processing, and Novel Spectroscopy
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Balakrishnan Naduvalath, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 828,904.00

This award from the National Scientific Foundation Major Research
Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of a phase stabilized optical
frequency comb by the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV). The optical
frequency comb (OFC) enables a broad range of research activities in the
Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Electric engineering, and Geoscience. The
instrument will expand research capabilities and ignite collaboration between 15
faculty at UNLV and roughly 50 of their associated students and postdocs. The
equipment will be a cornerstone toward building a research center for exploring
new methods and technologies in quantum sensing and information processing,
connecting expertise in AMO physics, condensed matter physics, physical
chemistry, electric engineering, and geoscience. This instrument will enable
investigations of fundamental questions in science and engineering, advance the
training of the diverse graduate and undergraduate STEM students at UNLV, and
increase the skilled workforce available in the Southern Nevada area and the
desert Southwest. The requested OFC will be the first advanced light source
facility with extreme coherence and broad bandwidth in Nevada. Thus,
installation of the requested instrument within a UNLV research core will
enhance the capabilities of Southern Nevada economic development in quantum
science, novel materials, and astrophysical and geological explorations. This
project is jointly funded by the MPS (Mathematical and Physical Sciences)
Directorate, the Physics (PHY) Division, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Office of Integrative Activities
(OIA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OFC is the newest generation of light sources
that combines accurate phase information (approximately 1 part per 10^20) in the
frequency-domain and ultrafast temporal information (femtoseconds) in the time-
domain simultaneously. It has been used as a precision optical frequency
synthesizer to explore new phenomena in fundamental science and is a crucial
component in the world's most precise atomic clock (Nobel Prize in Physics,
2005). Besides exhibiting an ultrabroad spectroscopic coverage and narrow
linewidth, the OFC revolutionizes molecular spectroscopy with unprecedented
speed and sensitivity, having already enabled successful applications in
physics, chemistry, and environmental science. The OFC at UNLV will enable the
following detailed studies: (1) development of a new generation of quantum
sensors facilitating exploration of new physics beyond the Standard Model; (2)
investigations of quantum computation platforms (photon, ion, superconducting
circuit) and construction of a quantum network between them; (3) utilization and
extension of novel asynchronous sampling pump-probe spectroscopy by dual-OFC in
various studies in condensed matter physics and chemistry, such as probing
driven topological phases in 2D systems and ultrafast photochemistry under high
pressure; (4) study of novel synthesized materials, such as room-temperature
superconductors (RTSC) by efficient nonlinear spectroscopy; (5) exploration of
interstellar chemistry by performing broadband, high-resolution spectroscopy of
cold molecules and probing ion-radical cold collisions; (6) study of
radiochemistry by high resolution spectroscopy of molecules containing heavy
elements; and (7) development of new technology for determining elemental
abundances in solid rock samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.