* 2117798
* MRI: Acquisition of an integrated Zeiss 980 microscope with Airyscan 2 and FCS to advance multidisciplinary research, inclusive teaching, and outreach at Amherst College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeeyon Jeong, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 735,648.00

An award is made to Amherst College to support the acquisition of a specialized
light microscope that provides the resolution to visualize features in cells as
small as 120 nm, approximately the size of a SARS-CoV-2 virus, and the ability
to analyze the movement of single molecules in living cells. The instrument will
expand the scope of research, currently not possible at the College, into
exciting new areas. Additionally, the new multifunctional imaging system will be
the flagship instrument of a new imaging facility in the recently opened
integrated Science Center. The acquired microscope will become a shared resource
open to investigators from all areas of scientific research across the community
of local colleges and universities. Through the new imaging facility, this
instrument will provide hands-on experience for students on a high-end imaging
system and will greatly expand the offerings of established pre-matriculation
and summer research initiatives aimed at recruiting, training, and retaining
underrepresented STEM students on campus. The acquisition of this unique,
multifunctional light microscope will not only modernize the institution’s
imaging capabilities but will impact classroom offerings across disciplines,
including biology, biochemistry, biophysics, and neuroscience. Working in
partnership with the Beneski Museum of Natural History, a student-curated
exhibit of images and videos will be created, speaking to the intersection of
art and science through an initiative entitled “Molecules in Motion” (MiM). This
will promote the science of the College’s scientists and students and increase
the visibility of the work to the broadest audience while creating awareness of
the remarkable developments in STEM to visualize the inner workings of molecules
in living cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new fast, multifunctional, high-
resolution microscope will transform researchers’ abilities to investigate
intermolecular interactions and cellular processes. It will meet the growing
demands of a variety of research programs ranging from high resolution studies
of dynamic signal transduction and developmental processes in sea anemone and C.
elegans to investigations of ultrafast cellular and organismal responses in
neurons and zebrafish. The instrument’s capabilities to stimulate with light
will enable studies of neural encoding of auditory function and motile responses
to environmental stimuli in Dictyostellium. Access to single molecule dynamics
will enable cross-disciplinary collaborations between chemistry around the
application of custom fluorescent labels for biological imaging and
investigations into the consequences of zinc dysregulation on amyloid protein in
vitro and in neurons. This new microscope will amplify the researchers’
abilities to leverage their unique strengths in research, outreach, and training
to bridge impactful scientific discoveries to a profound and enduring impact on
the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.