* 2117480
* MRI: Acquisition of a Continuous-wave Electron-paramagnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Greg Carman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 292,645.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. The University of California Los Angeles is
acquiring a continuous wave electron paramagnetic resonance (CW-EPR)
spectrometer to support research of Professor Paula Diaconescu and colleagues
Greg Carman, Miguel Garcia-Garibay, Sarah Tolbert and Chong Liu. This instrument
allows research in a variety of fields such as those that provide insight on how
biologically relevant species with unpaired electrons behave. In general, an EPR
spectrometer yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic
structure of molecular and solid-state materials. It is also used to obtain
information about the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive
species involved in valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation
of possible pathological growth. This instrument is an integral part of teaching
as well as research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students
in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution as well as collaborators from
regional institutions such as those in the Cal State System as well as nearby
minority serving institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the EPR
spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the characterization of pre-catalysts with unpaired
electrons, mixed valence metal complexes, and paramagnetic lanthanide complexes
used to prepare optically active molecular spin qubits and the study of
rotational dynamics of different magnetic organic frameworks with stable
nitroxyl radicals. The instrumentation is also used to search for materials for
multiferroic antennas and for the rapid screening of magnetic loss in new
dynamic magnetoelastic materials. In addition, it allows the characterization of
doped semiconducting polymers and studies of boron-based stable radical species.
The instrument also serves researchers designing rules and understanding the
effect of 3-dimensional aromatic radicals on how their electronic properties can
be rationally tuned and deliberately manipulated and to understand catalytic
methane air oxidation to methanol by reactive oxygen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.