* 2117844
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Particle Soot Photometer system optimized to quantify black carbon and iron oxide aerosols
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,840.00

This project enables the acquisition of a customized Single Particle Soot
Photometer (SP2) instrument coupled with a differential mobility analyzer (DMA)
for simultaneous, size-resolved measurements of refractory black carbon (rBC)
and iron oxide aerosols. This instrument system will be used in a wide range of
atmospheric, snow, ice core, and lake sediment environmental research projects.
The primary goal of this project is to develop reliable, relatively high-time-
resolution, spatially distributed records of refractory black carbon
concentration, flux, and particle mass distribution from lake sediment cores in
the eastern Arctic and to use these and existing ice core, charcoal, and other
paleoclimate records to develop a quantitative understanding of the history and
climate drivers of rBC and biomass burning
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research that will benefit from acquisition of
the customized SP2 and DMA system includes: (1) NSF-funded paleo fire
reconstructions in ice and lake sediment cores, (2) radiative forcing and melt
changes resulting from deposition of light absorbing particles on seasonal snow
covers and the modeling the effects on surface water resources, and (3)
atmospheric research such as long-term atmospheric monitoring, characterization
of aerosols from vehicle brake and tire wear, and characterization of modern
biomass burning aerosols and entrained dust samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
system will be housed in DRIâ€™s Trace Chemistry/Ice Core Lab that has hosted a
large number of post-doctoral researchers and high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students over the past decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.