* 2117763
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-ray Diffractometer for Research and Education at an HBCU
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kesete Ghebreyessus, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 349,989.00

This award to Hampton University is supported by the Major Research
Instrumentation and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation programs to support
research by Oluwatoyin Asojo and colleagues Kesete Ghebreyessus, Peter Njoki and
Rupak Dua. This institution is acquiring a single crystal X-ray difffractometer
(SCXRD). In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry, geology and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of undergraduate
students in chemistry and biochemistry at this Historically Black College and
University (HBCU) as well as Old Dominion University. The instrumentation
provides direct research experience for students in a variety of courses
distributed in various departments. Seminars on structural science engage
additional regional users and other neighboring universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the X-ray diffractometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. The science enabled by this
instrument provides relevant societal benefits by associating protein structures
and the chemistry of life and by developing ruthenium(II)-arene complexes
appended with hemilabile photoswitchable ligands. The instrumentation is also
used for studying, designing and fabricating non-noble copper-based materials
for electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide and for studies employing
bioengeneering materials for use in musculoskeletal disorders. The
diffractometer is also used to carry out photocatalytic and mechanistic studies
of clusters having a core composed of four cobalt and four oxygen atoms
(Co4O4).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.