* 2117286
* MRI: Acquisition of a Streak Camera System for Time-resolved Photoluminescence Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mim Nakarmi, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 158,820.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Photoluminescence is light emission from a
material after absorption of light in a different color with a shorter
wavelength or a higher photon energy. The color of the emitted light provides
important information about the material's electronic properties. A streak
camera is a complex scientific instrument that measures the variation of the
intensity of light pulses with respect to time with picosecond temporal
resolution. This major research instrumentation (MRI) grant adds a streak camera
to an existing photoluminescence measurement system. The combined instrument
enables time-resolved photoluminescence measurements to study the dynamics of
the electronic relaxation processes in materials such as semiconductors, protein
receptors, and DNA. The new equipment strengthens training of the graduate and
undergraduate students at Brooklyn College. The instrument is accessible to
other institutions in the New York City area, and thus promotes broader
collaboration and enhances research expertise. In addition, the educational
benefit extends to local high school students who are involved in research
projects at Brooklyn College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a streak camera extends the time-
resolved measurement capability in the current photoluminescence system at
Brooklyn College. The instrument supports a research project on wide bandgap
semiconductors for solid state single photon emissions. It helps understanding
the underlying optical and electronic properties and carrier dynamics in the
emission processes, which is necessary for photonic device application of such
materials. The addition of the streak camera also supports research on
photodynamics of the cation-pi interaction and its role in protein function. It
enables measurements of lifetimes in temporal resolution up to picoseconds with
wavelengths ranging from the deep ultraviolet to the visible for continued
progress in the spectroscopic characterization of cation-pi interactions. The
extended temporal and optical range of the combined instrument is also applied
to a study of the dynamics of biological macromolecules: G-quadruplexed
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.