* 2117322
* Weaving Indigenous Identity, Cultural Values, and Environmental Science Together for Sustainable Tribal Land Management and Resource Career Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Karla Bradley Eitel, Nez Perce Tribe
* Continuing Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 08/31/2024
* USD 630,243.00

This innovations in development project will develop and study the Wéetespeme
Stewardship Program (Wéetespeme: “I am of this land”). Tribal led, the project
supports and studies climate science learning experiences grounded in
traditional ecological knowledge, culturally relevant pedagogy, and land
education pedagogy. Nez Perce high-school youth and college-age adults will
choose specific species and places; work with tribal resource management offices
to learn to monitor, assess, and mitigate climate impacts; and receive
mentorship from tribal elders, as they co-develop climate-science adaptive
management plans for local concerns. Adaptive management plans may include
topics such as: drought and extreme weather impacts, shifts in animal
populations and migration patterns, cultivating traditional foods, and managing
important cultural sites. The Tribal research team will collaborate with
curriculum developers and Indigenous graduate student(s) from the University of
Idaho and Northwest Youth Corps to explore how a STEM curriculum centered on
cultural identity and traditional knowledge can align with Indigenous youths’
identities, resource responsibilities, and understanding and interest in STEM
career pathways within the Tribe and in the region. As part of its overall
strategy to enhance learning in informal environments, the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-
based understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understanding of deeper learning by participants. This project’s approach to
curriculum development, and youths’ identity and career interest development,
will contribute to the informal STEM learning field’s nascent understanding of
Tribal-driven education efforts, and approaches to blending or bridging
traditional ecological knowledge and Western ways of knowing. With co-funding
from the Directorate of Geosciences’ (GEO), this project will further advance
efforts related to the application of traditional ecological knowledge to the
geosciences, including Indigenous workforce development opportunities and
research experiences for Indigenous graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a two-year duration, the study will address two
research questions. 1) How and in what ways does a culturally relevant out-of-
school curriculum support Indigenous youths’ understanding of their own
identity, resource responsibility, and possible career pathways, including those
on Tribal land? 2) How and in what ways does a culturally relevant out-of-school
curriculum develop Indigenous youths’ ability to monitor and address climate
change impacts, to protect, preserve and recover land relationships that are
central to their cultural identities and values? Thirty-two college-age young
adults and high-school youth (sixteen of each age group) will participate in the
Wéetespeme Stewardship Program and research study. Indigenous research
methodologies will guide the approach to investigating and sharing Indigenous
youths’ understanding of their own identity, resource responsibility, possible
career pathways, and learning experiences within the Wéetespeme Stewardship
Program activities. Two Indigenous graduate students will play a central role in
conducting the research, supporting systemic impacts within, and beyond, the
Tribe. Methods will be embedded in learners’ experiences and will include field
journals, adaptive management plans, story maps, and talk circles. Youth will
also participate as research partners: understanding the research questions,
assisting with the analysis, contributing to interpretation of the findings, and
co-authoring manuscripts that share their stories and this work. The informal
STEM curriculum will be shared regionally, allowing for Tribes in the plateau
region to benefit from culturally relevant approaches youth engagement to
support climate resilience. The results of the research will also be shared more
broadly, contributing to the emerging knowledge-base about the ways that
cultural practices and values, guided by land education pedagogy and the
mentorship of traditional ecological knowledge keepers, and embedded in informal
STEM learning experiences, can contribute to Indigenous youths’ identities and
understanding of, and investment in, local and meaningful environmental
resources and STEM career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.