* 2117649
* MRI: Acquisition of a Chemical Ionization Mass Spectrometer for Measuring Organic Compounds at the Interfaces of Earthâ€™s Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Morris, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 501,183.00

This MRI project supports the acquisition of a GC-Vocus-2R instrument that will
enable research scientists to obtain significant detail about the composition of
organic compounds in the atmosphere. The instrument is a next-generation tool
that will better constrain the fate and impacts of organic carbon emitted to the
atmosphere and enable a better understanding of the interactions of organic
carbon with ecosystems, organisms, and human activities. The instrument is
expected to provide the sensitivity, time resolution, specificity, and detail
necessary to probe current outstanding questions in atmospheric and
environmental chemistry across interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GC-Vocus-2R
uses proton transfer reaction mass spectrometry (PTR-MS) to measure organic
gases, classified by molecular formula, with fast time response and can be
transported and deployed for in-situ sampling. The PIs have identified the
following topics to focus their research using the new instrument: Focus Area 1:
Fundamental processes in atmospheric chemistry; Focus Area 2: Feedbacks and
couplings between the biosphere and atmosphere; Focus Area 3: Impact of organic
carbon on ecosystems and other environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
instrument will support an interdisciplinary team of faculty at Virginia Tech
who are investigating the role of gas-phase organic compounds in atmospheric
chemistry, chemical signaling, insect ecology, freshwater ecosystems, and public
health, with projects planned to tackle complex global issues that bridge these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.