* 2117477
* Genomic design principles of carbon exchange between algae and bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Seppe Kuehn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 551,501.00

The research will discover the rules for building ecosystems that cycle carbon.
Life on Earth is sustained by a global carbon cycle. Understanding how and why
this cycling is maintained is a critically important question given the growing
impact of human activity on carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere. Carbon
cycling happens through two processes: photosynthesis which creates sugars and
biomass from carbon dioxide, and respiration which converts sugars and biomass
back to carbon dioxide. Remarkably, roughly half of all of the photosynthesis on
the planet is performed by microbes such as algae. Algae provide carbon in the
form of sugars and other compounds to bacteria. The resulting growth of bacteria
is not only essential for the health and function of nearly all ecosystems on
the planet but key to the global carbon cycle. Despite the critical nature of
this interaction, the principles the govern how carbon flows from algae to
bacteria and back are not known. The project will uncover these principles using
closed microbial biospheres: hermetically sealed microbial communities that
sustain a carbon cycle between algae and bacteria when provided with only light.
Uncovering these rules will open the door to predicting, designing, and
controlling carbon flow through microbial communities with applications from
modeling global carbon cycling to biofuels. The research is accompanied by a new
curriculum that is directed at bringing cutting-edge experimental and data
science methods to students of Ecology and Evolution as well as accessible
demonstrations of scientific ideas to middle school age
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to
discover the design principles governing carbon exchange between algae and
bacteria and to apply these principles to build synthetic communities with
predefined carbon cycling capabilities. A key roadblock to unlocking the power
of microbial communities is that we do not know how genomic structure determines
metabolic function. The project combines carbon-cycling closed microbial
communities, high-throughput measurements, and machine-learning to discover the
key genomic features (pathways and taxa) that enable carbon exchange between
algae and bacteria. The outcomes of the project will be: (1) Combine machine
learning and high-throughput measurements of carbon cycling to predict carbon
exchange between algae and bacteria using taxonomic and metagenomic information
and to test these predictions in synthetic consortia. (2) Dissect the
interactions that sustain carbon exchange in algae-bacteria communities by
exploiting a massively parallel droplet microfluidic platform to measure
thousands of interactions. Leverage these insights to construct a consumer-
resource model of carbon exchange and predict the impact of algal mutations on
carbon recycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.