* 2117433
* Quantifying Uncertainties in Drought Severity to Improve Drought Monitoring
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Steven Quiring, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 399,959.00

This project develops improved methods for classifying drought severity in ways
that improve comparative understandings of the effects of droughts in different
regions. A primary objective of the research is to identify and quantify sources
of uncertainty that can affect the accuracy of drought classification. This
information is beneficial for determining how the use of different datasets and
indices can influence the accuracy of drought assessment. The results of this
project have the potential to help to inform drought monitoring and mitigation
activities that are undertaken by local, state, and federal agencies. Aided by a
steering committee of drought experts from diverse agencies, the study
facilitates improved drought monitoring. In addition, the project provides
training opportunities for undergraduate students through summer research
internships and courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops refined
methods for assessing drought severity in diverse regional settings. The
researchers have multiple objectives. First, using archival data, the
researchers develop objective drought thresholds that can be used for accurate
assessments across temporal, seasonal, and spatial contexts. These thresholds
rely on multiple sources of data, including precipitation, temperature, soil
moisture, stream flow, and groundwater. Second, using related approaches and
data, the researchers quantify the uncertainty and bias in prevailing methods
for characterizing drought frequency and severity. Estimating these biases
allows for improved projections of future droughts. Third, the researchers
compare their thresholds to historical data on observed impacts of droughts,
which provides insight into the validity and utility of the derived thresholds.
Overall, the results of this study contribute to efforts to characterize and
assess the effects of past droughts while providing enhanced forecasting of
future drought severity and impacts. The methods developed in this study are
potentially transferable to global analyses of drought severity and
trends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.