* 2117932
* GEM: Modeling and Analysis of Extreme Geomagnetically Induced Currents (GICs)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Chigomezyo Ngwira, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 11/30/2022
* USD 449,411.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the this
award is to advance the understanding of the fundamental processes that control
the development and evolution of extreme geomagnetically induced currents
(GICs). The horizontal geoelectric field induced at the Earth's surface is the
primary quantity that determines the magnitude of GIC that flow on high-voltage
power transmission networks. However, knowledge on many aspects of the dynamic
solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere interactions that control the generation and
evolution of the geoelectric fields is lacking, especially during extreme
geomagnetic storms. The award would carry out a detailed characterization of the
dynamic solar wind-magnetosphere-ionosphere processes that produce extreme
geoelectric fields. Specifically, the award would address the science
objectives: 1) What are the key high-latitude processes associated with the
development and evolution of extreme geoelectric fields? (2) What is the role of
field-aligned current meso-scale structures in the development of extreme
geoelectric fields? (3) What are the key physical parameters/processes that
control the auroral equatorward boundary expansion to lower latitudes? The award
investigation is aligned with the White House-led National Science and
Technology Council (National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan, 2015/2019)
that identified GICs as one of the top national threats. This award also
contains a STEM education component in-which undergraduate students would be
supported and mentored to advance knowledge and understanding while promoting
teaching, training and learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award research plan
features a comprehensive data analysis and modeling effort that would connect
new multiscale understanding of the fundamental drivers of GICs with GIC
modeling. Observations from AMPERE/Swarm, SuperMAG, THEMIS, DMSP, and SuperDARN
would be combined with global magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations to address
the science questions. The University of Michigan, SWMF, a global MHD
application available at the CCMC operating at NASA/GSFC, would carry out a
tightly integrated analysis of numerical modeling in combination with
observations. The magnetosphere and ionosphere processes would be examined to
determine when, why, and how changes in magnetosphere, magnetotail, magnetopause
and in ionosphere currents affect the electric field characteristics. An in-
depth analysis would be performed to understand what in the magnetosphere causes
the geoelectric field latitude boundary effect, and their relationship to the
boundary location in the simulations and observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.