* 2117971
* NSF-MRI: Acquisition of a Microwave Radiometer for Arctic Atmospheric Boundary Layer Research &amp; Education
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Carmen Moelders, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2023
* USD 224,415.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation award is for the acquisition of a Microwave Radiometer to
enhance high-latitude Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) research and applied
areas of Air Pollution Meteorology, Mesoscale Modeling and Low Level Cloud-ABL
interaction. This instrument will enhance the research capabilities at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks into important topics for Air Pollution and Human
Health, connected to the ABL dynamics and Air Quality. The instrument will also
be used as an educational tool for use by a diverse cohort of undergraduate and
graduate students including Alaskan Natives and underrepresented minority groups
coming to Alaska seeking for an Arctic-focused research and education
opportunity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will acquire the RPG-
HATPRO-G5 from RPG Radiometer Physics, which is the latest generation of
microwave radiometers with enhanced capability for low humidity atmospheres. The
team will incorporate the Microwave Radiometer into the existing Arctic Facility
for Atmospheric Remote Sensing at the Department of Atmospheric Sciences,
University of Alaska Fairbanks and will be combined with Lidar and surface-based
turbulence instrumentation. The instrument will also be prepared to be deployed
into a mobile unit for field studies. Topics of study that will be enhanced by
this instrument acquisition includes: a) improve understanding of surface fluxes
and ABL dynamic states; b) provide high resolution description of the ABL
structure during the buildup and breakup of surface based temperature
inversions; c) improve understanding of dynamic-radiative interaction between
elevated synoptic temperature inversions layers and the surface based
inversions; d) provide experimental observations of the winter ABL structure to
support the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry - Alaskan Layered
Pollution and Chemical Analysis (IGAC-ALPACA); e) support Fire Weather
applications detailing the summer ABL structure and f) improve mesoscale
modeling for renewable energy applications and, g) support educational programs
including dynamic meteorology with Arctic focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.