* 2117351
* Adaptation: Project CREST - Changing Research Experiences, Structures, and (in)Tolerance through the Adaptation of Promising Equity Practices
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Emily Skop, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,144,442.00

It is imperative that the U.S. have a thriving academic research community. Yet,
women and minority faculty in science, technology, engineering, math (STEM) and
the social behavioral sciences (SBS) face significant barriers to their
productivity, intellectual impact, and career progression. For the U.S. to
remain competitive, innovative, and responsive to global needs, it is important
for universities to support inclusive and equitable participation of diverse
researchers. The University of Colorado Colorado Springs (UCCS) ADVANCE
Adaptation program, named Project CREST, aims to significantly enhance the
research capacity and opportunity of women faculty in STEM and SBS. Project
CREST draws from proven strategies from previously funded ADVANCE Institutional
Transformation Projects at Montana State University, West Virginia University,
Seattle University, and Georgia Tech. The goal is to use these evidence-based
strategies to build a responsive and inclusive research culture at UCCS, the
largest university serving southern Colorado. Project CREST will focus on
systemic reform efforts that aim to transform the culture of research at UCCS
today and for the next generation of scholars. With these transformations,
Project CREST aims to result in the sustained advancement of scientific
knowledge, as more diverse voices contribute to the national research
agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of Project CREST are: 1)
positively impact women’s research experiences and productivity; 2) change the
research policies and evaluation structures at UCCS to support women’s research
participation more fully; and 3) vigilantly mitigate biases within research
spaces and processes. To advance these aims, Project CREST will focus on two
initiatives that are grounded in past problem analyses and employ an
intersectional approach. Initiative 1 focuses on building responsive and
inclusive research infrastructure. Initiative 2 focuses on reshaping research
policy, practices, and evaluation structures. Project CREST will employ
sophisticated evaluation and assessment methods to make data-driven
recommendations to other emerging high research activity institutions for how to
mitigate research inequities that limit women’s career advancement. Project
CREST provides a unique opportunity to test the replicability of existing
evidence-based strategies while adapting to and addressing the short and long-
term impacts of COVID-19 on women’s research. Project CREST has the potential to
advance the national research agenda by including more women in the discovery of
new ideas and new technologies. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.