* 2117943
* MRI: Acquisition of an ultrahigh resolution mass spectrometry system to enable metaproteomics experiments to support microbiome research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jessica Prenni, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,167,241.00

An award is made to Colorado State University (CSU) to purchase state-of-the-art
instrumentation to study the microbiome. The instrument will be housed in and
managed by the CSU Analytical Resources Core Bioanalysis and Omics Center (ARC-
BIO) at the Fort Collins Campus, which ensures that this shared resource is
equally available to all CSU students – including students at the CSU campus in
Pueblo, CO, a federally designated minority serving institution. The requested
instrument will be used to support a hands-on undergraduate research experience
in microbiological sciences. The PI team, highly regarded leaders in microbiome
and analytical sciences, will disseminate knowledge derived from this instrument
through both formal and informal methods, including development of graduate and
undergraduate coursework and lectures, laboratory tours, graduate committee
membership, and undergraduate employment and training. A hands-on workshop
involving the Graduate Student Microbiome Club and the student Bioinformatics
Club is planned to introduce metaproteomic concepts and nurture a well-educated
user base for this instrument. These educational activities offer improved STEM
educational opportunities at every academic level within CSU in a manner that
reflects CSU’s diversity. Training in modern mass spectrometry helps to ensure a
globally competitive STEM workforce valued by both academic and corporate
employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “microbiome” can be defined as a community
of microorganisms in a particular environment (e.g. human, animal, soil, etc.).
Microbiome studies are primarily facilitated using 16S rRNA or metagenomics
sequencing to identify the bacterial components present in a given microbial
community. However, this type of analysis cannot measure functional changes to
microbial communities (e.g. what are the bacteria doing?). Proteins represent
the biologically functional output of genes, and proteomics is the analytical
technique used to characterize an organism’s functionality. By extension,
metaproteomics approaches provide thousands of measurements of protein
composition and concentration from a community of organisms. Metaproteomics has
historically been limited by mass spectrometry technology and computational
challenges. Significant advancements have been achieved in both of these areas,
opening the potential for more researchers to incorporate metaproteomics
approaches in their studies. Researchers at CSU are interested in understanding
the functional and structural basis of microbiome biology and ecology, with
application to research fields including human, animal, plant and soil biology,
ecology, and biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.