* 2117405
* Analysis of Impacts of Environmental and Natural Hazards on Human Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2025
* Elizabeth Fussell, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2025
* USD 661,085.00

Climate-related hazards are expected to permanently or temporarily displace
millions of people around the world in the coming decades. In the US, coastal
cities face the twin threats of sea-level rise and more intense tropical storms,
with extreme precipitation contributing to more flood events, while Western
states are primed by climate-related warming and drying for increased wildfire
activity. Federal, state, and local governments have invested in hazard
mitigation and adaptation to reinforce settlements against these environmental
hazards, but increasingly scientists and policy actors are acknowledging that
climate migration is inevitable. A coupled human and environmental understanding
of the hazard-migration relationship anchored in the social sciences is critical
for policy development around post-disaster rebuilding, population relocation,
and managed retreat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates a new dataset
called the Dataset on Environment-Migration Systems (DEMS) to investigate the
effects of highly destructive climate-related hazards such as tropical cyclones,
floods, and wildfires on migration behavior for the US population as well as for
population subgroups defined by age, sex, race, ethnicity, and nativity during
the past 20 years. These hazards differ in their spatial and temporal scales,
frequency, and the mechanisms by which they affect communities and provide
contrasts to support investigations that build a broad understanding of hazard-
driven human migration and why some demographic groups may be more prone to
climate migration. To achieve the overarching project goal of understanding the
effects of climate-related hazards on migration behavior, the work is structured
around three core objectives: 1) construction of a new spatiotemporal dataset to
support analyses of environmental hazards and internal US migration; 2)
investigation of relationships between environmental hazards and the
redistribution of the population as a whole and by sociodemographic sub-groups;
and 3) support of public use of the DEMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.