* 2117004
* Collaborative Research: Origins of Serial Sovereign Default
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Sasha Indarte, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2023
* USD 12,838.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sovereign nations have consistently borrowed from
international financial markets for centuries, and this foreign debt remains an
important source of funding for advanced and developing countries to the modern
day. What sustains the existence of this market when there is no formal legal
means of enforcing repayment? Standard economic models predict that defaulting
on sovereign debt is deterred by the threat of investors refusing to engage in
future lending. However, historically countries differ significantly in both
their likelihood of default and ability to re-access financial markets after
default. This research will examine what leads some countries to become serial
defaulters – experiencing repeated cycles of borrowing and default – while
others do not. This project will assemble a new database on sovereign borrowing
and default consisting of both numerical and textual data. These data will
document detailed default and debt issuance history as well as the perspectives
of the general public, investors, and analysts. The project will have potential
policy implications for sovereign borrowing decisions around the world, by
improving the understanding of the reasons for sovereign defaults and investor
willingness to lend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate why
some countries experience cycles of repeated borrowing and default. The project
will build a new quantitative and textual database on sovereign borrowing,
default, negotiations with lenders, and the economic and political circumstances
relevant to sovereign debt. To assemble these data, the project will develop new
adaptations of machine learning methods for natural language processing (NLP) to
extract and analyze text. The data will be obtained from the universe of
articles from major financial newspapers, annual reports by investors, and
periodical publications by financial analysts. The project will develop a new
deep learning model to correct for common Optical Character Recognition (OCR)
errors. The project will further construct new text libraries to aide in NLP
content classification, which will allow determining how investors perceive the
motive of the sovereign, such as economic or political, in issuing or defaulting
debt. The project will categorize countries as being a serial defaulter based on
the frequency and duration of their defaults from 1820 to 1939. The research
will then document how the political and economic circumstances of borrowing and
default, including public, investor, and expert perceptions of the sovereign's
motives, influence serial default decisions. What determines sovereign default
and investor willingness to lend is not only relevant for understanding the
history of sovereign debt but has implications for ongoing policy debates over
debt restructuring, payment moratoriums, and bailouts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.