* 2117764
* Collaborative Research: Heterogeneity, Risk Premia, and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Rohan Kekre, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 220,998.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Financial assets differ in their exposure to
aggregate risk. Investing in the stock market, for instance, is substantially
riskier than investing in short-term government bonds. There is substantial
heterogeneity across households, financial institutions, and countries in their
portfolios of these assets, suggesting that investors differ in their capacity
or willingness to bear risk. This project studies how this heterogeneity matters
for the transmission of business cycle shocks and macroeconomic policy. The
project will improve our understanding on macro-financial linkages and will have
potential implications for monetary policy and financial
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project bridges recent advances in
heterogeneous agent New Keynesian models and asset pricing with segmented
markets, which have been largely disconnected. The proposed research accounts
for aggregate risk, heterogeneity in portfolio choice, and nominal rigidities
within a unified framework. The project aims to explore research questions on
the transmission of macroeconomic shocks by taking into account the relationship
between movements in risk premia and the real economy. The project will further
consider the role of the dollar in the international financial system, and the
role of asset prices in the design of optimal stabilization
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.