* 2117261
* Collaborative Research: Asymptotic Approximations for Sequential Decision Problems in Econometrics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jack Porter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,699.00

Economic and social data are often collected over time. The data collection
method may sometimes be adjusted to respond to lessons learnt during the data
collection in earlier periods. In these situations, researchers may need to
estimate policy effects, test hypotheses, or adjust experimental designs
dynamically as new data become available. The estimation method will need to
adjust as the data changes. There are currently no efficient methods for drawing
inference from data collected in such sequential manner. This project will
develop new and innovative methods for analyzing such sequential statistical
problems. The project will devise methods that are easy to solve mathematically
and allow researchers to properly evaluate dynamically collected data and
maximize the efficiency with which the data is used to draw policy conclusions.
These methods will be useful in several areas of economics, biostatistics,
medicine, and other social sciences. The results of this research will improve
methods of policy evaluation, hence improve the functioning of the US economy
and governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop new methods for analyzing statistical decision problem in dynamic
settings. We will extend the limits of experiments framework to incorporate the
informational structure in various forms of sequential data collection. The
first part of the research will focus on sequential settings where the
information available to the analyst is fixed or set exogenously to the
collected data. The second part of the project will include settings where
sequential collection of data evolves dynamically to reflect information gained
from earlier portions of the data. For each of these settings, two key research
outputs will be: (i) new information-adapted asymptotic representation theorems;
and (ii) a new asymptotic optimality framework and findings. The results of this
research will improve methods of policy evaluation, hence improve the
functioning of the US economy and governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.