* 2117566
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Information Asymmetry in Job Search
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Sandra Black, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 24,851.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wage gaps across race and gender
persist among equally educated individuals, and have been attributed in
significant part to differences in behavior during job search. Economic theory
suggests that access to information about the labor market influences behavior.
If information differs across groups, either in quantity or quality, this can
lead to differences in job choice. Across race and gender, unequal access to
networks and mentoring has been shown to give rise to these information gaps. To
test whether access to information contributes to different job search outcomes,
the project will conduct an information intervention experiment to assess first
whether students of different races and genders have differential information
about the labor market. The project will further explore whether an information
intervention could change their job search behavior and help bridge the gap in
wages. The project will have potential policy implications in considering
information intervention as a low-cost process for decreasing gender and racial
wage gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct and experiment that
will center on college students in their senior year, who are about to enter the
job search process. The treatment group will be provided with information about
the starting salary distributions of students from prior years by major, along
with reminders about deadlines for employment searches. The control group will
only receive the deadline reminders. The project will then examine whether the
treatment information changes job search behavior: in particular, the salary of
the accepted job, the number and salary of jobs rejected, negotiation behavior,
and valuation of non-wage amenities. To account for heterogeneity across
demographic groups, stratified random assignment across race, gender, and major
will be used to split participants into treatment and control. The results of
the study will inform the understanding of both the effect of information on
labor search behavior, as well as of the differential impact of information
across demographic groups. The results will also help parameterize a labor
search model with information asymmetry, where systematic informational
differences lead to differences in the reservation wage. The model will allow
for estimation of counterfactual scenarios focusing on the impact of narrowing
information gaps across groups under heterogeneous labor market
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.