* 2117792
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal Diffractometer for Teaching and Research at Rutgers University
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alan Goldman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 244,912.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Rutgers University-New Brunswick is acquiring
a single crystal X-ray diffractometer (SCXRD) to support Professor Alan Goldman
and colleagues Edward Arnold, Jing Li, Weiwei Xie and Jianyuan Zhang. In
general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the
full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a
molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact
many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry, and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of undergraduate and graduate students as well as
collaborators from other regional institutions such as Princeton University,
City University of New York and the University of Delaware.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this diffractometer is aimed at enhancing
research and education at all levels. It especially impacts the development of
transition-metal-based catalysts for transformations of simple organic molecules
and the characterization of crystalline solid-state inorganic and inorganic-
organic hybrid materials. The instrumentation is also used for determining the
structures of non-centrosymmetric superconductors and interplay of topology and
magnetism in quantum materials and studying molecular mechanisms of HIV
polyprotein precursors and reverse transcriptase. The instrument also serves
researchers investigating endohedral metal cluster control in metallofullerene
derivatives for use as molecular qubits and those designing molecular
organometallic catalysts and supramolecular structures for energy-related
transformations and functional materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.