* 2117998
* EAGER: Towards DNA-based Tools for Single-particle Cryo-electron Microscopy of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Thorsten Schmidt, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Newcomer
* 09/30/2021
* USD 86,444.00

This research will develop molecular tools that allow the study of membrane
proteins (MPs), which are among the most important, but least understood
components of cells. All cells are surrounded by lipid membranes that are almost
impermeable to water, salts or nutrients that cells need. For this reason, many
membrane proteins (MPs) are inserted into the membranes that control cellular
functions such as material transport, sensing, intercellular communication, cell
adhesion, and energy conversion. MPs are also the targets for many therapeutic
drug molecules. Knowledge of the molecular structure of MPs is necessary to
understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of their function and can guide
the development of therapeutic drugs for many common diseases. However, MPs are
difficult to study and therefore the molecular structure of most MPs is still
unknown. The goal of this project is to develop broadly applicable new tools
using DNA nanotechnology that will facilitate solving MP structures with cryo-
electron microscopes. This project will provide research opportunities for
graduate, undergraduate and high school students from underrepresented minority
groups through several established programs, which will inform them about
experimental research and potential career opportunities. Finally, introductory
physics courses will be strengthened by developing modules that underline
interdisciplinary aspects and applications of physical principles, and an
interdisciplinary molecular biophysics course will be developed. These efforts
will train the next generation of diverse, interdisciplinary leaders in STEM
research and technology.

Single-particle cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) is becoming the standard
method for MP structure determination, but several experimental challenges have
prevented solving more than 1% of human MP structures so far. The overall goal
of this project is to establish DNA-lipid nanodiscs (DLNs) as a radically new
customizable nanoscale lipid bilayer mimetic for single-particle cryo-EM of MPs.
This DNA nanotechnology-based approach will overcome existing limitations of
established bilayer mimetics and offer unprecedented control over structural,
chemical and physical design parameters that could transform MP research. Such a
paradigm shift involves significant risks and requires substantial exploratory
development efforts. First, strategies will be developed to increase synthesis
yields and to prevent lipid bilayer aggregation. Next, MP expression,
purification and co-reconstitution of MPs in DLNs need to be established. Then,
freezing conditions, additives and other sample preparation parameters need to
be iteratively optimized to produce high quality grids for imaging. It is
expected that the same or better resolutions can be achieved than with
established bilayer mimetics, while providing new functionalities and
unprecedented programmability. It is expected that DNA-lipid nanodiscs will
initiate new research in structural biology, pharmacology, virology and bio-
catalysis and therefore enhance the understanding of common diseases. The
methods and models developed in this research will be made publicly available to
benefit the larger scientific community researching the mechanisms of actions of
drugs and vaccines.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.