* 2117533
* Influence of wildfire risk perception on agricultural land management decisions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Marcellus Caldas, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2024
* USD 446,006.00

Some types of agri-environmental conservation programs, known as Payments for
Environmental Services (PES), provide financial incentives to owners of farms
and ranchers that promote the reduction of soil erosion, the protection of
wildlife habitat, and improved watersheds. However, droughts and wildfires in
agricultural grasslands have increased significantly over the last three
decades. Funds from one such program, the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP),
encourages farmers to let fields lie fallow, however there is a perception that
fallow lands allow for buildup of biomass that can serve as fuel for wildfires
that cause larger and more frequent fires. This project investigates how
landowner perceptions of wildfire risk inform their land management decisions to
participate in incentivized conservation programs. Documenting and analyzing
rural conservation efforts and responses of landowners to incentive programs
coupled with their perceptions of wildfire risk provides critical information on
how these extreme events impact the efficacy of incentivized conservation
programs. This project employs stakeholder engagement of local farmers that will
promote best-practices for managing and conserving agricultural environments.
This knowledge assists both policy makers and landowners to make effective
decisions about conservation programs. Graduate and undergraduate students are
mentored in interdisciplinary STEM research and methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While incentive programs that promote healthy agricultural
land are popular alternatives to new environmental laws that govern landowner
decisions, little is known about the effectiveness of these incentive programs
to mitigate wildfires. Using a mix of geospatial analysis integrated with a
survey and semi-structured interviews, rural land managers, farmers and ranchers
provide their experiences with, perceptions of, and responses to wildfire on CRP
lands and adjacent properties that include rangeland, agricultural fields, and
rural residences. This research provides data on how landowner perceptions of
wildfire risk influence conservation land management decisions and assesses the
subsequent impact that conservation programs and practices have on mitigating
the occurrence and size of wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.