* 2117105
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Information frictions, demand for quality, and welfare in the market for antimalarials
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Russell Morton, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 24,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Malaria is extremely deadly: In
2019, 229 million cases worldwide caused 409,000 deaths; 23% of those deaths
occurred in Nigeria. One key problem is the prevalence of substandard
antimalarials: various studies find 11.8% (Beargie et al.) to 23% (WHO) of
antimalarials sold do not have the correct active pharmaceutical ingredients
percentage, typically meaning the pills are either counterfeits or were
improperly stored. 35% of artemisinin-based combination therapies (ACTs) — the
WHO's recommended treatment for uncomplicated malaria — were found to be
substandard in a six-country study in sub-Saharan Africa (Bate et al.).
Estimates indicate “poor-quality antimalarials are responsible for 12,300 deaths
and $892 million ($890-$893 million) in costs annually in Nigeria” (Beargie et
al.). In addition to ACTs, consumers have access to many less effective
substitutes, including less effective drugs such as chloroquine and drugs not
intended for the treatment of malaria. While a quarter of Nigerians mention ACTs
when asked about malaria treatments they would use, 17% mention chloroquine, and
20% cite over-the-counter painkillers (aspirin, paracetamol, etc.) (DHS). Why
are less effective treatments commonly used? In addition to a somewhat lower
price point, consumers cannot be certain whether a drug they purchase is
substandard and likely have difficulty assessing the relative effectiveness of
different treatment options. Improving the functioning of markets for
antimalarials can help affordable and effective, high-quality drugs reach those
in need. This study seeks to improves our understanding of this vital market and
highlight how consumer uncertainty about drug quality affects antimalarial
choices. Beyond malaria, understanding how health product choices relate to
perceptions of product quality could be valuable to policy makers trying to
increase take-up of high-quality pharmaceuticals, such as Covid-19 vaccines:
similar mechanisms will likely be at play, and counterfeit Covid-19 vaccines
have been found in South Africa. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Markets in
low-income countries often fail to reliably provide high-quality versions of
goods. Both theoretical and empirical work has highlighted the importance of
information frictions in the low-quality equilibrium. This project will
investigate information frictions in the antimalarials market. This market
features quality uncertainty because i) highly effective drugs may be
counterfeits or degraded, ii) myriad lower-quality alternatives exist, including
weaker drugs and traditional remedies, and iii) learning about product quality
is difficult, e.g. because antimalarials may be used to treat non-malaria
fevers. The project asks four related questions about information frictions and
the antimalarial market: how do information frictions influence demand for
quality; what are the welfare consequences of information frictions, accounting
for how beliefs about quality influence price, quality provision, and adoption
in equilibrium; what are the distributional consequences of reducing information
frictions; and how do information frictions influence the welfare effects and
efficacy of common policies to increase uptake of high-quality antimalarials. To
answer these questions, the project combines an RCT providing drug quality
information (including free drug testing) to consumers with a structural model.
The RCT allows for precise estimates of the effect of quality beliefs on demand
for quality and evaluates a policy relevant intervention for improving uptake of
high-quality antimalarials. The structural model, incorporating treatment effect
estimates from the RCT, allows for counterfactual simulations of adoption
choices and welfare under improved quality information. The model features both
biased and noisy beliefs, advancing existing structural approaches, by using
data on both beliefs about drug quality and true quality from test
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.