* 2117994
* MRI: Development of an Agile Free-Electron-Laser-Powered Pulsed Electron Magnetic Resonance (FEL-EMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Sherwin, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,160,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Excitation and detection of the magnetic
response of electrons at high magnetic fields -- high-field electron magnetic
resonance (EMR) -- is needed for breakthroughs in disciplines ranging from
biology to quantum information science. All magnetic resonance spectrometers are
based on the fact that the building blocks of matter -- protons, most atomic
nuclei, and electrons --behave like tiny magnets whose strength is quantified by
their magnetic moments. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spectrometers deployed
in many hospitals excite and detect the magnetic moments of protons in large
magnetic fields using powerful pulses of electromagnetic radiation at
frequencies well below 1 GHz. Because the magnetic moments of electrons are
nearly 700 times larger than those of protons, high-field EMR spectrometers must
use powerful pulses of electromagnetic radiation with frequencies above 100 GHz,
or 0.1 THz. Due to the extreme difficulty of generating such powerful, high-
frequency pulses, the capabilities of high-field EMR spectrometers lag far
behind those of MRI and other nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometers. In this
project, researchers at the University of California at Santa Barbara leverage
their unique sources of powerful sub-THz electromagnetic radiation to build an
agile free-electron-laser-powered EMR spectrometer. This spectrometer is
designed to enable unprecedented studies of the basic properties of candidates
for new classes of quantum sensors; fast, energy-efficient alternatives to
electronics; and exotic quantum mechanical states of matter. The diverse team of
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers receive unique
training in developing state-of-the-art scientific instrumentation, which is
excellent preparation for the science and engineering
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The free-
electron lasers (FELs) at the University of California at Santa Barbara are
unique sources of powerful, quasi-continuous wave sub-THz and THz
electromagnetic radiation. A new helical FEL in combination with "pulse slicing"
technology delivers pulses with peak powers of about 10 kW at frequencies that
are tunable between 140 and 500 GHz. The FEL-powered EMR (FEL-EMR) spectrometer,
supported by this Major Research Instrumentation project, is designed to rotate
spin-1/2 species by 90 degrees in a few nanoseconds at magnetic fields up to
16.5 Tesla and sample temperatures between 1.6 and 300 K, enabling rapid
electron spin manipulation and read-out in paramagnetic, antiferromagnetic, and
strongly correlated spin systems. The scientific targets of the FEL-EMR
spectrometer include the optimization of paramagnetic contrast agents for
dynamic nuclear polarization-enhanced nuclear magnetic resonance of proteins;
the measurement of spin coherence in optically addressable molecular qubits; the
investigation of damping and spin transport in antiferromagnetic spintronics;
and searches for elusive excitations of fractionalized
magnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.