* 2117052
* Submarine Basins, Steppe, and Sea Ice: Paleoclimate and Paleoecology of the Late Pleistocene and Holocene Bering Sea Shelf
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sarah Fowell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,721,614.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Bering Land Bridge served as a
migration corridor for plants, animals, and humans passing between Eurasia and
North America during glacial stages of the Quaternary period (the last ~2.6
million years). During interglacial stages, rising sea level floods this land
bridge, creating a marine gateway that connects the Pacific and Arctic oceans
and modulates the global climate system. Although the Bering Sea shelf is the
only place on Earth where fluctuations in Quaternary sea level repeatedly opened
and closed such a gateway, sediment cores for the purpose of paleoenvironmental
reconstruction have never been collected from the central and southern portions
of the submerged land bridge. To determine how the most recent
glacial/interglacial transition affected the ecology and climate of the Bering
Land Bridge, the project team will collect, analyze, and archive terrestrial and
marine sediment preserved in sedimentary basins across the Bering Sea shelf.
Because these basins occupied topographic depressions on the Bering Land Bridge,
they were likely to have been sites of freshwater lakes and terrestrial sediment
deposition during glacial stages. Researchers will use a suite of traditional
and cutting-edge paleoclimate proxies, including pollen, diatoms, and stable
isotopes, to reconstruct the vegetation of interior and coastal sites on the
Bering Land Bridge and evaluate the relationship between sea ice extent and
aridity during and after the last glacial stage. Results will address
longstanding questions regarding migration patterns of plants and animals,
resources available to human populations, and the role of the marine gateway
during the most recent past episode of global warming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cores of Late Pleistocene and Holocene sediment will be
collected from transects of five submarine basins located between the Bering
Strait and the southern shelf edge: Norton Basin (64 N), St. Matthew Basin
(62.5 N), Navarin Basin (62 N), St. George Basin (55.5 N), and the North
Aleutian Basin (56 N). Existing US Geological Survey and industry seismic data
suggest significant accumulation of Holocene and Pleistocene sediment fill in
these basins. To maximize sediment recovery, the team will deploy a variety of
coring apparatus, including a multicore system, a vibracorer, and gravity
corers. New Chirp sub bottom data will be used to provide high-resolution
imaging of the basin fill and subsurface topography in order to refine selection
of both sites and apparatus. Pollen analysis of the Pleistocene section will
permit reconstruction of the vegetation of the central and southern Bering Land
Bridge and test the hypothesis that relatively humid conditions in low
elevation, coastal regions provided a refugium for woody plants. Identification
and dating of the transition between terrestrial and marine sediment will serve
to constrain the rate and timing of Holocene sea-level rise.
Micropaleontological and geochemical analyses of marine sediment will permit
reconstruction of sea ice extent, primary productivity, and organic matter
source. Comparison of marine records from sites near the shelf edge with coeval
terrestrial records from the inner shelf will allow identification of
terrestrial-marine linkages. These data will be used to test the hypothesis that
when sea ice retreats during deglaciation, primary productivity on the Bering
Shelf increases in sync with humidity on the Beringian continent. Results of
this project will further our understanding of ocean circulation, the effect of
sea ice on global climate, and the paleoecology of the migration corridor. The
Beringian Standstill hypothesis suggests that ancestors of all Native Americans
were isolated from Eurasian populations for thousands of years prior to
migrating to North America. Fossil pollen records from terrestrial sites on the
Bering Land Bridge are thus crucial to assessing the resources available to Late
Pleistocene inhabitants of Beringia. Because the results of this project are
likely to be of interest to Alaska Natives, the project team will collaborate
with the Shared Beringian Heritage Program, the Bering Land Bridge National
Preserve, and the Alaska Regional Office of the National Park Service. A
PolarTREC teacher will design activities and lesson plans to promote
understanding of land bridge paleoecology, and the Alaska Teen Media Institute
will create video, web, and social media products during the science cruise.
Curricula will be delivered in Alaskan schools, and results will be disseminated
to stakeholders via public presentations and a traveling museum exhibit. This
project will also provide training for multiple undergraduate and graduate
students at sea, in university laboratories, and at international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.