* 2117203
* MRI: Acquisition of a Sputtering-Evaporation System for Thin Film Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Min Zou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,823.00

This project is jointly funded by the Major Research Instrumentation program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).The award
supports the University of Arkansas, Fayetteville (UAF) campus with the
acquisition of a hybrid sputterer-evaporator system to add transformative thin-
film materials synthesis capabilities to the campus. The instrument will
facilitate the fabrication of a wide range of state-of-the-art complex layered
materials for research in a broad range of applications that rely on precise
control of the chemical, structural, and compositional properties of thin film
interfaces. This range of materials covers the broad scope of researchers
intending to use the instrument. The instrumentation is also robust for high
user throughput and complements the cutting-edge materials characterization
facilities already operating on campus. The instrument provides a state-of-the-
art research and educational experience for the graduate students and postdocs
that will serve as its primary user base. It aides in the recruitment and
training of a diverse graduate student population at the University of Arkansas
by enabling a more competitive research experience and by providing an exciting,
user-friendly route to high-level scientific research. It is anticipated that it
will impact translation of related materials research into technologies,
stimulating entrepreneurial activity in Northwest Arkansas. It will enhance the
standing in materials science and engineering through the efforts of large-scale
collaborations on campus and investment in young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of research themes have emerged on
the UAF campus that highlight the need for a general thin-film synthesis
instrument. One theme focuses on energy conversion at electrochemical
interfaces, where researchers aim to fabricate and characterize nanocomposites,
alloys, and heterostructures for electrocatalysis and battery applications.
Another theme studies the fabrication of state-of-the-art quantum devices from
thin films and 2D materials. A third theme aims to develop complex functional
interfaces and three-dimensional materials by surface engineering and additive
manufacturing. A fourth theme emphasizes chemical, photochemical, and
electrochemical reactions relevant to biological sensing and organic chemical
reactions. Thin- film synthesis has broad application across these emergent
themes. This award provides the campus with an instrument that significantly
improve the relevant research capabilities. The instrument facilitates the
fabrication of a wide range of complex layered materials (semiconductors,
metals, and insulators) by RF plasma sputtering and electron-beam evaporation.
It also includes a heating stage and gas plumbing that enables in situ chemical
control of materials synthesis that covers the broad scope of intended
researchersâ€™ interests. The instrument will be housed in and available to users
of the Institute of Nanoscience and Engineering on the UAF campus. The cutting-
edge materials characterization facilities already operating in that facility
complement the scientific impact of the thin-film instrument to be acquired.
Users of the instrument include primarily graduate students, postdocs, and
faculty from the UAF campus, though it is also accessible to undergraduate
students and R&amp;D and startup activity adjacent to the campus and throughout
the region&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.