* 2117605
* MRI: Acquisition of a Chemical Mechanical Polishing System for Research and Education
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Betty Lise Anderson, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 475,223.00

The objective of this project is to acquire a state-of-the-art chemical
mechanical polishing (CMP) system for frontier research and synergistic
education. CMP has emerged as a technique for planarizing surfaces with
resulting surface roughness down to the sub-nanometer root-mean-square level.
Ultra-flat surfaces are enabling for microelectronics, optoelectronics, micro-
electro-mechanical systems, and advanced device architectures. The proposed CMP
system consists of a CMP instrument and a post-CMP cleaning instrument. The CMP
instrument polishes a material surface through the combination of chemical and
mechanical processes. The post-CMP cleaning instrument removes particles that
can be electrostatically attached to the surface during the CMP process. We plan
to install the system at The Ohio State University (OSU) multi-user and shared-
use research fabrication facility, Nanotech West Lab, in the spirit of open
access availability for users across the region. Acquisition of the CMP system
is in strong alignment with OSU research priorities in quantum information
science and engineering, cyber security, communications, and mobility.
Electronics and photonics research impacts the networking, computing, and
sensing industries. The education and training of students at multiple levels
will be impacted through research programs, classroom instruction, and robust
hands-on outreach activities. As one of the largest public universities in the
USA, OSU provides opportunities for large numbers of undergraduate and graduate
students to carry out research in a range of cutting-edge areas.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Frontier research involves integrated photonics devices for classical
and quantum applications, high power electronics based on ultrawide bandgap
semiconductors, 5G/6G communications and sensing devices, and compound
semiconductor technology for ultraviolet and topological lasers. The CMP system
will allow OSU researchers to conduct direct bonding of thin film ferroelectric
materials for the development of heralded single photon sources, prepare growth
surfaces for gallium oxide vertical power devices, generate tunability and
reliability in microfabricated antenna arrays, and realize topological phenomena
in semiconductor lasers. Chip-scale single photon sources exploit large scale
multiplexing in compact form factors from photonic integrated circuits with
micrometer scale mode field diameters at telecommunications wavelengths. Power
devices based on gallium oxide exhibit factor-of-two larger breakdown electric
field over traditional wide bandgap semiconductors such as gallium nitride or
silicon carbide. Micro-electro-mechanical systems integrated into antenna arrays
produce radiation pattern tunability from 100 GHz frequency-reconfigurable
antennas. Topological lasers have potential for scatter-free edge-state
transport and robustness against fabrication defects. The CMP system is critical
for our vision of next generation electronics and photonics. The acquisition of
the CMP system is expected to have broad regional impact on campus, in industry,
and at the Air Force Research Lab in Dayton Ohio. Potential future users of the
new CMP system include established and early-career faculty in Engineering and
Physics departments, conducting fundamental research spanning materials,
devices, and components for systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.