* 2117616
* MRI: Development of a Machine Learning Multimodal Ultrafast Optical Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gregery Buzzard, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 766,944.00

This award is jointly supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging, and the Chemistry Research Instrumentation
programs. Purdue University is developing a machine learning multimodal
ultrafast nonlinear optical microscope to support the research of Professor
Libai Huang and colleagues Gregery Buzzard, Sujith Puthiyaveetil, Michael
Reppert, and Chi Zhang. In general, this instrument development combines
expertise in instrument design, non-linear ultrafast spectroscopy, microscopy,
and machine learning. If successful, the resulting instrument will represent an
enabling tool that could facilitate investigations involving complex materials
and biological systems over a wide range of time (10 femtoseconds -
microseconds) and length (50 nm - micron) scales, extending capabilities beyond
what is currently available with conventional commercial microscopy instruments.
This temporal/spatial information may be used to better understand energy and
heat flow in complex materials and biological samples. This instrument will
enhance education, research, and teaching efforts of students at all levels, in
several departments, as well as be accessible for use at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award to develop a machine learning multi-modal
ultrafast optical imaging platform is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels, especially in areas such as optical microscopy, machine learning,
and ultrafast spectroscopy by reducing optical exposure and measurement time by
about 100-fold without significant loss in reconstructed image quality. Studies
focused on coherent and non-equilibrium energy transport in nanomaterials,
multi-scale tracking of light response in photosynthetic membranes, and heat
flow in biological assemblies are to be pursued as are those focused on machine
learning-enabled adaptive sampling for ultrafast microscopy measurements. This
instrument development project has the promise of opening up optical imaging
studies of complex materials or biological systems at time and length scales
beyond what is currently available with conventional commercial optical
microscopy instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.