* 2117324
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Modelling the Historical Consolidation of Family Farms Through Time
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Price Fishback, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,613.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research answers an important
question in theoretical economics---how a seemingly competitive industry like
agriculture comes to be dominated by a few firms. The Homestead Act, beginning
in 1863, granted 3 million farmers 160 to 640-acre plots of farmland in the
western part of the United States. The Act, which fundamentally reshaped the
demographic and agricultural makeup of the American West, is widely regarded to
be one of the most influential land laws in American history. Yet several
important aspects of this Act, including its impact on the consolidation of
farms in later years, have not been studied partly because of lack of
appropriate detailed data. This research project will collect, digitize, merge
millions of land transaction records and individual owner characteristics, and
use the data to study why owners chose to homestead or purchase land allocated
to them and how the ownership or homestead decision influenced farm
consolidation in the 20th century as well. The results of this research will not
only explain why competitive industries, such as agriculture, become a non-
competitive one and thus provide important inputs into competition policies.
This will help improve the functioning of the US economy, hence increase the
growth rate of the economy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses four
projects to analyze the mechanisms behind the decision to purchase or homestead
land in Kansas, and the causal effects of that decision on a range of future
outcomes. The first project predicts settler decisions to purchase or homestead
based on land characteristics at the farm level; the second project studies
selection into purchasing and homesteading based on heterogeneous production
functions; the third project estimates the option value created by homesteading
using a multi-period structural model, while the final project explores the
effect of the decision to homestead on the subsequent rate and method of farm
consolidation over time. This project develops a structural industrial
organization model of endogenous mergers. In the process, it relates the
economics of farm consolidation to the industrial organization literature on
horizontal mergers. Agricultural markets in the 1870â€™s were characterized by
many small farms that produced homogeneous agricultural goods and were price-
takers in both inputs and outputs. This research builds and estimate a
competitive model of endogenous mergers to explain farm consolidation. The
results of this research will not only explain why competitive industries become
a non-competitive ones and thus provide important inputs into competition
policies. This will help improve the functioning of the US economy, hence
increase the growth rate of the economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.