* 2117834
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Machine Learning Training and Curriculum Development for Earth Science Studies
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ziheng Sun, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 995,817.00

Earth system science discoveries are increasingly affected by data management,
analysis, and inference using powerful machine learning (ML) techniques. Yet,
the skills required to perform these tasks, and training in cutting-edge, open-
source technologies to build ML models and pipelines, big data, and cloud
computing, are not covered by the traditional graduate curriculum in the
geosciences. To fill these gaps, this project will develop the GeoScience
MAchine Learning Resources and Training (GeoSMART) framework that will build a
foundation in open-source scientific ecosystems and general ML theory, toolkits,
and deployment on Cloud computing platforms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will include a team of geoscience and ML educators to create a novel ML
curriculum with focus on seismology, cryosphere and hydrology applications. The
training materials will be included in an enhanced curriculum that will broaden
impact on emerging ML communities. The projectâ€™s implementation plan will
provide training in open-source ML toolkits and data science skills. Further,
the project will cultivate the development of discipline-specific ML libraries,
workflows, and communities of practice to sustain future growth of ML
cybertraining opportunities. By building tools using open-source and cloud-
accessible platforms, and by partnering with colleges and institutions that lack
computing resources for ML workflows, the project will increase access to
cybertraining materials and help to solve geoscience
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.