* 2117272
* MRI: Acquisition of an Illumina NovaSeq 6000 to Support High-Throughput Sequencing Collaborative Research and Integrated Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Frank Loeffler, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2024
* USD 692,495.00

An award is made to The University of Tennessee, Knoxville (UTK) to acquire an
Illumina NovaSeq sequencer, which will be broadly accessible to on-campus and
external researchers through the Genomics Core within the Center for
Environmental Biotechnology. The new instrumentation will enable UTK researchers
to attain a level of competency more attuned to the breadth of research across
the institution’s portfolio of microbial, plant, human, and animal nucleic acid
sequencing needs. The expanded Genomics Core will engage a broader cohort of
researchers to obtain sequence data, provide faculty new means of illustration
of the genes-to-ecosystem concept, and excite more young minds about discovery-
driven scientific research and the exploration of the rules of life. A robust
network of outreach activities that align with NSF’s STEM educational mission
will be strategically integrated into new training and learning opportunities
involving the NovaSeq. The newly enabled research will address fundamental
research questions that impact the applied sciences and engineering disciplines,
and several projects will be of considerable public interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NovaSeq sequencing instrument bestows the ability to
perform demanding nucleic acid sequencing projects allowing researchers to
assess the entire genetic makeup of a single organism (e.g., a bacterium, a
fungus, or an animal), or an assembly of different microorganisms in a specific
habitat (i.e., a microbiome). DNA sequencing will reveal microbial taxonomy and
functional potential, and metatranscriptome sequence data will shed light on the
actual activities that result in observable characteristics (i.e., organismal
phenotypes). Research projects will link microbiome sequence information with
processes relevant to environmental, animal, and human health. Sequence-enabled
research projects will advance understanding of microbes that detoxify
pollutants, control greenhouse gas emission, and promote carbon dioxide
sequestration in (agricultural) soils; generate new opportunities for
ecologically informed control of biocorrosion and biofouling; allow integrated
cross-kingdom analyses to reveal host-microbiome interactions and genetic and
epigenetic mechanisms that determine phenotypes; compare lives of contemporary
and ancient peoples; explore microbiomes in understudied environments, such as
the deep subsurface; and provide new insights into viral ecology and emerging
viral diseases (i.e., zoonoses).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.