* 2117534
* Urbanization and Economic Growth.
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Nathan Nunn, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2023
* USD 393,434.00

This research project will use experimental methods to study two channels
through which access to cities may cause economic and social change: markets and
denser social networks. Cities are hubs of innovation and entrepreneurship, both
important drivers of economic growth. However, there is little credible
empirical evidence about the mechanisms behind the economic benefits of cities
because urbanization occurs alongside several social and economic change. The
experiments involve providing free transportation of rural dwellers to urban
markets as well as urban social events. Exposure to markets has been shown to be
associated with greater cooperation and more trust in anonymous strangers; two
key ingredients for a successful economy. By facilitating denser social
networks, cities enable the cross-fertilization of ideas and drive innovation.
Reducing barriers to urban access could thus promote business relations, provide
information about new opportunities, and new ideas that individuals could then
bring back to their communities. This research will provide credible causal
estimates of the importance of access to urban centers for rural dwellers. In
doing this, it will provide evidence about the importance of these different
mechanisms through which urban centers facilitate economic growth. The results
of this research project will provide policy makers a mechanism to link rural
areas with urban areas and thus reduce the rural-urban income
differential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will study the randomized rollout of a program that facilitates urban access for
people living in rural areas. Implemented by an NGO, this `City Access Program'
provides rural dwellers with regular weekly transportation to the nearest large
city. The program has two components, which will be the `treatment arms' of the
study. In the `market’ arm, the NGO provides transportation directly to the
city’s central market and encourages participants to buy or sell goods there as
they please. In the `social’ treatment arm, NGO provides transportation to the
city along with an invitation to attend one or more of a series of social group
activities, either a dancing/music group or a church group. The random
assignment of participants to these treatments or to control group will allow
the PIs to estimate causal effects of providing rural dwellers with greater
access to the city in general—and to urban markets and social networks in
particular. The project will examine how such exposure affects individuals’
economic behaviors and wellbeing, beliefs and values, psychological traits, and
social interactions. The results of this research project will provide policy
makers a mechanism to link rural areas with urban areas and thus reduce the
rural-urban income differential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.