* 2117623
* MRI: Acquisition of a Scanning X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy Microprobe for Fundamental and Applied Materials Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Lauren Webb, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 698,545.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a scanning
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) microprobe to serve a large community of
scientists at the University of Texas at Austin. XPS is a surface sensitive
technique based on the photoelectric effect that can enable spatially- and
depth-resolved surface chemical characterization of materials. XPS data is of
great importance to the understanding the relationship between structure,
properties, processing, and functional behavior of novel materials. Advances in
nanoscience and nanotechnology hinge on developing such an understanding. The
advanced capabilities of this instrument will have a profound impact on the
research and educational programs at the University of Texas at Austin. It will
enable next-generation materials research, especially for renewable energy,
catalysis, electronics, environmental sciences, and health. The XPS will serve
as a research facility of excellence for remotely controlled studies of advanced
materials for southern US universities and industries and enhance the mission of
center-level research activities involving a diverse set of faculties. Research
enabled by the instrument will foster the creation of start-up companies by
providing the necessary research base with state-of-the-art and easily
accessible instrumentation. This instrument will also have a strong impact on
the education and training of the next generation of scientists from graduate
students to faculty. The instrument will also be incorporated into outreach
activities that involve K-12 programs, community college students and teachers,
and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a versatile and
high-performance XPS with several unique, state-of-the-art features will allow
analytical measurements with complementary techniques (such as Auger
spectroscopy and reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy) and in-depth
analysis of chemically sensitive materials. The instrument has high sensitivity,
excellent micro-area spectroscopy performance, fast acquisition of imaging XPS
data, effective charge compensation on insulating samples, excellent angular
resolution, and facile identification of regions of interests, as well as full
remote access with active control capability. This will enable a wide range of
forefront research and discovery in the area of materials science and
engineering, nanoscience, and nanotechnology, including the development of low-
cost, efficient materials for solar cells, batteries for transportation and grid
storage, solar-to-fuel conversion, fuel cells, catalysts, low-dimensional
materials, nano-electronics, additive manufacturing, pharmaceuticals, drug
delivery, as well as water purification and harvesting. These capabilities will
thus contribute to the development of a broad range of research and educational
activities, including those supported by major centers at UT-Austin, such as the
NSF-MRSEC Center for Dynamics and Control of Materials, the NSF-ERC
Nanomanufacturing Systems for Mobile Computing and Energy Technologies, and the
NSF-ERC Center for Innovative and Strategic Transformation of Alkane Resources.
This will create vibrant synergies among UT-Austinâ€™s diverse research, training,
and educational enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.