* 2117877
* MRI: Acquisition of Hovermap Rapid Data Capture and 3D Imaging of GPS-Denied Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Mark Aldenderfer, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2023
* USD 101,694.00

Over the past decade there has been a revolution in survey and mapping with the
advent of LiDAR imaging technology. LiDAR scanners mounted on Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAVs) offer a method of rapid data capture that creates detailed
regional images of anthropogenic and natural landscapes to generate high-
resolution relief models of ground surfaces. While this method has radically
changed the imaging of terrestrial environments, these systems often require
Global Positioning System guidance systems to fly and navigate. Contexts
described as GPS-denied, which include subterranean spaces such as caves,
rockshelters, mines, or building interiors, have seen limited use of LiDAR/UAV
technologies due to this limitation. The instruments currently used to create 3D
images of interior spaces such as total stations or scanners are often
impractical in rugged environments and cannot be employed in tight or hard to
reach places. Yet, these types of sites are often under threat of destruction
and cultural heritage loss. With the development of new technologies, it is now
possible to record and create 3D reconstructions of these sites as they exist
today, not only enabling greater capacities for research, but ensuring that they
will be digitally preserved for the future. This MRI project is initiated by the
University of California, Merced (UCM) and the Qualcomm Institute at the
University of California, San Diego. UCM is a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI)
and one of few Ph.D.-granting HSIs nationwide. The acquisition of a Hovermap
system leverages the leadership role played by UCM in innovative deployments of
UAV technology in environmental monitoring, natural resource management,
precision agriculture, and student training . Models of GPS-denied environments
are produced for use in disciplinary and multidisciplinary collaborative
laboratory research projects. Opportunities for education include student
training in the field and classroom as well as student research and internship
opportunities. Projects engage the digital preservation of archaeological sites
under threat as well as management of heritage sites both nationally and
internationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the acquisition of
the Emescent Hovermap system, a hand-held and UAV-based Light Detection and
Ranging Velodyne LiDAR with a proprietary SLAM (simultaneous localization and
mapping) and processing system. Designed for the mining industry, the Hovermap
is a robust tool that enables rapid capture and visualization of complex
topologies. This new technology allows for multiple on-demand surveys and on-
the-fly opportunistic data collection that builds capacity for the rapid capture
of complex subterranean/indoor contexts such as caves, rockshelters, or building
interiors as well as terrestrial landscapes and surface architecture, producing
representations for employment in research that depends on accurate spatial data
capture and imaging. The system allows for progressive LiDAR scanning while
walking through constricted or confined spaces with the unit in hand, with plug-
and-play transition to drone-based scanning as terrain and environments require.
The system has propriety software that will stitch multiple images from each
modality creating a high resolution 3D image with
colorization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.