* 2117095
* Effects of Artificial Intelligence on Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Anastassia Fedyk, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 184,223.00

To what extent are recent advances in technology replacing white collar jobs?
While prior automation technologies, such as robotics, impacted menial labor in
sectors such as manufacturing, emerging technologies such as artificial
intelligence are meant to automate the types of tasks (prediction and decision-
making) that are associated with white-collar workers and that are more
prominent in service-oriented industries. This project focuses on the banking
industry and uses a detailed rich dataset that includes job histories, education
records, demographics, and skills. The project explores individual banks’
adoption of technology through the human capital lens, characterizing technical
capabilities of each bank’s employees based on their reported skills. The
project will first document stylized facts on modern technical talent, including
its demographic composition and educational attainment. The research will then
examine the determinants of technological investments by firms, linking
technological investments to bank size, previous efficiency, and business model.
Finally, the project will study the impact of banks’ technology adoption on
their workforce, by considering changes in the composition of banks’ employees’
job functions and primary skill focus areas. The research will examine which job
functions and skills are being displaced by technology, and which jobs appear to
be complementary to technological investments. The project will have policy
implications on the role of artificial intelligence investments in the labor
markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study adoption of technology
in service-oriented industries and the resulting impact on white collar jobs.
Using detailed granular data on workers in the banking industry, the research
will characterize each individual employee as either non-technical, a user of
off-the-shelf tools, having basic technical skills, or having advanced technical
skills. This approach will lead to a measure of bank-level investments in
technology, based on the share of a given bank’s workforce that is comprised of
advanced technical employees. The project will provide a detailed
characterization of modern technical talent across demographics and educational
attainment, and consider the determinants of technological investments by firms.
Specifically, the research will study whether larger banks are more able to
adopt technology, whether ex ante efficiency enhances or hinders technology
adoption, and whether adoption of new technologies is more pronounced among
institutions with more reliance on processing soft information. The research
will further examine the impact of banks’ technology adoption on their
workforce, by taking into account the changes in the composition of banks’
employees’ job functions and primary skill areas. To link changes in technology
to changes in labor composition, the project will employ long-difference
regressions to observe long-term effects, and distributed lead-lag models to
test for pre-trends and reverse causality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.