* 2117771
* Geospatial Artificial Intelligence Approaches for Understanding Location Descriptions in Natural Disasters and Their Spatial Biases
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kenneth Joseph, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2026
* USD 384,940.00

The objective of this project is to understand how people describe locations on
social media during natural disasters. These data from social media are
potentially beneficial in disaster response efforts, and to further this goal,
computational algorithms are being developed to extract location information
from social media postings. However, uneven use of social media by different
populations and varying ways of describing places can complicate the process of
identifying locations. This project advances knowledge by enhancing the
understanding of the ways in which people describe geographic locations during
natural disasters, the effectiveness of different algorithmic approaches for
location extraction, and the potential spatial biases in the described
locations. Such knowledge benefits society by informing future disaster response
practices to help save lives and reduce inequality in response efforts. This
project provides interdisciplinary research experience for undergraduates and
graduates and will enhance academia and industry partnership. The datasets and
algorithmic tools produced from this project will be publicly shared.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social media platforms, such as Twitter, are increasingly
being used by people impacted by natural disasters. Descriptions about the
locations of victims and accidents are often contained in help-seeking messages
posted on these platforms. However, a limited understanding exists of how
locations are described on social media during natural disasters, which hinders
their automatic extraction via computational tools. This project addresses three
research questions: (1) What are the typical forms of location descriptions used
by people on social media during natural disasters? (2) How effective are
different geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) approaches for extracting
these location descriptions and representing them in geographic space? And (3)
What spatial biases have characterized location descriptions on social media
during natural disasters? The research team is collaborating with emergency
management specialists to understand location descriptions on social media,
examine multiple geo-knowledge-informed AI approaches for location extraction,
and investigate the spatial biases of the extracted locations and their relation
to vulnerable communities. The obtained knowledge about location descriptions
and the developed methods can be applied to future disasters in diverse
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.