* 2117205
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder ALD/CVD Reactor for Next Generation Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kyriaki Kalaitzidou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 519,700.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
fluidized bed vapor deposition reactor capable of applying precise nanoscale
coatings to a range of materials. Such coatings can improve the processing and
performance of materials in technology sectors as diverse as electronics
(enabling smart dust for environmental monitoring), renewable energy and
chemical processing (greatly reducing carbon emissions), additive manufacturing
(improving medical implants or aerospace components), and pharmaceuticals
(increasing the effectiveness of drug delivery). The instrument will allow
researchers to study the details of fluidized bed processing and understand how
it can be applied to new applications. The reactor will be installed within the
shared-user facility at Georgia Tech’s Institute for Electronic and
Nanotechnology, a node of the NSF-funded National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure, ensuring accessibility to users at Georgia Tech, the southeast
region, and the country. Multiple educational activities, including the
integration of course content on powder processing into the existing curriculum
as well as the creation self-guided primer videos, will increase awareness of
and access to the tool.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While vapor deposition methods are
ubiquitous in microelectronics, they are rarely used in other high-volume
manufacturing situations. However, the development of fluidized bed vapor
deposition reactor technology is changing the status quo, now making it
technically feasible and economically viable to apply such nanomaterial coatings
to previous off-limits materials (e.g., powders, fibers). The unique
capabilities of this reactor will permit fundamental investigations of the (i)
heat and mass transfer during the bottom-up manufacturing of electronic devices
in microcapsule powders, (ii) impact of length scale and order/disorder in the
optical phenomena of dispersions of complex colloidal particles, (iii) rheology
of advanced feedstock for additive manufacturing and how reactants and
inoculants can be used to create new materials with superior properties, (iv)
interplay between weight, strength, and interfacial functionalization in on-
demand recyclable carbon fiber composites, and (v) mechanisms governing
mechanocatalyst operation to enable new all-electric paradigms in industrial
processing. For these and related use-cases, powder agitation – via fluidization
– is essential to ensure uniform deposition. Small volumes enable work with
scarce samples or prototype materials. Large volumes provide the quantity of
material needed to fabricate and study macroscopic objects/devices/parts and to
explore manufacturing scale-up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.