* 2117974
* Testing an Integrative Model of the Social-Psychological Drivers of Participation in Relational Organizing
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Rebecca Niemiec, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 245,057.00

Relational organizing is a promising approach for achieving rapid, widespread
community action for environmental conservation and other pro-social outcomes.
Relational organizing involves enlisting motivated volunteers to share
information about and encourage others they know to engage in a desired
behavior. It is effective because it harnesses the power of people’s social
connections, which people are generally motivated to maintain, to help spread
new information and create new social norms. Although a growing number of
studies have documented the effectiveness of relational organizing, a key
challenge to implementing this approach is scaling it up, or encouraging a
larger number of individuals to reach out to others they know. Studies find that
most people who are committed to participating in a conservation behavior in
their personal lives are reluctant to reach out to others about this behavior.
Preliminary research suggests this may be a result of specific social-
psychological barriers that prevent people from reaching out to others, such as
their fear of being judged negatively. This project examines these barriers
through public surveys, and develops and experimentally tests messaging
approaches for reducing these barriers to encourage greater participation in
relational organizing. To do so, the researchers partner with an international
NGO, local government, and private industry to focus on a context with immense
environmental, health, and animal welfare impacts: relational organizing to
reduce meat consumption. The team develops practical handbooks and webinars
summarizing the findings to inform the efforts of numerous organizations seeking
to harness the power of relational organizing for pro-social behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scaling up the relational organizing approach requires
understanding, synthesizing, and developing interventions to address the most
salient factors driving people’s willingness to reach out to others. The
researchers advance a theoretical model of the social-psychological drivers of
participation in relational organizing. The model proposes that participation in
relational organizing is influenced by: 1) personal norms about reaching out to
others; 2) activist social identity; 3) attitudes towards and past engagement in
the target behavior; 4) perceptions of others’ beliefs about the issue and about
reaching out to others about the issue; and 5) beliefs about the efficacy of
relational organizing. To test this model, the team first conducts surveys to
examine the explanatory power of the model and identify the social-psychological
variables that are most associated with participation in relational organizing
for reducing meat consumption. The results of the surveys inform the development
of messaging interventions to address the most important social-psychological
factors. The team tests the effectiveness of the messaging interventions at
enhancing relational organizing for reducing meat consumption first through
online experiments and then through field experiments in collaboration with an
international NGO, local government, and private sector partners. In the field
experiments, they track vouchers for meatless meals that respondents can give to
others as indicators of effective relational organizing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses three gaps in the literature on pro-
environmental and pro-social behavior. First, most studies have focused on
motivating personal-sphere behaviors, rather than more collective behaviors that
involve engaging with others. The team addresses this gap through the focus on
motivating individuals to reach out to others to facilitate relational
organizing. Second, there is a lack of understanding of the diversity and
relative importance of social-psychological factors influencing whether people
reach out to others in their social network. This gap is addressed through the
development and testing of the theoretical model. Finally, few studies have
tested the impacts of theory-based interventions on real-world indicators of
conservation behavior, particularly on collective behaviors related to
biodiversity conservation and food choices. This project addresses this gap
through a field experiment that implements a real-world relational organizing
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.