* 2117903
* MRI: Acquisition of a Direct Detection Electron Energy Loss Spectrometer for Fast, Low-Dose, and High Resolution Spectroscopic Imaging of Hard and Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Josef Michl, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 995,799.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
high-speed electron energy loss spectrometer (EELS) equipped with a direct
electron detection (DED) camera. This instrument is integrated with an
aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope at the Facility for
Electron Microscopy of Materials at the University of Colorado Boulder, vastly
expanding the utility and regional impact of this already powerful microscope.
The science enabled by this advanced electron spectrometer system spans many
fields and includes collaborations across diverse departments, institutes,
universities, national labs, and industry. The instrument is readily accessible
to graduate students, postdocs, and researchers from the broader region
(including academic, industry, and national laboratory personnel), and because
of unique capabilities, is of interest to scientists around the country.
Required training and support are provided to all internal and external users.
Through connections with various campus programs, faculty using the new system
enrich educational experiences of hundreds of students by sharing their cutting-
edge research. The instrument is integrated into graduate and undergraduate
courses, initiatives and outreach programs for students from underrepresented
groups, K-12 students, and teachers to cultivate their interest in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new EELS system probes optical and
electronic properties of materials in ultraviolet, visible, and infrared regions
down to energies of 80 meV with high spatial resolution. Researchers measure
elemental composition, chemical bonding, and oxidation state information
contained in the electron energy loss near edge structures with atomic
resolution, providing new insights into the relationship between materials
structure and chemistry. The instrumentation is also designed to enable high
resolution electron imaging and spectroscopy on beam-sensitive and low-contrast
materials, such as polymers and organic thin films, while minimizing electron
dose. The high-speed DED camera allows scientists to further develop the
technique of electron ptychography. The combination of DED camera and electron
biprism enables phase and spectroscopic imaging of beam-sensitive materials.
Nanomaterials designed for renewable and sustainable energy applications are
analyzed to facilitate the analysis of performance for thermo-, photo-, and
electro-catalytic reactions in terms of atomistic-level electronic structure.
The new system is also employed for several applications in biominerals and
natural materials, such as for mapping the chemical composition of beam-
sensitive nanomaterials generated by biological organisms. Beyond these specific
examples, users from a wide variety of disciplines interrogate atomic and
electronic structures of diverse types of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.