* 2117463
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement in Economics: Supply-Side Responses to Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Andreoni, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how
people respond to actual and anticipated discrimination. Literature on
discrimination in economics has primarily focused on evaluating whether and how
employers discriminate against employees. Substantially less research has
investigated how employees respond to discrimination, and whether they may
actively avoid situations in which they anticipate being discriminated against.
These responses may be important drivers of the underrepresentation of women in
male-dominated high paying jobs. In the first set of projects, the authors will
conduct a series of laboratory experiments in which subjects face choices over
working in different environments. These environments differ based on whether
they have rules that discriminate against certain groups of subjects. By
eliciting subjects’ preferences over these environments, the researchers will
evaluate whether subjects are willing to give up money to avoid facing
discrimination. In the second set of projects, the researchers will investigate
people’s beliefs about potential signals of discrimination in the labor market
and how these beliefs affect their choices. Together, these projects will
provide insight into the role that beliefs about and responses to discrimination
may play in the persistence of wage gaps in the labor
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will investigate
the role that discrimination anticipation plays in the labor market, and how
providing information about signals of discrimination affects workers' choices
and beliefs. The emphasis for much of the economics literature on discrimination
has been placed on the role of the employer. Theoretical papers have shown that
supply-side (employee) perceptions of discrimination may play a crucial role in
the persistence and exacerbation of group-level wage gaps (Coate and Loury,
1993; Lang et al, 2005). Yet, empirical research on the relevance and role of
discrimination anticipation among employees is limited. In this project, the
researchers will conduct a series of experiments to examine the role of supply-
side anticipation of discrimination in the labor market. In the first study, the
researchers will run a laboratory experiment to test whether individuals are
averse to discriminatory environments. That is, are subjects willing to forego
profits in order to avoid facing discrimination? Literature on fairness suggests
that individuals may be averse to discriminatory rules, but this theory has not
been directly tested. Evidence of discrimination aversion would provide
theoretical insight into mechanisms leading to wage gaps, which may be masked as
preferences. In the second study, the researchers will run an information
experiment to investigate beliefs about a signal of potential discrimination in
the labor market and to analyze how people respond to information about this
signal. Together, these studies have the potential to provide a more holistic
view of the theoretical and empirical role of discrimination, through supply-
side anticipation of discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.