* 2117438
* MRI: Development of a Scanning Single-Electron Box Electrometer Microscope for Studying Materials for Quantum Science and Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yoichi Miyahara, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2024
* USD 419,999.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Characterization of electrical properties of
materials in nanometer scale dimensions has become crucial in a broad range of
fundamental and applied research fields ranging from chemistry to physics to
quantum computation. In particular, the electrostatic potential profile and
electric charge distribution is of fundamental importance in nanoscale
electronic devices including quantum devices. This project develops a novel
scanning probe microscope for pioneering extremely sensitive measurements of
electric potential/charge with sub-nanometer spatial resolution. The developed
instrument will be used to study a wide range of advanced materials and novel
devices. Graduate and undergraduate students participate in the science of
precision instrumentation development and research. The status of Texas State
University as a Hispanic Serving Institution increases the likelihood of
participation of underrepresented minorities in the research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This Major
Research Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the development of a scanning
single-electron box electrometer microscope, which is based on an atomic force
microscope and an integrated single-electron box with its probe tip that serves
as a sensitive charge sensor. It enables detection of extremely small quantities
of electric charge and electric potential and provides the spatial map of
electric potential/charge with sub-nanometer spatial resolution. The outcome of
the project will be a cryogenic atomic force microscope with an extremely high
electric charge/potential sensitivity. The instrument is designed to operate
with samples at temperature as low as 20 mK and in magnetic fields up to 9 T in
a cryogen-free dilution refrigerator. It will be used to investigate the charge
state of individual quantum dots for quantum computers and novel electronic
states in two-dimensional materials/electronic systems, topological insulators,
and superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.