* 2117544
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Optimal time scales for integrating paleoecological and fossil data in human evolutionary studies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* John Kingston, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 12,648.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans have a unique suite of
biological adaptations, many of which can be observed at various points in the
primate and human evolutionary fossil record. To investigate how and why these
adaptations occurred, it is critical that scientists consider not only the
fossils themselves but their ecological and environmental contexts. This
doctoral dissertation project addresses important questions about the optimal
time scale(s) for investigating links between early humans and their
environments. The investigators use data from high-resolution geological
sediments to reconstruct and analyze environmental change at various scales of
observation and consider how different patterns emerge depending on scale. The
project also includes opportunities for student training and mentoring, public
science outreach activities, and strengthening of international research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interpretations of large- and small-scale
paleoecological trends are developed to assess how scale may influence
interpretations of mammalian dietary ecology, as well as early human
environments within a relatively continuous geologic sequence where fossil apes
and humans have been recovered. The investigators develop long-term, coarsely
resolved dietary data for 8 herbivore lineages for periods from 13-8.5 Ma and
5.3-1.6 Ma. They develop temporally refined, short-term dietary data for
herbivores from 4-2 Ma. Each fossil sample is correlated to a specific geologic
horizon— and subsequently a specific date—for which detailed paleoclimatic and
paleobotanical data have been published. The project enables the diets of
individual animals to be reconstructed to the level of vegetation type and then
be compared to outstanding paleoclimatic datasets in order to better understand
prevailing modes of paleoecological change in the region. These data can advance
the integration of paleoecological patterns at various temporal scales to help
clarify the types of environmentally-selective forces experienced by the hominin
and hominoid lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.