* 2117505
* Patterns and Drivers of Intra-Urban Heat and Pollution Island Interactions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Alexandra Ponette, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 07/31/2026
* USD 405,852.00

This project investigates the spatial and temporal variation of urban heat and
urban pollution interactions at the geographic scale of neighborhoods. Urban
Heat Islands (UHI) and Urban Pollution Islands (UPI) are a well-documented
phenomena where the ambient temperature and pollution are dis-proportionally
high as compared to non-urban areas. This poses a critical health and
environmental risk to more than half of the world’s population. Until now these
two environmental hazards have been studied independently and at the larger
geographic scale of cities, therefore little is known about how they interact to
affect heat and air quality for inter-urban residents. This multidisciplinary
research will develop geographical methods that will transform knowledge about
the patterns and drivers of intra-urban Heat Island and Pollution Island
interactions. The project’s educational activities will broaden participation of
undergraduate women and military veterans in STEM sciences and will strengthen
scientific data literacy in K-12 and college classrooms by developing curricular
materials on environmental risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a mixed methods
approach, this project couples a dense network of fine-scale ground measurements
of air temperature and air particulates collected via citizen scientists, with
large-scale remotely sensed data of land surface temperature and aerosols. These
data will be analyzed to determine when and where urban heat islands and urban
pollution islands occur, and the risks that their interaction poses to urban
residents. These results will support informed decision-making for urban heat
and air pollution mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.