* 2117711
* MRI: Acquisition of Thermal Scanning Probe Lithography in a Glovebox for Research and Training in Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Qiong Ma, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2024
* USD 267,400.00

This Major Research Infrastructure (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
thermal Scanning Probe Lithography (t-SPL) system in a glovebox to be housed in
the Boston College (BC) Cleanroom and Nanofabrication Facility (CNRF). Combined
with the Boston College “cleanroom in a glovebox”, this system allows true
nanoscale fabrication entirely in inert atmosphere. This setup is relatively
easy to use, has superior capabilities that come without needing to gown up, and
does not demand expensive infrastructure, training, and staff required by other
cutting-edge nanofabrication tools. Thus, the project allows rapid and low-cost
prototyping by researchers and local companies, cutting-edge research and
training of undergraduate and graduate students in nanofabrication, and will be
incorporated into summer programs and classes. The system is employed for an
array of basic, applied, and interdisciplinary research at BC and the region
including quantum materials, catalysis, microbial interactions, biological and
chemical sensors. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Nanofrazor, thermal Scanning Probe
Lithography system inside a glovebox uses a thermal tip to both characterize the
surface and remove the resist. As such the Nanofrazor minimizes the need for
developer, produces superior surfaces to e-beam lithography (EBL) with
competitive feature sizes (≈15nm), operates in a glovebox, and 3D writing (≈1nm
height resolution). The minimal fabrication impact on the sample and operation
in a glovebox provide new capabilities in cutting-edge 2D heterostructures and
quantum materials that are often highly air sensitive. The t-SPL also provides
novel device architectures requiring excellent contacts, 3D plasmonic
structures, and small scales. These efforts together with the ability to rapidly
fabricate new heterostructures (MBE/2D materials) and compounds with transfer
via vacuum suitcase and a suite of characterization capabilities (diamond
Nitrogen-Vacancy (NV) center, photocurrent, STM, TEM, Raman, magneto-transport)
will amplify the impact of the t-SPL system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.