* 2117637
* MRI: Acquisition of a Maskless Aligner
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Ronald Walsworth, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Souleymane Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 313,915.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
Heidelberg Maskless Aligner photolithography tool (MLA150) to enhance
micro/nanofabrication initiatives at the University of Maryland College Park
(UMD) and its surrounding institutions. Photolithography – a process of defining
micrometer-scale patterns by using ultraviolet light to selectively expose mask
patterns in a coating of light-sensitive polymer – is a ubiquitous process which
underlies modern electronic devices from microcontrollers and processor chips to
novel battery designs, biomedical devices, and even developing quantum-computer
technologies. The MLA150 instrument allows researchers to laser-print
lithography patterns without the need for mask, greatly reducing the expense and
cost of improving and developing new device designs. The instrument supports
various research projects in materials science, nanoscience, energy science, and
quantum science and students training at UMD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
MLA150 system is an essential yet powerful tool to promote a wide range of both
fundamental and applied science studies, including but not limited to
realization of compact battery cells, improved micro-electron-mechanical
devices, higher-quality quantum sensors, and novel superconducting-circuit
devices. The instrument eliminates delays associated with mask ordering,
validation, printing, and shipping, allowing researchers at UMD to move from
design to device in a less than one day. The resulting rapid fabrication cycle
times greatly expands the range of device geometries that can be explored,
promote the exploration of new design concepts that would otherwise be
impractical to implement, and improve the overall agility of microsystems and
nanosystems research at UMD. Furthermore, the tool complements to the existing
mask aligners as it can be used to produce permanent masks for finalized
designs, which can then be made with higher through-put using conventional mask
aligners, turning mask production from a slow expensive process to a rapid and
versatile in-house one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.