* 2118138
* RCN-UBE: Design to Data Network: expanding a faculty community of practice to broaden and diversify participation in undergraduate research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Justin Siegel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 221,316.00

Within the last year the power of current biology was made strikingly apparent,
with success of an entirely novel vaccine technology to halt the crippling COVID
pandemic. It is clear that we are now living through an age of profound
biological advancement and that a large, diverse, skilled biology-oriented
workforce is needed now more than ever. Experiencing the process of science
first-hand can mean the difference between an undergraduate STEM student
completing their degree or dropping out. Integrating undergraduate research
experiences (UREs), into classes makes it possible for many more students to
glean these benefits. However, it is often prohibitively difficult for faculty
to develop a suitable research project that is both relevant to the scientific
community and simultaneously meets their curricular needs. The Design to Data
network aims to make it as easy as possible for faculty to integrate research
into their cell, molecular, genetics, biotechnology, and biochemistry courses,
and particularly at institutions with very diverse student bodies. The research
project engages a workflow of experiments that are highly representative of
cutting-edge techniques common to the biotechnology industry and students who
participate in these classes will gain skills and knowledge that increase
competitiveness as STEM workforce members or graduate school applicants.
Further, this project will examine the faculty network member experience to
answer the question as to what essential programmatic and professional
development components are necessary to expand such networks across the US. In
elucidating these best practices, the network will grow sustainably for years
beyond the funding period and will share recommendations for program organizers,
who seek to integrate other research projects into undergraduate classes to
realize a future where all undergraduates experience research first-hand as part
of their education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of the Design to Data
network is to make integrating research into biology courses readily accessible
for faculty from institutions with limited research-related resources. To
accomplish this the network will target known barriers in this space through,
strategically connecting with established networks thereby creating networks
within networks, offering professional development through different modalities
and structuring mentorship opportunities, and ensuring facile and economic
feasibility by providing essential lab supplies for implementation during the
funding period. The expected outcome is participating faculty members will
successfully integrate the Design to Data modules into their classes and that
students will complete defined research milestones: building the mutant plasmid
library and contributing enzyme functionality data to the project’s database,
which are key performative indicators that students have successfully gained the
requisite knowledge and skills. Further, faculty perceptions regarding
motivation and challenges will provide insightful, and more nuanced explanatory
understanding of the network outcomes. The project will disseminate these
findings to enable others in the undergraduate biology community to streamline
the UREs they develop to serve thousands of future students, many of whom come
from backgrounds historically excluded from STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.