* 2118108
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Comparative analysis of malaria impacts on human and primate evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Todd Disotell, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,250.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both humans and non-human
primates have evolved defensive adaptations against malaria via changes in the
genome. This doctoral dissertation research uses comparative primate data to
advance knowledge about the co-evolution of primates and malaria or similar
parasites, including how malaria has impacted the evolution of the primate
immune system and identification of genetic mechanisms underlying the immune
response to blood stage malaria. The project outcomes may inform public health
relevant research on the human response to malaria. The project also supports
outreach efforts that focus on increasing participation of underrepresented
groups in STEM research through K-12 outreach and computational genomic capacity
building. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a comparative functional and evolutionary
genomics approach, the researchers identify primate genes and pathways that are
differentially expressed in response to malaria infection, including those with
species-specific involvement in malaria response. The researchers also identify
signatures of malaria-imposed changes across primate genomes. The study outcomes
can advance understanding of how the primate immune system has evolved in
response to this host-pathogen arms race. The analysis uses an innovative
approach to investigate primate malaria response in natural transmission
systems. This study can help to determine which malaria responses arose through
the host-pathogen coevolutionary arms race as well as explore how human and
primate evolution has been impacted by the selection pressure of
malaria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.