* 2118158
* EAGER: Enhanced sensitivity of Dark Matter Detectors via Machine Learning
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* James Battat, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2023
* USD 51,363.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known elementary particles. Deciphering the
nature of this so-called Dark Matter (DM) is of fundamental importance to
cosmology, astrophysics, and high-energy particle physics. Directional dark
matter detectors have access to a smoking-gun signature of dark matter – an
order unity asymmetry in the angular distribution of recoils induced by Weakly
Interacting Massive Particles (WIMPs). Although the leading limits on WIMP dark
matter currently come from non-directional experiments, these experiments are
rapidly approaching the solar neutrino floor, where the signal will be dominated
by neutrinos from the sun and which will make future advances with those
technologies more challenging. Directional detectors, however, can reach below
the neutrino floor to constrain WIMP dark matter. This EAGER award will leverage
Machine Learning (ML) techniques to further enhance the sensitivity of
directional DM experiments. The ML techniques and analyses developed under this
award would be broadly useful to experiments that employ gas-based Time
Projection Chambers. Broader impacts of this work also include the training of a
culturally and socioeconomically diverse set of female undergraduate students at
Wellesley College, and the enhancement of the physics curriculum through the
integration of particle physics experimentation in both teaching and research
laboratories. Wellesley is a women's college traditionally ranked in the top 10
for ethnic diversity among liberal arts colleges. By integrating students at
Wellesley in all aspects of this experimental particle physics program, the
proposed work will broaden the participation of members of underrepresented
groups in physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will be applied to existing
DRIFT (Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks) data and will establish an
analysis pipeline that can be used with new data from directional experiments.
Preliminary work using very basic ML techniques has already shown significant
improvement in the nuclear recoil detection efficiency, with associated gains in
the sensitivity to the WIMP-nucleon cross section. Under this award, the group
will undertake a more complete exploration of the ML landscape to further
enhance the sensitivity of DRIFT to dark matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.