* 2118079
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Employing Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and High-Performance Computing (HPC) in Advanced CI
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ming-Cheng Cheng, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 331,998.00

Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) is a highly effective, data-driven
learning algorithm for solving multi-dimensional Ordinary/Partial Differential
Equations (ODEs/PDEs). However, POD is rarely covered in the typical graduate
curriculum, and thus the nation is not fully leveraging this advanced algorithm
in science and engineering research. To fill this void, this project will
conduct a two-week online workshop for trainees in engineering and science-
related disciplines and will integrate the developed instructional material into
an existing graduate course on High-performance Computing (HPC). In doing so,
this project provides for an educational ecosystem enabling computational and
data-driven science for scientists and engineers. By training a diverse group of
graduate students, post-docs, and faculty members in various disciplines, this
project will help prepare the scientific workforce for advanced CI-enabled
research, which will serve to enhance research productivity and enable
researchers to effectively address complex societal problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will help develop the national research
workforce in areas of critical need through intensive, integrated instruction on
open-source computing platforms to solve ODEs/PDEs by use of POD models that
employ HPC. The training will incorporate team-based interdisciplinary projects
based on data-driven POD learning algorithm for computationally intensive
multiphysics simulation problems in various science and engineering disciplines.
The workshop will provide trainees with intensive instruction on POD and related
topics, including open source platforms to solve ODEs/PDEs and eigenvalue
problems. Training culminates in a research project where trainees learn
advanced computational tools and implementation of HPC skills. The project will
broaden the access and adoption of advanced CI while integrating CI skills into
existing curriculum models and fostering inter-disciplinary and inter-
institutional research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.