* 2118302
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Collaborative Research: Computational and Data-Centric Ecology Training
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Eric Simoneau, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 920,482.00

While the scientific community has ever cheaper and more rapid access to large
amounts of data with respect to ecology and other issues, the training necessary
to take full advantage of these large data streams has not kept up. This project
will create an online learning and community platform known as Data4Ecology to
support the integration of computing, statistics, and data science into
undergraduate ecology curriculum and courses. To do so, this proposal will build
a freely accessible website enabling students and others in ecology and allied
STEM disciplines to develop the skills in computational and statistical
reasoning necessary to address problems related to ecology and data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, Data4Ecology, will develop and deploy a
website to curate, assemble and embed open educational and learning resources
that will serve as training for a multitude of undergraduate students in ecology
and environmental science at various college and universities. In turn, this
project will integrate computing, statistics, and data science into an ecology
curriculum. The project will build and make accessible collaboration and
community resources while providing professional development and disseminating
project products. The project will serve the larger scientific community by
providing researchers and educators with a dedicated repository of data-centric
ecology data, resources, and curriculum. Further, the learning resources from
this project will be ported to STATS4STEM, an NSF-funded project that collects
educational resources on data, computing, and statistics for use by educators
and students at many levels, thus exposing users beyond the project to an
expanded pool of ecology-based data-centric learning
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.