* 2118003
* EDGE FGT: Genome-editing tools for keystone freshwater heterotrophs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Thomas Hanson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,687.00

Microbial activity drives carbon emission and burial in freshwater environments,
which cover only 4% of Earth's surface but both emit and store disproportionally
large amounts of carbon. Up to 60% of the bacteria in fresh waters belong to a
specific group of Actinobacteria, and this group likely controls conversion of
organic matter to CO2 and buried biomass in these ecosystems. Although these
bacteria have fewer than 2000 genes, they thrive in bogs, algae-choked lakes,
pristine alpine ponds, rivers, estuaries, and reservoirs. To understand how
bacteria with so few genes are able to dominate in such a diverse range of
environments, we propose to develop genome-editing tools in two easy-to-work-
with species of freshwater Actinobacteria. The work proposed here, and the
research that builds on it, will enable scientists working on freshwater carbon
cycling, bacterial-algal interactions, heterotrophy, and light capture to
identify the genes in freshwater Actinobacteria that contribute to these
processes. That work, in turn, will provide experimental data linking genes to
ecosystem functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory research on the physiology
and metabolism of freshwater clades of Actinobacteria has been hampered by
having only a few cultivated species, none with available genome editing tools.
To understand how such an apparently homogeneous group of bacteria contributes
to nutrient cycling in such a diverse range of ecological settings, we propose
to develop systems for targeted and random mutagenesis in Rhodoluna lacicola and
Aurantimicrobium sp. strain MWH-Mo1, two easily cultivated, representative
species of freshwater Actinobacteria. Targeted mutagenesis will enable not just
inactivation of specific genes, but also insertion of genes for heterologous
expression from the chromosome. Random transposon-based mutagenesis will enable
construction of comprehensive mutant libraries that can be screened for fitness
under a variety of different environmentally relevant stresses. These tools will
catalyze research that connects simple genomes to complex phenotypes, phenotypes
to biochemical networks in microbial communities, and microbial community
metabolism to ecosystem carbon budgets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.