* 2118510
* A Graph Signal Processing Framework for Situational Awareness in Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mia Naeini, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,717.00

The reliability and security of smart grids, as critical infrastructures for
communities, are of great importance. A cyber or physical stress, or even worse,
a joint cyber and physical stress on transmission networks in smart grids can
have widespread and devastating effects such as large blackouts. Situational
awareness for monitoring and analyzing the cyber and physical states of the
system is an essential function in smart grids that can ultimately enable
mitigation and recovery from unexpected events. This project will investigate
and develop new methodologies to enhance situational awareness in smart
transmission grids through a Graph Signal Processing (GSP) framework, suitable
for analyzing structured energy data and data on dynamics of interactions among
system components. The outcomes of this project are expected to map out a new
perspective and technical paradigm in terms of analyzing data for smart grids
with the potential to be applied to other networked systems and critical
infrastructures. This project will also have substantial broader impacts on
education. Namely, the integrated education plan includes introducing energy
data analytics topics to students through course projects as well as promoting
research experiences, especially for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of this project has two
cohesive thrusts. In the first thrust, graph spectral analysis techniques,
filter design, system frequency response to events, and graph sampling
techniques will be used for cyber stress detection, localization and state
estimation under stresses. Machine learning methods will also be used to learn
the signatures of stresses in various GSP domains, including vertex, graph-
frequency, and joint vertex-frequency domains, and in signal properties,
including graph signal smoothness, to improve such techniques. In addition to
cyber stresses, situational awareness towards physical stresses is also critical
but challenging due to the unique properties associated with physical stresses.
For instance, the energy signal oscillations due to physical stresses are not
fully localized and can occur at a distance due to the physics of electricity.
Moreover, certain physical events including failures can change the underlying
physical topology, and consequently the frequency bases of the graph signals.
Hence, the second thrust of this project will focus on improving situational
awareness of physical stresses by addressing such challenges in the detection
and localization techniques for physical stresses in a GSP-based framework. The
role of uncertainties and missing information on analyzing physical stresses
will also be investigated, which will enable evaluation of the effects of
certain joint cyber and physical attacks on the
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.