* 2118561
* CAREER: Building a Theory of Collective Cellular Sensing with Applications to Morphogenesis, Chemotaxis, and Metastasis
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2026
* Andrew Mugler, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2026
* USD 408,084.00

Theoretical and experimental work from the past forty years has established that
the sensory precision of single cells approaches the limits of what is
physically possible. However, experiments within the past ten years suggest that
sensory precision is enhanced even further when cells interact. These
experiments are fascinating and raise many fundamental questions about sensory
cooperation, information sharing, and collective behavior. This project will
address this problem by developing a comprehensive theory of collective cellular
sensing. The project focuses on three examples from cell biology - morphogenesis
in Drosophila, chemotaxis in E. coli, and metastasis of breast cancer and
melanoma cells, where experiments suggest that cell-cell communication enhances
sensing, but the mechanism of enhancement is poorly understood. In each case, a
theoretical framework will be developed based on known features of the system
and the framework will be validated using experimental data. The research,
educational, and outreach activities are designed in a strongly interconnected
manner to increase the broader impact of the work. Graduate and undergraduate
students will directly perform the research and disseminate it through
publications and conferences. The research will be integrated into education via
an inquiry-based teaching module and cross- disciplinary units in the PI's
graduate and undergraduate courses. Designed and piloted in collaboration with
graduate students, the departmental outreach coordinator, and a local high
school teacher, the activity will be delivered on campus, at an Indiana middle
school serving underrepresented students, and at a state-wide and a national
education conference, thereby reaching thousands of middle and high school
students, particularly underrepresented students. Special focus is placed on
developing and assessing knowledge of microbiology, microscopy, statistics, and
number sense.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensory precision is crucial
during development because cells determine their fates by sensing concentrations
of molecules called morphogens. Recent experiments suggest that short-range
cell-cell communication may help increase the precision of morphogen profile
formation and the establishment of cell fate boundaries, but the mechanisms are
still unclear. The PI will develop a theory of concentration sensing with short-
range communication, validate it using previous experiments in Drosophila and
zebrafish embryos, and make predictions for future morphogenesis experiments. In
addition the PI will build a theory of long-range communication and apply it to
bacterial chemotaxis. Bacteria move toward favorable environments by sensing
gradients in attractant concentrations, a process called chemotaxis. Recent
experiments suggest that chemotaxis is enhanced by long-range cell-cell
communication, but the enhancement mechanism is unknown. To address this
question the PI will develop a theory of gradient sensing and chemotaxis with
long-range communication, validate it using previous experiments on E. coli
bacteria, and make predictions for future chemotaxis experiments, including
those of a collaborating lab. The PI will also build a theory of self-
communication and apply it to cancer metastasis. Many cancer cells spread to
other parts of the body, or metastasize, by sensing lymphatic flow. Recent
experiments suggest that these cells sense flow by self-communication (releasing
a molecule that they also detect), but the details of this mechanism are still
poorly understood and the PI will develop a theory of flow sensing via self-
communication, validate it using previous experiments on breast cancer and
melanoma cells, and make predictions for future cancer biology
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.