* 2118006
* I-Corps: A hybrid indoor navigation application for smart cities and the Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystem
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Arber Ruci, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of digital infrastructure to transform a large transportation hub
into a smart and accessible hub with minimal infrastructure change. The proposed
technology is an assistive sensor solution that is designed for independent and
safe travel for people who are blind or visually impaired, or those who simply
face challenges in navigating through an unfamiliar indoor environment. In the
U.S. alone, 6.6 million people have visual impairments, and 1 in 45 people have
been diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Currently, there are several
indoor navigation applications on the market but they have limitations such as
inaccuracy of localization, high cost, and poor accessibility. The proposed
technology also may be extended to indoor navigation of other public facilities,
such as school buildings, libraries, office buildings, and airports.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
Internet of Things (IoT) application to provide indoor navigation with accurate
location tracking, personalized planned routes, and turn-by-turn voice
instruction for visually impaired persons and other users. The proposed
technology is based on integrated sensors and software, including existing
surveillance camera systems, installed Bluetooth beacons, and a building
information model of transportation or other public facilities, with a hybrid
solution of a mobile phone localization app (using beacons, on-board sensors,
and cameras along with 3D sensors). This technology will be incorporated with
personalized user interfaces to provide a seamless service to the end users,
while also providing valuable user information and facility use information to
transportation infrastructure stakeholders. The proposed solution is a system-
engineering approach to a challenging problem in urban transportation that
integrates three major components: multilayer live facility modeling tools,
hybrid mobile navigation algorithms, and multimodal human-centric interface
designs. The technology is designed to integrate smart infrastructure (civil
engineering) with accessible services (sensing and
computing).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.