* 2118673
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Grain Interface Functional Design to Create Damage Resistance in Polycrystalline Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Siddhartha Pathak, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 524,805.00

Even though polycrystalline metallic materials are ubiquitous in daily life,
when and where metallic structural components damage and fail is difficult to
predict, which generally leads to overdesign. One form of damage – ductile
damage – takes place in materials which are easily plastically deformed by
formation of voids and localized shear bands. The initiation of these voids is
strongly influenced by the internal constitution of the aggregate composite made
up of single crystals comprising the polycrystalline metal. High-purity metals
often form voids at the boundaries between single crystals, but it is not known
why. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
award supports the fundamental study of voids-based ductile damage in high-
purity metals to enable the manufacture of materials for specific applications
with significantly reduced propensity for void formation. In addition, this
project will facilitate collaboration with the Air Force Research Laboratory to
pursue design of new materials and manufacturing techniques for strategic
purposes. This highly collaborative project will also allow students the
opportunity to engage on three campuses, the Air Force Research Laboratory, and
a couple of Department of Energy Laboratories to assist in educating the next
generation of scientists and engineers in strategically important disciplines.
Designing material interfaces to resist formation of voids during tensile
deformation will be a significant contribution to the Materials Genome
Initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses control of feature and
defect character as well as the internal stress state for the design and
manufacture of polycrystalline metals against failure. Ductile damage generally
includes the processes of void nucleation, growth, and coalescence in addition
to localized shear banding. This project is for a new three-dimensional sample
design for both rod and plate forms of material, which will be a surrogate for a
general structural component for large deformation. High-purity refractory body-
centered cubic tantalum is selected as the model material due to its potential
for extreme environment use. This material is known to form voids predominantly
at grain boundaries and will be the focal point of material design through
advanced manufacturing processes. The material design process will include the
highly interactive elements of nano, micro and macro-scale experiments at
varying strain rates and temperatures, molecular dynamics simulations,
thermodynamically consistent plasticity and theory development, micro-scale
polycrystal simulations, and macro-scale damage simulations for component
design. The highlight of the approach is the uncertainty quantification via
machine learning for self-consistent consolidation of large experimental and
simulation datasets to guide material design and manufacturing process. The goal
of this project is to design a manufacturing process to produce material which
reduces damage by 30% over that in the as-received and annealed
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG), the Divisions of Materials Research (DMR) and Mathematical
Sciences (DMS) in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS),
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.