* 2118201
* HDR Institute: Institute for Data Driven Dynamical Design
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ryan Adams, Colorado School of Mines
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2026
* USD 12,656,673.00

From molecules to robots, designing for dynamics has common theoretical
underpinnings despite differences in length and time scale. However, such
research is often overwhelmed by the high dimensional design space. The
Institute for Data-Driven Dynamical Design addresses the challenge of prediction
of dynamical processes in materials, including ion and molecular transport,
catalytic pathways, and phase transformations in metamaterials, with a focus on
discovering fundamentally new mechanisms and pathways. This research represents
a paradigm shift from traditional material efforts involving incremental
improvements in ground-state and steady-state properties. Developments in the
data sciences target (i) strategies for encoding complex structures and
mechanistic pathways for machine intelligence, (ii) new predictive capabilities
for evolving systems, and (iii) advances in visualization and integrating
machine and human expertise. Fueling these data science developments are large-
scale simulations of dynamical processes across high dimensional design spaces.
Experimental validation of these large-scale simulations addresses both end-
product prediction and mechanistic pathways therein. The Institute's data
science innovations may advance fields both within and beyond STEM involving
complex time-evolving systems including molecular biology, atmospheric science,
geophysics, and physical cosmology. The Institute seeks to grow and unite the
dispersed data-driven design community. Long-term growth is sought through
outreach activities involving (i) high school coding schools, (ii) undergraduate
involvement in data-rich research, and (iii) a post-baccalaureate bridge program
that introduces students to data sciences and motivate them to pursue higher
degrees. Data-driven design community activities include (i) interdisciplinary
summer schools and workshops, (ii) a Fellows program to collaboratively grow and
disseminate the Instituteâ€™s developments, and (iii) dedicated efforts to create
open-source software for the design community. Throughout these efforts, the
Institute actively seeks to recruit, retain, and graduate a diverse array of
students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This virtual Institute seeks to design
complex dynamical materials and structures through the union of machine and
human intelligence. To learn dynamical behavior and ultimately discover new
mechanisms, three core data science needs are addressed: (i) new representations
and learning architectures that capture and encode the spatial arrangement,
interactions, and temporal evolution of complex materials and geometrical
structures, (ii) efficient exploration of high dimensional, time-dependent
design spaces, and (iii) new visual analytics tools to quantitatively
incorporate human-in-the-loop design feedback. Advances in each of these areas
form a virtuous cycle that accelerates discovery of new materials, driven by new
mechanisms. This Institute converges an interdisciplinary team focused on four
design spaces at their `tipping point', where large quantities of dynamical data
can be readily created: (i) crystalline solids with tailored ion transport for
fuel cells and batteries, (ii) pressure-sensitive metamaterials for robotics,
(iii) light driven catalytic reactions for chemical production, and (iv)
synthesis and assembly of porous frameworks for chemical separations. These four
areas are testbeds for cyberinfrastructure development for the broader
scientific community. Interwoven throughout these activities are dedicated
activities to build a new generation of STEM talent at the intersection of data
science and the physical sciences/engineering and to broaden participation in
STEM through targeted outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the
National Science Foundation's Big Idea activities in Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR). The award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is
jointly supported by the Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research, and
Mathematical Sciences within the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.