* 2118102
* CyberTraining: Pilot: Cyberinfrastructure Training in Computer Science and Geoscience
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 313,762.00

Computation, data, and workforce development are critical components of
cyberinfrastructure (CI). This project will help create future CI professionals
from the Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) and Geography Departments who
can use, develop, deploy, and maintain advanced CI. CSE students have little
experience with spatio-temporal data, while Geography students have training in
spatio-temporal data but are unfamiliar with advanced computing techniques and
data analytics techniques. To fill these gaps in curricula, this project will
develop a set of training materials covering the full workflow of data
acquisition, transfer, synthesis, computation, and visualization of CI, with a
focus on handling large-scale spatio-temporal data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
encompass the interdisciplinary nature of CI, this project will develop training
materials by faculty with complementary expertise in both CSE and Geography,
targeting undergraduate and graduate students, postdocs and researchers with
these substantive interests. The training materials will be at three levels that
are in increasing depth. The first level is a set of basic training modules on
the main components and their interactions in a CI system. The second level is a
set of open-ended course projects that uses CI to solve challenging research
problems, while the third level is an intensive competition-based workshop that
will provide the students with the experience of solving real-world problems
using CI through interdisciplinary collaboration. The context of the training
materials will be in urban computing, an interdisciplinary field that relies
heavily on spatio-temporal data and has profound societal impacts. This project
will provide students with improved understanding of CI systems, contribute to
new knowledge and discoveries using CI, and expand the CI community of
interdisciplinary collaborators. Training materials be made publicly available
and will be broadly disseminated through various outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.