* 2118605
* GP-IN: A Bridge to Geoscience: An Issue-Relevant Learning Community for College Transfer Students
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* LuAnne Thompson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,148.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of jobs that require
Geoscience training continues to grow, but the number of students pursuing an
education in this field is declining. In all science disciplines, the
participation of individuals from historically marginalized groups does not
match the proportion of the U.S. population as a whole, but their representation
in the Geoscience workforce lags even further behind. At the same time, the
impact of environmental challenges is greater and more severe for historically
marginalized communities. Increasing the representation of these communities in
the Geosciences is therefore fundamental to developing equitable solutions to
these issues. Here, the PIs aim to pilot and test the effectiveness of a place-
and issue-based recruitment and summer education program that is designed to
increase community college student interest in, and retention in, the
Geosciences as practiced at a research intensive university. In doing so, the
PIs aim to develop educational approaches that can be adapted to any location,
thereby supporting NSF goals of promoting the progress of Geosciences by
increasing participation by all affected communities. In the long term, PIs also
aim to advance NSFâ€™s goals of improving the health and welfare of the
communities most impacted by environmental challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to test whether delivering fundamental, disciplinary content within
a context that is meaningful to students can promote recruitment and retention
of two-year college transfer students into the Geosciences, and particularly
from local communities that may be economically challenged, underserved, and
underrepresented in STEM. Researchers and educators in the University of
Washington College of the Environment address both discovery and solutions-based
science that bring together knowledge of the environment (Oceanography,
Atmospheric Sciences, Earth Sciences) with the study of living marine resources,
habitats and human communities. Using this expertise, PIs will develop a summer
bridge program, conducted on a research vessel and at the institution's marine
field station. The program will provide immersive experiential learning
activities that explicitly link quantitative skill enhancement with Marine
Geoscience via a deep, data-driven exploration of particular issues of community
and political concern in the Pacific Northwest. Subsequently, students will
engage in a series of cohort-building activities designed to facilitate
community building during their first year with an eye towards enhancing student
preparedness for advanced coursework in the Geosciences and to improve social
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.