* 2118222
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Cyberinfrastructure Training to Advance Environmental Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,326.00

The project will support Cyberinfrastructure (CI) training for environmental
science research, education, and practice in the Hawaii-Pacific region.
Environmental issues in the region affect health, economic stability, and ways
of life for Indigenous and other communities. This project will create workshops
and curriculum modules for undergraduate and graduate students to increase CI
skills across the environmental science domain. By providing the next generation
of environmental scientists and practitioners with advanced CI skills, these
future professionals will have the ability to use CI to transform science in the
region across academic research institutions, public agencies, and community
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a multi-level
capacity enhancement program for CI training and skills development that will
serve CI users, contributors, and professionals in the environmental and climate
science communities. The training materials in the workshops and curriculum
modules will be incorporated in undergraduate and graduate courses in order to
promote CI skills development and awareness. The project will increase the pool
of CI professionals and facilitate knowledge transfer from existing CI
professionals to the environmental and climate science communities. As well, it
will advance domain-specific CI skills development to position students as CI
contributors in their future professional careers. The project will deliver
important impacts to the environmental and climate science communities in the
Pacific Island region, as there are unique aspects to the region, as well as to
others in and beyond the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.