* 2118415
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Designer 3D Mesoscale Materials Synthesized in the Self-Assembly Foundry
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Vincenzo Vitelli, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Self-assembly is one of the most promising avenues for the
manufacturing/synthesis of materials and systems with exquisite control over
nanoscale features while being fast, scalable, and inexpensive. It could enable
the next revolution in integrated systems and designer mesoscale materials for
multiple applications including information systems, sensing, actuation, and
artificial intelligence. However, there are still many challenges in utilizing
self-assembly as a precision fabrication technique. This project will develop a
self-assembly foundry by implementing a dual assembly line in which
experimental, molecular simulations, and artificial intelligence techniques are
deployed simultaneously to create designer 3-dimensional (3D) nanostructured
systems. This effort will examine the limits of 3D self-assembly to accelerate
the fabrication of custom systems, from interconnected nanosystems used in
computer chips to designer mechanical nanostructures for sensing and actuation.
Particular emphasis will be placed in developing new manufacturing routes using
topological principles. The broader impacts of this project envision a basis for
training a new generation of scientist or engineers that can engage effectively
with industry and academia. This project will also lead to the training of
community college students and the development of online learning materials, as
well as public engagement activities. The convergence of academia and industry;
theory, computation, and experiment; different mentoring perspectives; and the
high-level view of the self-assembly manufacturing process will provide a rich
environment for the participants to develop new knowledge, skills, and
abilities, with a strong emphasis on training and knowledge
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific challenge that this project will
tackle is that of being able to create arbitrary 3D structures using block
copolymers, which are polymers composed of two or more chemistries. Using state-
of-the-art computational techniques in conjunction with experiments, this
project aims to unravel the design rules for self-assembling layer-by-layer
systems that have a predesigned, non-symmetric, and intricate 3D structure from
the information contained in the substrate. While in the optics field this
corresponds to creating a hologram, the rules for doing so in a self-assembly
system are not clear. Fault tolerance is one of the main challenges and
topological constructs will be sought to make the self-assembly process robust.
Direct learning through a new dual self-assembly line concept that combines, on
one branch the physical process and in another branch the virtual process, will
also be employed. Both of these assembly lines will be connected through an
artificial intelligence engine to find the hidden correlations and learn the
design rules. Thus, this project has the potential to set a blueprint for the
future of nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.