* 2118849
* Improving Student Learning While Decreasing Bias in Teaching Through Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Rhonda Christensen, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 840,166.00

This project aims to contribute to a more just and equitable society in the
future by encouraging teachers to identify, reflect on, and correct revealed
biases. This three-year project will implement a scalable model for developing
equitable, culturally responsive teaching practices through a simulated teaching
environment. The project will identify best practices to help teachers recognize
and mitigate implicit biases that often impact student success. Bias reduction
in teaching practices is crucial for enabling future leaders to achieve their
highest innate and positively nurtured potential. The COVID-19 pandemic has
highlighted disparities in learning and emphasized the importance of socio-
emotional stability for the long-term well-being of students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will iteratively develop and test a
Teaching without Bias curriculum and add an AI-driven set of bias reduction
tools to existing simulation instruction modules. The project will use data-
driven decisions to confirm the feasibility of a three-phase approach to
reducing bias in teaching. Through a randomized-assignment experimental design,
the project will also confirm whether any of the three phases alone, in
sequence, or in combination, is most effective. Through a simulated teaching
environment, the project outcomes will lead to a model for developing equitable,
culturally responsive teaching practices. The project will use the simulated
teaching environment to develop and refine computational models that lead to
improved teaching practices and contribute to the learning
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.