* 2118161
* Mesoarchean diamond-bearing sediments: implications for Archean continental roots and their surface expression
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jesse Reimink, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 385,650.00

The continental crust is fundamental to the development and sustainment of life
on Earth. Continental crust, and in particular ancient continental crust,
produces &gt;90% of the world’s gold and platinum deposits and nearly all of the
mined diamonds. Ancient continental crust is clearly stable on Earth today and
often has a much deeper mantle root than younger crustal blocks. Yet, how
ancient continental crust formed and, perhaps more importantly, was stabilized,
remains an outstanding question in the Geosciences. This project will help to
address this question by making use of recent discoveries of &gt;2.85 billion-
year-old diamonds preserved in ancient sedimentary rock samples. Diamonds are
the best available tools to sample the deep roots of continents, and the
sediments they are contained within preserve a record of the elevation and
surface of the continents back in Earth history. These small diamonds are likely
some of the oldest diamonds on Earth, and their chemical signatures record how
the earliest roots of the continental crust formed. This project will look for
more of these valuable records of the deep continental root, while also
investigating the sedimentary rocks where they are now found. Sedimentary rocks
record the surface features at the time they were deposited, so this combined
deep-and-surface study will help address questions such as: Was the early Earth
an ocean world? Did the roots of continents form first before continents rose
above sea level? Were ancient continents loose and malleable early in their life
before they became rigid and stable? The outputs of this research will serve as
input data for scientists trying to understand the composition of the ancient
atmosphere, ancient biological processes, and how important mineral deposits
were formed on Earth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team involved in this
proposal recently discovered detrital diamonds preserved in ca. 2.85 billion-
year-old sediments in the Canadian shield. The presence of Archean diamonds at
Earth’s surface during this time interval, and their detailed geochemical
signatures, contain key evidence for the formation and time-integrated stability
of regions of preserved continental crust. The team will evaluate the
prevalence, location, and mantle-residence ages of these ancient diamonds, as
well as their geochemical signatures to test models for the timing of the
formation deep lithospheric mantle roots and their significance for large scale
craton formation. The team will also evaluate the sediments that now contain the
ancient diamonds including their catchment size (size of the ancient watershed),
catchment age distributions, and the depositional environment. These inputs will
help understand if significant continental elevation was formed in the very
early in Earth history, potentially due to continental root stabilization. The
work in this proposal will address two major aspects of craton formation and
continental stability, using a single sample set and a dedicated field campaign.
The research team will use float planes to sample rocks in the remote regions of
Northern Canada and will then conduct state-of-the-art chemical analyses in
laboratories in the US and Canada. A full understanding of the life cycle of
continental crust throughout Earth history has broad scientific implications for
the geoscience community, including helping to understand how the atmosphere
became rich in oxygen and how life evolved on the surface of the Earth. This
proposal will also result in a large collection of ancient diamonds which can be
studied in future work. Additionally, ancient cratonic blocks host a large
fraction of Earths economic Pt, Au, and diamonds making them economically
important geologic features. Importantly, the prevalence of detrital diamonds in
ancient sediments is largely unknown, such that the results of this project may
drive economic activities (exploration and resource development) in similar
sediments globally. This project will fund training of a PhD who will also be
exposed to many sections of the geoscience industry, including academia,
governmental surveys, and economic exploration and mining as well as many types
of advanced analytical techniques. Diamond research, as well as the geology of
the early Earth, is a research topic that is popular with the science media and
general public. Every effort will be made to engage with the popular science
media to expand the influence and public engagement with the results of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.