* 2118944
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Rheostructurally-informed Neural Networks for geopolymer material design
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Norman Wagner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 513,693.00

Geopolymers are inorganic and non-crystalline structural materials that can be
obtained from natural soils via a chemical activation. They have great potential
as additives to reduce cement consumption in construction and thus can help
reducing green-house gas emissions of cement manufacturing. They also promote
the adoption of local soil resources for traditional and 3D printing-based
construction. Important for human space exploration, geopolymers can be also
formed from lunar and Martian soils with limited water, and thus are excellent
candidates for space infrastructure such as landing pads and shelters. However,
at present processing of geopolymers into desirable structures remains far
behind their laboratory scale performance, due to the wide range of chemistries
and characteristics of different indigenous geopolymers. This award combines
experiments, microscopic simulations, and machine learning approaches that will
enable scientists and engineers to effectively design and control geopolymers
properties and performances. In collaboration with the Air Force Research
Laboratory, the team will educate and train future materials researchers with
multi-tool skills that span experiments, simulations, and data-driven
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geopolymers are amorphous and porous solid
matrices that develop as gels when an alumino-silicate source (typically from
clays) reacts with an alkali hydroxide or alkali silicate solution, yielding
ceramic-like structures and mechanics. The range of multiscale pore morphologies
and material strengths of geopolymer gels makes them ideally versatile and
potentially smart binders. However, the primary challenge hindering wide
adoption of these sustainable materials is the complexity of controlling
property development and processing, given the significant chemical variability
that makes their design cycle difficult and empirical. Artificial intelligence
approaches are required to bridge the gap between the deep fundamental
understanding of a few materials and the need for sustainable processing of a
wide range of material resources on earth and other planets with limited
experimentation efforts. The team will construct a data-driven platform informed
by integrated multiscale modeling and experiments, in order to accelerate design
of processing routes for geopolymers into desirable structures. The PIs will
work together to develop rheology-informed neural networks that use the multi-
scale and multi-component dynamics of geopolymeric systems under load and in
flowing conditions. To do so, they have planned a comprehensive interrogation of
experiments and simulations that hierarchically span from the atomistic to
macroscale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.