* 2118628
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: Panorama: Integrated Rack-Scale Acceleration for Computational Pangenomics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Michael Taylor, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2026
* USD 672,409.00

Semiconductor technology scaling is slowing, and as a consequence, computer
systems must increasingly rely on a heterogeneous mix of general-purpose and
specialized computing engines. At the same time, computer users are tackling new
problems with massive datasets that must be manipulated in irregular and rapidly
changing ways while maintaining strict privacy guarantees. Efficiently
supporting big, sparse, dynamic, and private data to solve large complex
problems on heterogeneous systems is one of the grand challenges in
software/hardware systems research. To address this grand challenge, the
Panorama project is exploring integrated rack-scale acceleration for
computational pangenomics. Integrated rack-scale acceleration refers to an
emerging computer-systems paradigm that uses tens of tightly integrated
computing nodes, each of which includes a mix of general-purpose processors and
specialized accelerators interconnected with a special-purpose network.
Computational pangenomics refers to a recent trend towards representing genomes,
the genetic material of an organism, not as a single linear sequence of DNA base
pairs but instead as an intricate network of sequences that efficiently
represents the relationships between many individuals' genomes at once.
Computational pangenomics naturally captures the trend towards big, sparse,
dynamic, and private data and is thus a perfect application domain to explore
heterogeneous software/hardware systems research. The project's novelties are: a
truly cross-stack approach spanning applications, programming languages,
compilers, architecture, security, and privacy including use of a one-of-a-kind
Panorama prototype system; new hardware techniques to accelerate domain-specific
computing and to unify heterogeneous systems; new software techniques to let
programmers harness the performance advantages of heterogeneous systems; and new
software/hardware techniques to make such heterogeneous systems more secure. The
project's impacts are: to specifically enable computational biologists to better
see the "genetic dark matter" of population-wide genomics which has been to date
hidden, opening up new scientific discoveries; and to more generally enable
future computer users to more easily take advantage of heterogeneous computer
systems to solve large and complex problems. This project is also pursuing two
broader impact initiatives. The first is an ambitious yet concrete initiative to
increase participation of under-represented minority students in computer
science by developing a low-level computer-systems module for a new four-week
summer program targeting rising sophomores. The second involves specific plans
to grow the open-source software/hardware ecosystem in the computational-biology
and computer-systems communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Panorama project
includes a highly interdisciplinary team of researchers across four focus areas:
applications (computational biology), programming languages &amp; compilers,
computer architecture, and security &amp; privacy. The team is taking a holistic
software/hardware co-design approach to explore five tightly interconnected
research thrusts. The first three thrusts are structured from top-down across
the computing stack. Thrust 1 investigates new computational pangenomics data
structures and algorithms and will develop PanoBench, a new benchmark suite
suitable for driving the remaining thrusts. Thrust 2 investigates new
programming-language and compiler techniques. Thrust 3 investigates new computer
architectures with support for a whole-rack manycore with 1M+ cores and a
partitioned global address space, unified array-based accelerators, and
application-specific accelerator chiplets for computational pangenomics. The
final two thrusts cut across both software and hardware. Thrust 4 investigates
new security and privacy techniques including scalable secure computation on
heterogeneous rack-scale systems, secure rack-scale resource management with
auto-tuning, and differential privacy and homomorphic encryption for
pangenomics. Thrust 5 involves holistically evaluating the research ideas in the
other thrusts through the use of a one-of-a-kind Panorama prototype
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.