* 2118818
* Learning-Aided Integrated Control and Semantic Perception Architecture for Legged Robot Locomotion and Navigation in the Wild
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jessy Grizzle, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 986,380.00

This project develops an open-source system to allow legged robots to perform
autonomous exploration and environmental monitoring in unstructured
environments, such as in a forest. A central theme is the design and deployment
of a unified and integrated framework that exploits the redundancy of onboard
sensory modalities and cross-integrates with feedback control and planning. The
project seeks major advances in control theory, computer vision, embedded
systems, and planning under uncertainty, areas that are often studied in
isolation. By studying these areas as a systems problem, the researchers expect
significant advances for autonomous systems in unstructured environments. The
results of the research are demonstrated on a Digit-series 3D biped and a Mini
Cheetah quadruped robot. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research elevates the state
of the art in deploying autonomous mobile robots “in the wild.” In off-road and
unstructured settings, the main technique currently employed by the autonomous
vehicle industry, registering into known high-definition maps on the basis of
collected sensor measurements, is not possible and adversely affects autonomy.
The project develops a real-time multi-layer dense semantic occupancy mapping
with an extended set of terrain labels and a “walk-ability” index combined with
an integrated motion planner for an autonomous system. The traversability map
enables a walking robot to make dynamic real-time planning and feedback control
decisions, adjusting for gait characteristics and for precise foot placement
based on the surrounding terrain and environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigators are co-developing a freshman college course to inspire
students by teaching how practicing engineers employ computational linear
algebra to solve large and important problems as arise in the study of
autonomous robots. Course projects are selected from contemporary topics in
robotics such as, for example, map building from LiDAR point clouds, machine
learning for spatial representation of data, and feedback control of mobile
platforms. In addition, the project engages in outreach to underrepresented
communities through collaborative educational instruction in STEM fields in
Detroit public high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.