* 2118250
* CyberTraining: Pilot: An Artificial Intelligence Bootcamp for Cyberinfrastructure Professionals
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Eric Fosler-Lussier, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,858.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is used in many aspects of modern life such as
language translation and image analysis. In addition to consumer and business
applications, researchers are increasingly using AI techniques in their
scientific processes. The growth in AI is heavily dependent on new Deep Learning
(DL) and Machine Learning (ML) schemes. As datasets and DL and ML models become
more complex the computing requirements for AI increase and researchers turn to
high performance computing (HPC) facilities to meet these needs. This is leading
to a critical need for a Cyberinfrastructure (CI) workforce that supports HPC
systems with expertise in AI techniques and underlying technology. This project
will pilot an AI bootcamp for CI professionals that is targeted based on the
professional's job requirements. After attending the bootcamp CI professionals
will be better equipped to provide computing and data services to AI research
users. This in turn will broaden adoption and effective use of advanced CI by
researchers in a wide range of disciplines and will have an impact on science
and corresponding benefits to society from their successes. The training
materials developed during this project will be openly shared with the CI
community so that others can use and adapt the materials for similar training
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is novel in taking a holistic
approach to addressing the AI expertise gap for CI professionals. The project
will develop an AI Bootcamp for CI professionals with the overarching goal of
increasing the confidence and effectiveness of their support of AI researchers.
The project leverages the CI professionalization efforts of the Campus Research
Computing Consortium (CaRCC) to organize the training outcomes based on four
"facings" (Strategy/Policy facing, Researcher facing, Software/Data facing, and
Systems facing). The project will identify learning outcomes for each CI facing
and organize training tracks customized to specific roles. For this pilot the
project is focused on developing a comprehensive training experience for
Software/Data facing CI professionals. The AI Bootcamp will be offered virtually
over twelve weeks. The instructional materials will be shared openly as
notebooks, slide-decks and containers as appropriate so that they can be used
for other training offerings. The project team is comprised of CI professionals,
experienced in training CI users and providing CI operations, and Computer
Science faculty members, experienced in offering courses in Data Analytics, AI
and High Performance AI with active AI-based research programs. Drawing on
extensive experience and materials in hands-on experiential learning for AI, the
project team will create a comprehensive curriculum spanning foundational AI,
software frameworks, and high performance computing for AI in a modularized
virtual format to minimize barriers to access for the CI professional
learner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.