* 2118012
* Empirical and theoretical investigation of associative learning in groups
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Federico Sanabria, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 12/31/2024
* USD 541,126.00

Learning is a central psychological construct that has been studied primarily in
individuals. However, humans and other social animals often learn with others,
yielding outcomes that are often superior to those obtained by learning alone—a
phenomenon known as collective learning. This project investigates the extent to
which fundamental principles of associative learning, which operate at the level
of individual organisms, contribute to collective learning. Just as individuals
learn about correlations in the environment (e.g., rain typically follows dark
clouds), they may also learn about correlations between stimuli in the
environment and the actions of other individuals (e.g., rain typically follows
if you see people carrying umbrellas). The investigators will test a
mathematical model that postulates how associative learning in individuals
contributes to collective learning using animal model systems. The specific
animal models are selected because (a) like humans, they are highly social and
learn collectively, (b) they afford the necessary level of experimental control
under laboratory conditions to test the proposed mathematical model, and (c) the
evolutionary distance between them is large enough to identify general
mechanisms of collective learning. The basic rules of collective learning found
in these animal groups can be leveraged to promote advantageous aspects of
collective learning and to anticipate its detrimental consequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify fundamental processes of
collective learning. A series of associative-learning experiments will test
which form of training—individual or collective—results in faster and more
durable learning that is resilient to interference from uninformative cues. For
each experiment, a prediction will be made based on a simple computational model
that assumes that the behavior of other group members can be learned as an
informative cue. The generality of the proposed model will be tested on nest-
seeking behavior in social insects and food-seeking behavior in social mammals.
Aside from their sociality and convenience, specific species were selected as
animal models because they lack the higher cognitive sophistication of humans.
This makes it easier to uncover the basic associative mechanisms underlying
collective learning, without having to control for potential interference by
cognitively complex non-associative processes, such as verbal communication.
Nonetheless, aspects of the model that are validated with different parameters
are expected to generalize to human learning and can be the basis of further
examination in humans. These findings will, therefore, aid in determining the
factors that can promote or impede collective intelligence when humans or
machines (e.g., artificial intelligence) perform tasks as a
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.