* 2118420
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: DMREF: Designing Plasmonic Nanoparticle Assemblies For Active Nanoscale Temperature Control By Exploiting Near- And Far-Field Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Stephan Link, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 612,096.00

With the support of the DMREF Program and the Division of Chemistry, Professor
David J. Masiello from the University of Washington, Professor Stephan Link from
Rice University, and Professor Katherine A. Willets from Temple University are
developing methods to theoretically design and experimentally realize a new
class of periodic 1D and 2D thermal metamaterials. Thermal energy, or heat,
flows naturally from hot to cold, making it difficult to create localized
thermal “hot spots” even when heat is applied to a single location. Said
differently, the degree of spatial correlation between the heat power supplied
and the temperature change that it induces is likely to be small. Touching a hot
pan’s lid provides a simple and all too familiar example of this effect. As a
material’s size is reduced to 10-100s of nanometers, or about 1,000 times
smaller than the width of a human hair, depositing and maintaining thermal
energy within a small region of space becomes even more challenging. Yet, the
ability to control heat flow and thus temperature at both nanoscale (&lt;100 nm)
and micron-scale (~1-100 μm) dimensions has important implications for
applications ranging from big data to nanomedicine. This research project aims
to overcome thermal diffusion and achieve long-range global control of
spatially-nonuniform heating, using only light to actively control the thermal
profile of the materials. Beyond impacting a wide variety of applications, the
project will facilitate the interdisciplinary training of students and
postdoctoral researchers through student exchange between the three research
groups, organization of two new scientific meetings, and the design of a
nanotechnology summer camp for middle school students with focus on photothermal
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to overcome thermal
diffusion through the theoretical design and experimental realization of a new
class of periodic 1D and 2D thermal metamaterials. Plasmonic nanoparticle unit
cells that are individually capable of hosting spatially-controllable nanoscale
thermal profiles will be integrated into periodic lattices, which introduces the
possibility for long-range global control of spatially-nonuniform heating upon
optical excitation. To achieve this goal, the research team will (i) expand the
design and thermal characterization capabilities for multi-particle unit cells
that exploit near-field coupling; (ii) engineer photonic band structure to
sculpt long-range thermal profiles in 1D and 2D Bravais lattices using light;
and (iii) integrate multiple sub-lattices to realize 1D and 2D non-Bravais
lattices to actively control both nanoscale and micron-scale thermal profiles
using light. Realization of such thermally-active materials will require the
coordinated and iterative efforts of a highly-skilled team capable of
integrating new theoretical methods for predicting how light energy is
transduced into modified thermal profiles with experimental fabrication and
characterization techniques to design and quantify temperature across decades of
length scales, spanning from below the diffraction limit to millimeters. This
project will leverage the iterative theory-experiment-theory feedback loop to
expand the genome of actively-controllable photothermal
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.