* 2118311
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Cybertraining on P4 Programmable Devices using an Online Scalable Platform with Physical and Virtual Switches and Real Protocol Stacks
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Neset Hikmet, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2025
* USD 499,540.00

Traditionally, the data plane of network devices has been designed with fixed
functions to forward data packets, using a small set of communication protocols.
This closed-design paradigm has limited the capability of switches to costly
proprietary implementations that are hard-coded by vendors. Recently, data plane
programmability has attracted significant attention, permitting the owners of
communication networks to use switches with customized processing functions.
While large companies are now using programmable platforms, campus networks and
small- and medium-sized enterprises have yet to fully benefit from the
advantages of P4, the de-facto standard for programming the data plane. A key
barrier preventing faster adoption of P4 is the availability of engaging
training material for cyberinfrastructure (CI) professionals that focuses on the
operation and management of P4 systems. This project addresses the gap by
developing hands-on virtual labs that run on a platform for online instruction,
referred to as the academic cloud. The project will lower the entry barrier to
innovation through P4 technology, which will enable CI professionals to reduce
the time to design, test, and adopt new communication protocols; devise new
customized applications; understand the behavior of data packets as they travel
across networks; develop more effective defenses against cybersecurity attacks;
and improve the performance of applications used in essential areas such as
cybersecurity, Internet of Things (IoT), congestion control, and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first goal of the project is to facilitate the
adoption of programmable P4 devices by CI professionals and by network owners in
general, by developing virtual labs. The second goal is to promote the
integration of P4 and virtual labs into academic degree programs at the
associate, bachelor, and graduate levels. Equipment used in virtual labs
consists of production-grade devices such as software switches (e.g., Open
vSwitch, PISCES), hardware switches based on state-of-the-art Tofino chips, and
open-source operating systems and controllers (e.g., Open Network Linux, Open
Network Operating System). For virtual labs using physical devices, the
equipment pods incorporate P4 programmable hardware switches that are attached
to the cloud and are managed via remote-access capability. Virtual labs provide
both functional and traffic realism, as they use the same equipment as in real
deployments and generate interactive network traffic. They emulate
communications across local area networks (LANs), wide area networks (WANs),
campus networks, data centers, and high-performance systems. The project will
organize workshops to create awareness of this new technology and virtual labs
resources, and to train CI professionals on P4. Workshops are co-organized and
broadly disseminated through collaborators that play a critical role in
enhancing and securing the national cyberinfrastructure: ESnet, the high-
performance network that carries science traffic for the U.S. Department of
Energy, including the National Laboratory system; and Internet2 and Front Range
GigaPOP, two Research and Education Networks (RENs) that operate national and
regional communication backbones. Finally, in coordination with the Western
Academy Support and Training Center, one of the main technical training centers
in the U.S. for two- and four-year instruction, and the Network Development
Group, a company in virtualized training, the project will train IT instructors
interested in the P4 technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.