* 2118493
* I-Corps:  Microencapsulation of phase change materials using cenospheres for thermal energy efficiency in building materials
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Jialai Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of microencapsulated phase change building materials for temperature
management and energy efficiency. Residential and commercial buildings account
for about 75% of all electricity use in the US and result in an energy costs
that totaled over $410 billion in 2020. The proposed microcapsule technology may
be integrated into building materials to improve US energy efficiency up to 20%.
This reduction in energy use could lead to $82B savings per year. In addition,
the proposed technology may be used in a broad array of building materials
including wallboards (e.g., drywall, gypsum boards, acoustical panels, and fire-
retardant panels), machine applied plasters, ceiling products, flooring
products, dry mortar, cement mixtures, and interior and exterior
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a microencapsulation technology for phase change materials (PCMs) using
cenospheres to improve energy efficiency in building materials. In existing
technologies, PCMs are microencapsulated by synthesizing a polymer shell on the
surface of PCM droplets. This type of shell is expensive and has limited
stiffness/strength, low thermal and chemical stability, high flammability, and
low thermal conductivity. The proposed technology addresses these problems by
using cenopheres as the shell material. Cenospheres are hollow fly ash particles
generated in coal burning power plants. Cenospheres inherently have small pores
that are sealed by a thin glass-crystalline film. By removing this film through
chemical etching, the pores may be exposed, providing a path for PCMs to enter
the internal void of the cenosphere. Once filled, a thin coating is then applied
on the PCM-impregnated cenospheres to prevent the possible leaking of liquid
PCMs. Compared with existing products, the proposed PCM microcapsules have been
shown to be lower cost, stronger, more durable, flame resistant, and higher in
thermal conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.