* 2118840
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Accelerated Data-Driven Discovery of Ion-Conducting Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Martin Harmer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 450,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxides with fast ion-conduction are
crucial components for a wide range of applications including batteries and
solid-oxide fuel cells, which are needed for societal adoption of renewable
energy technologies. However, progress in the research and development of ion-
conducting ceramics has been sluggish, as time-consuming synthesis and sintering
act as a bottleneck to new materials discovery. The project team will leverage
their ultra-high-temperature synthesis technique that can rapidly sinter oxide
materials in about 10 seconds, integrated with computational modeling and high-
throughput measurements, to accelerate the discovery and design of novel oxide
materials. The integrated closed-loop framework will advance a general paradigm
for materials design and discovery in a fraction of the time of conventional
discovery. Through this project, novel sodium-ion conducting materials will be
discovered, which can be used for sodium batteries as economic, environmental-
friendly, and sustainable alternatives to lithium-ion batteries for renewable
energy storage. In addition, this project will leverage the interdisciplinary
research program to create unique educational opportunities for a diverse group
of graduate, undergraduate, K-12 students, and under-represented minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate high-temperature rapid synthesis of ceramics with first-principles
data-driven computation, high-throughput measurements, materials
characterization, and microstructural modeling into a closed-loop framework to
significantly accelerate the discovery and design of new ceramic oxide materials
using sodium-ion conductors as model systems. The integrated closed-loop
approach will advance an effective and general paradigm that comprehensively
considers the complex interdependence among composition, sintering,
microstructure, and properties for materials design and discovery in a fraction
of the time of conventional discovery. The project will lead to improved
understanding of the composition-sintering-microstructure-property relationships
for a wide range of oxide materials, which will be of scientific value for
guiding future research of new oxides. Education and outreach activities will be
developed and undertaken in conjunction with the proposed research activities.
In the spirit of Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), the education and outreach
efforts will emphasize the unique components of data-driven closed-loop
materials design as essential training for the next-generation MGI
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.