* 2118099
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Cyber Training on Materials Genome Innovation for Computational Software (CyberMAGICS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Pratibha Dev, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

The computing landscape is evolving rapidly. Exascale computers can perform
unprecedented mathematical operations per second, while quantum computers have
surpassed the computing power of the fastest supercomputers. Concomitantly,
artificial intelligence (AI) is transforming every aspect of science and
engineering. To address these rapid changes and challenges, this project will
train a new generation of materials cyberworkforce, who will solve challenging
materials genome problems through innovative use of advanced cyberinfrastructure
(CI) at the exa-quantum/AI nexus. Further, the project will foster the adoption
of exa-quantum/AI nexus technologies by a broad research community and beyond
through a unique dual-degree PhD/MS program, undergraduate research to close the
research-education gap, and broadening participation of women and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop training
modules for a new generation quantum materials simulator named AIQ-XMaS (AI and
quantum-computing enabled exascale materials simulator), which integrates exa-
scalable quantum, reactive and neural-network molecular dynamics simulations
with unique AI and quantum-computing capabilities to study a wide range of
materials and devices of high societal impact such as optoelectronics and
pandemic preparedness. CyberMAGICS (cyber training on materials genome
innovation for computational software) portal will be developed as a single-
entry access point to all training modules that include step-by-step
instructions in Jupyter notebooks and associated tutorial slides/videos, while
providing online cloud service for those who do not have access to computing
platform. The modules will be incorporated into the open-source AIQ-XMaS
software suite as tutorial examples, and they will be piloted in classroom and
workshop settings to directly train 1,200 CI users at the University of Southern
California (USC) and Howard University, with a strong focus on underrepresented
groups. Broader reach and training will be accomplished through the portal and
nanoHUB. Students trained in the dual-degree program will earn a PhD in
materials science or physics; they will also earn either an MS in computer
science specialized in high-performance computing and simulations, MS in quantum
information science, or MS in materials engineering with machine learning.
Undergraduate students will be mentored and trained by academic scholars in
multidisciplinary fields as well as by scientists at national labs and industry.
The project will further broaden participation through USC’s Women in Science
and Engineering (WiSE) program and undergraduate research by underrepresented
groups jointly supervised by USC and Howard faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.