* 2118276
* University of Washington - School of Oceanography for R/V Thomas G. Thompson and R/V Rachel Carson Shipboard Scientific Support Equipment (SSSE)
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Robert Kamphaus, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 97,154.00

Requests are made by the University of Washington for Shipboard Scientific
Support Equipment (SSSE) on R/V Thompson, a 274-foot general purpose, global
class research vessel, and R/V Rachael Carson, a newly outfitted 72-foot coastal
research vessel, both operated as part of the US Academic Research Fleet (ARF).
In 2020, Thompson, in a COVID-shortened season, completed 202 funded days with
131 (65%) of them for NSF. For 2021, the vessel is scheduled for 277 total days
with 224 (80%) days for NSF. Carson had 41 days in 2020 with 1 NSF day. For
2021, there are 71 days scheduled, 32 (45%) of which are for
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal, UW provides technical descriptions
and rationale for the acquisition of the following Shipboard Scientific Support
Equipment:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purchase and Install Boat Davit on R/V Rachel
Carson $51,807&lt;br/&gt;Design and Install ADCP Well in Hull of R/V Rachel
Carson $26,630&lt;br/&gt;Purchase Wide Throat Metered Block for R/V Rachel
Carson $18,717&lt;br/&gt;Replace starboard aft main deck crane on R/V Thompson
$252,500&lt;br/&gt; $349,654&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The
principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of
the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for
scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of
their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo
separate review by the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition,
maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded
researchers from any US university or lab access to working, calibrated
instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research, and
expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.