* 2118851
* PPoSS: Planning: High-Performance Certified Trust for Global-Scale Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Zhong Shao, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2022
* USD 250,000.00

A global-scale public infrastructure of distributed computing resources, in the
form of data centers of various scales, has emerged in the past decade. Today, a
user of this global infrastructure must trust the infrastructure vendors based
on their informal textual contracts. This trust model provides limited legal
protection of user interests and has become a key barrier for more services to
migrate into the public infrastructure, stymieing innovation and competition.
This project's key novelty is to build highly performant, certified execution
environments (CEEs) for large-scale distributed systems. In doing so, the
project explores, refines, and discovers design principles for scaling certified
trust --- specifically, scaling up to include the entire software stack, and
scaling out to include globally distributed resources. The project's main impact
is to enable and promote trustworthy, performant, cost-effective uses of the
public global infrastructure, empowering applications and services for a global
market. Specifically it will lower the barrier of entrance for startups to enter
a global market and as a result, foster competition and innovation, and make
information technologies more accessible. It is intended to profoundly change
many industries that traditionally heavily rely on proprietary IT
infrastructures, e.g., mobile networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project makes
three related scientific contributions. First, it contributes new technologies
for building distributed CEE enclaves for running global-scale applications.
CEEs extend remote attestation (as in trusted execution environments (TEEs))
with formal verification so the chain of trust can be used to establish not only
the authenticity of enclave binaries but also the trustworthiness properties.
Second, it provides hardware and software support to accelerate the underlying
mechanisms for isolation, integrity, and confidentiality. These themes range
from support for better isolation to CPUs and TEEs, but also include fast
mechanisms for emerging hardware accelerators. Finally, the team of researchers
explores the extension of certifiably trustworthy execution environments to
emerging disaggregated datacenter designs using a software-defined-network-based
decomposition of functionalities. The insights gleaned from their study guide
the development of new algorithm-driven, data structure-driven, and hardware-
driven solutions for the trustworthy disaggregated cloud design. During the
Planning stage, the investigators are developing a prototype testbed to evaluate
the feasibility of building a high-performance trustworthy global-scale mobile
network using cloud-scale disaggregated CEEs. They are compiling a list of
challenges which become the central research agenda for a full-scale, large
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.