* 2118103
* Collaborative Research: Loopholes as a Window into the Learning of Meaning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Laura Schulz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,454.00

Intelligent machines could help achieve major human goals. But even current
state-of-the-art machines can catastrophically misunderstand what they were
asked to do, resulting in machines that 'do what you asked, but not what you
want'. In contrast to these failures of human-machine interactions, from an
early age humans can quickly and efficiently communicate their goals, and find
ways to cooperate and help. But when people's values do not align, they find
‘loopholes’ to avoid cooperating or complying. Loopholes offer a unique window
into the successful but opaque commonsense process of goal understanding. While
loopholes are a pervasive everyday concern with real world implications, there
is little computational or cognitive research examining this phenomenon. This
project means to study the mental processes that allow humans to intuitively and
purposefully contort communication in loophole-behavior. This research will help
tackle central open challenges in the design of safe intelligent machines and
human-technology interactions, and will improve our understanding of the
emergence of social interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research has
focused on how children learn to communicate socially and negotiate values, but
not on how children and adults handle and exploit value misalignment. This
raises a crucial question for cognitive science and human-machine interactions:
how do people learn to go from ambiguous communication to the alignment of
intended goals, plausible alternatives, and one’s own values? Studies of
development are particularly important in answering this question, as the
developmental trajectory sheds light on which processes are foundational to this
ability and which are brought in piecemeal with greater knowledge and
experience. The project combines methods from AI, computational cognitive
science, and social cognitive development, and will (1) characterize the
emergence and scope of loopholes in the wild with large open databases using
citizen-science and public data, (2) build a formal framework informed by the
data for modeling the interpretation and (mis)alignment of social goals from
sparse statements, (3) validate the framework using controlled experiments with
diverse populations to study the evaluation of loophole-seeking from childhood
to adulthood, and (4) extend this framework with novel studies on the inferred
goals of machines in human-machine interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.