* 2118202
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Scaling Autonomous Vehicle Systems at the Edge: from On-Board Processing to Cloud Infrastructure
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 06/30/2023
* USD 163,796.00

The focus of this project is on Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) and the
smart city infrastructure supporting their operation. Current CAV and smart city
infrastructure systems do not scale well with the increasing number of
applications and are overwhelmed with massive amounts of data collected from
embedded, roadside, and edge devices. As more infrastructure and vehicle sensors
begin to collect data, novel techniques and methodologies are required to
improve the scalability of these systems. The projectâ€™s novelties are
developments of principles, abstractions, and methodologies for the design and
implementation of scalable systems for CAVs and the smart city infrastructure
supporting the operation of CAVs. The project's impacts are in the development
and deployment of CAVs which will lead to a safer, cleaner, and more efficient
transportation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops: (1) theoretical
models, frameworks, and software libraries to support the design and
implementation of scalable parallel algorithms on heterogeneous CAV platforms;
(2) a highly-scalable system for opportunistic offloading of CAV applications to
the cloud/edge that will perform on-CAV mixed-criticality scheduling and task-
offloading selection, edge-performance-aware vehicle path planning, and multi-
hop secure and private offloading; (3) a scalable and secure real-time
collaborative detection system in which CAVs leverage sensing data from their
on-board sensors and neighboring vehicles; (4) scalable, adaptive traffic-signal
and CAV-trajectory coordination protocols via fine-grained sensing of traffic
data while addressing the increased computation demands of increased volumes of
data; and (5) a programming framework, including libraries and interfaces, that
facilitates the development of scalable applications for CAVs and their
supporting smart city infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.