* 2118654
* BEE: Demographic and evolutionary consequences of phenological tracking
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kathleen Donohue, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 07/31/2024
* USD 825,211.00

Plants have many ways of determining the environment they experience. This
ability to “track” environments alters ecology and evolution. This is because it
changes the survival of individuals and determines how the environment exerts
natural selection on traits. Plants can control which environments they are
exposed to by adjusting the seasonal timing of development in response to the
environment. Specifically, the timing of seed germination determines what a
plant is exposed to throughout its life. Understanding how traits like
germination timing will respond to changing conditions is important for both
agriculture and conservation biology. This research uses populations that differ
in their ability to track seasonal environments via germination cuing, to
quantify the degree to which environmental tracking adjustment influence
population growth and adaptation. In this way it will provide critical
understanding of the influence of a changing environment on important resources.
The project will, furthermore, provide societal impacts by training a diverse
set of students from k-12 through graduate school. It will also provide
fundamental information to professionals in agriculture and conservation
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental tracking is known to be a crucial
process that allows organisms to persist under conditions of environmental
change and range expansion. This research allows explicit tests of such theory
and will elucidate fundamental processes that influence the ability of organisms
to persist and adapt under conditions of environmental change. This project uses
replicated, genetically variable, populations of similar genetic composition to
contrast population persistence, growth, extinction, rates of adaptation, and
changes in genetic composition between dormant and non-dormant populations. The
dormancy treatments will be genetically identical with the exception of
differences in major genetic loci that control seed dormancy, which allows
seasonal environmental tracking. In addition, it will identify specific traits
and genetic loci associated with adaptation to contrasting environmental
conditions, and to test whether those traits and loci differ depending on the
population’s previous ability to track seasonal environmental conditions via
germination cuing. It will elucidate how phenological environmental tracking
itself evolves under diverse environmental conditions. This research program
therefore tests how ubiquitous processes such as environmental cuing and
phenological regulation can alter adaptation across the genome and across the
lifecycle, and how they alter population persistence and
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.