* 2118125
* RAPID: Ecological memories and theory-guided recovery of post-fire steppe
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Kathleen Lohse, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,998.00

Wildfires are becoming more common as environmental change progresses,
destroying entire landscapes and costing the American public billions of dollars
annually. Wildfire frequency in many regions is intensified by the invasion of
exotic grasses that are highly flammable, and which often replace native plants
as burned landscapes regrow. To prevent invasive species from taking over burned
landscapes, land managers are increasingly applying seeds of native plants to
encourage ecosystem recovery and keep invasive plants at bay. However, there is
still much to learn about the factors that determine the success of seed
additions in terms of the ability of seeded species to establish, and to
suppress flammable invaders. It is also unclear how previous human-caused
landscape changes, such as nitrogen pollution or the removal of water-hogging
shrubs (a practice common in western USA rangelands), will affect the success of
native seed additions and plant recovery from fire. Moreover, it is unclear how
different seed mixes repel exotic plants from invading disturbed areas. This
research project addresses these issues by building on a long-term experiment
investigating the effects of past nitrogen pollution and shrub removal
(originally intended to improve rangeland forage) in a highly invaded sagebrush
steppe ecosystem. The experimental site was entirely burned in a recent
wildfire, providing a unique opportunity to evaluate how a history of nitrogen
pollution and shrub removal will influence plant recovery from wildfire. The
research team will develop criteria for creating seed mixes that suppress
invasive plants, particularly flammable annual grasses, and will determine their
effectiveness within the different long term experimental environments present
across the study site. The results from this study will aid land managers in
choosing native seed mixes that will help to prevent the spread of invasive
plants and decrease the risks and costs of future
wildfires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how ecological
memories of nutrient enrichment and dominant plant removal impact plant re-
assembly following wildfire and addresses a critical need to test the
applicability of current models for creating post-fire communities that will be
resistant to invasion by transformative invasive species. The research will
evaluate a promising, but under-studied, trait-based model (the Community
Assembly by Trait Selection model) for establishing native plant assemblages
that are resistant to invasive grasses and forbs. This model will be applied in
a novel experimental design to discern whether seed additions result in biotic
resistance via limiting similarity, fitness hierarchies and/or trait
complementarity. While much focus has been given to limiting similarity as a
mechanism of resistance to invasion, experimental support has been mixed because
this mechanism has been difficult to distinguish from fitness hierarchies and
because ecosystems are frequently invaded by more than one exotic species
simultaneously. This project will overcome these issues by using two separate
seed mixes designed to convey resistance to invasive grasses and forbs, plus a
high-diversity seed mix that combines these. With this experimental setup,
evidence for biotic resistance within functional groups will support limiting
similarity, resistance across different groups will support fitness hierarchies,
and relatively greater resistance in the high diversity mix will support trait
complementarity. The seed mix treatments will be nested within plots of long-
term nitrogen enrichment and shrub removal, which at a microhabitat scale are
characterized by environmental variation due to ecosystem engineering by shrubs
and ants. This hierarchical design will enable the researchers to assess how
ecological memories of landscape and microhabitat-level factors affect the
success of seed additions for conveying biotic resistance to invasive plants. It
also allows evaluation of how nutrient availability influences mechanism
conferring resistance to invasion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.