* 2118515
* Towards the Realization of the Hot Carrier Solar Cell using Valley Photovoltaics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ian Sellers, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

The concept of a hot carrier solar cell has long been considered an exciting
prospect for the &lt;br/&gt;realization of ultra-high efficiency solar cells
with the ability to convert more of the sun’s energy &lt;br/&gt;to useful power.
Hot carriers are photogenerated when photons with energy well above the
&lt;br/&gt;threshold (or band gap) for absorption in the semiconductor used to
produce the solar cell are &lt;br/&gt;absorbed. For most materials, the hot
carriers then rapidly interact with the material to generate &lt;br/&gt;heat.
This parasitic thermal energy cannot be converted to useful power and is
therefore a major &lt;br/&gt;loss process in commercial solar cells. To date,
the solar cells used terrestrially are limited to power &lt;br/&gt;conversion
efficiencies of ~ 30%. If “hot” photogenerated charge carriers were harnessed
prior to &lt;br/&gt;generating heat, the conversation efficiency of a solar cell
has been predicted to exceed 60%. This &lt;br/&gt;would significantly reduce
system costs and increase the global impact of photovoltaic
technology,&lt;br/&gt;therefore contributing significantly to sustainable and
clean energy sources. This research also &lt;br/&gt;creates the potential for a
new generation of solar cell technologies, generating new devices and
&lt;br/&gt;consumer products, as well as having significant implications for
future sources of energy. &lt;br/&gt; Extracting hot carriers is, however,
extremely challenging, and requires significant innovation &lt;br/&gt;and the
development of novel systems and architectures that effectively decouple heat
generation &lt;br/&gt;processes. One possible avenue to achieve this goal is via
valley photovoltaics, a protocol recently &lt;br/&gt;developed by the PI to
store the high energy hot carriers through a natural process observed in high
&lt;br/&gt;mobility transistors in which hot carriers transfer to so-called
satellite valleys in the structure of &lt;br/&gt;the solar cell absorber. This
process slows heat generation and provides the opportunity to remove
&lt;br/&gt;these carriers before they lose energy and create heat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite this success, there are several important
fundamental processes to understand before a &lt;br/&gt;practical valley
photovoltaic solar cell can be realized. In particular although the transfer and
&lt;br/&gt;storage of hot carriers to the satellite valleys and therefore
reduced heat loss has been demonstrated&lt;br/&gt;– the ability to remove the
carriers and provide useful voltage and current remains problematic due
&lt;br/&gt;to parasitic barriers to carrier extraction in the proof-of-principle
devices developed to date. In this&lt;br/&gt;program a comprehensive
investigation of III-V heterostructures is proposed encompassing
&lt;br/&gt;material growth, optical spectroscopy, and device physics such as to
deliver a practical hot carrier &lt;br/&gt;solar cell. The proposed research
will take the important new results demonstrated by the PI
to&lt;br/&gt;systematically optimize the device design and operation of a hot
carrier solar cell based on, or &lt;br/&gt;enhanced by, intervalley scattering.
Specifically, material systems and solar cell structures that &lt;br/&gt;enhance
hot carrier extraction will require novel barrier/selective-contact layers with
specific &lt;br/&gt;properties. Furthermore, novel architectures will be
necessary that not only scatter high energy &lt;br/&gt;photocarriers but also
sustain large internal electric fields at the operating point of the solar
cell,&lt;br/&gt;so photogenerated carriers at lower energies can also be
harnessed further improving the efficiency &lt;br/&gt;of the
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The applied and fundamental nature of this work
exposes the graduate and undergraduate &lt;br/&gt;students involved in this
program to a diverse research activity. This will enable them to develop
&lt;br/&gt;considerable practical skills while exposing them to the process of
materials development and&lt;br/&gt;technology transfer, an experience unique in
graduate research and of significant value to their &lt;br/&gt;future careers.
The program also provides research opportunities for minority students,
including &lt;br/&gt;summer research in the group of the
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.