* 2118578
* DMREF:  Computational Chemistry to Accelerate Development of Long Wave Infrared Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Dennis Lichtenberger, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,899,460.00

This project will develop plastic optical materials to create lenses, windows,
and optical elements for long wave infrared (LWIR) thermal imaging systems. IR
thermal imaging and optical technologies are critical across the defense and
military sectors, while the potential of IR thermal imaging and detection for
applications in consumer electronics, transportation, medical imaging, security
and robotics have also been known for decades. However, the high cost of IR
cameras &amp; detectors has impeded widespread use of these systems in consumer
markets. In the vast majority of these imaging systems, expensive, inorganic
semiconductors are required for the fabrication of LWIR optical components.
Importantly, one of the common materials used in these efforts, germanium, has
been identified as a US critical mineral, a lack of which would profoundly
impact US defense capabilities. Hence, the development of new inexpensive and
moldable polymers for use as LWIR plastic optics would be a significant advance
to lower the cost of LWIR cameras and ensure US national security. To address
this challenging problem, this interdisciplinary project has been launched in
collaboration with scientists at the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), and
it will harness a wide range of computational tools and machine learning
capabilities to accelerate materials discovery. Thus, the project closely aligns
with the Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness
(MGI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to yield optical polymers with
high LWIR transparency, high refractive index, and melt processability. The
research will examine the use of elemental sulfur and liquid sulfur media to
prepare high refractive index (RI, or n), LWIR transparent polymer optics for
LWIR thermal imaging. The project will be directed by computational chemistry
tools to accelerate design and synthesis efforts. Density functional theory
(DFT) and molecular dynamics (MD) will be used in tandem to simulate infrared
(IR) spectra of comonomers and hybrid sulfur copolymers and rapidly screen
candidates with high LWIR transparency from databases of millions of known
molecules. Furthermore, machine learning tools will be developed to rapidly
create new candidate material libraries. Quantum cluster equilibrium (QCE)
calculations, along with DFT and MD, will be exploited to quantify the complex,
dynamic nature of liquid sulfur and to determine solubility parameters in order
to expand the scope of miscible/soluble organic comonomers. ML tools will be
developed to integrate all of these efforts and create a universal computational
package for rapid LWIR polymers discovery. The computational work will be
closely looped to (macro)molecular synthesis, polymer processing and optical
characterization of new chalcogenide-based hybrid
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.