* 2118195
* Incremental Comprehension during First and Second Language Reading of Authentic Texts Assessed through Statistical Models, ERPs, and Behavioral Measures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Lin Chen, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2026
* USD 523,903.00

Many children and adults struggle to comprehend what they read, which interferes
with academic success, professional development, and engagement with society.
This project seeks to understand the specific reading comprehension challenges
faced by adult learners when English is not their native language. The research
strategy is to identify the factors that affect incremental reading
comprehension â€“ comprehension that builds as words are recognized, understood,
and connected to what has already been read. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
assesses the relative contributions of word-based factors in reading
comprehension (such as their familiarity and their meaning), sentence-based
factors (such as their structure and grammatical form) and the interaction of
factors (e.g., how predictable the word is in particular sentence contexts).
Adult learners read authentic texts for which statistical language models have
assessed the grammatical, lexical, and predictive properties. The investigators
collect behavioral measures (e.g., the time taken to read each word) and
electrophysiological measures (event-related potentials) to determine 1) whether
English sentence structure contributes more to reading comprehension of non-
native speakers learning to read English than to native English speakers'
comprehension and 2) whether the role of sentence structure in reading
comprehension of non-native learners depends, in part, on the similarity between
the native and non-native grammars. The work has the potential to elucidate
critical issues in reading that have major implications for education, and in
particular for children with dyslexia and other learning
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Perception,
Action, and Cognition Program with co-funding from the EHR Core Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.