* 2118488
* Performance-Based Wind Engineering: Knowledge and Computational Modeling Advances for Collapse Characterization
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Seymour Spence, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 414,847.00

Each year, extreme windstorms cause significant economic and societal losses in
the United States. Current performance-based wind engineering (PBWE)
methodologies do not provide a means to characterize the collapse performance of
engineered building systems subject to extreme winds. This not only limits the
design innovation necessary for achieving building systems that mitigate these
losses at reduced costs and environmental impacts, but also hinders the
development of the next generation of guidelines and standards for PBWE that
would lead to the advancement of national prosperity and welfare through better
performing building infrastructure. This award will provide the necessary
advances in knowledge and modeling to address this fundamental gap through 1)
creation of new knowledge on the probabilistic collapse capacity of typical
engineered building systems subject to extreme winds, 2) creation of practical
and validated methodologies for the rapid probabilistic collapse assessment of
engineered building systems, and 3) technology transfer to the wind engineering
practicing community. Impact on graduate and undergraduate education will be
created through integrated research activities that foster greater participation
of underrepresented groups by leveraging multiple programs at the University of
Michigan. The computational methodologies resulting from this award will be
shared through the National Science Foundation-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Computational Modeling and
Simulation Center (https://simcenter.designsafe-ci.org/). Project data will be
archived and made publicly available in NHERIâ€™s Data Depot
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org). This research will contribute to NSF's role in
the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will create a holistic collapse modeling environment for the structural and
envelope systems of engineered buildings subject to extreme winds. A new class
of multivariate stochastic pressure models will characterize the extreme loads
associated with both synoptic and hurricane events. The damage susceptibility of
the building system will be captured through coupling high-fidelity finite
element modeling with progressive and interdependent multi-demand fragility
analysis. Optimal stratified sampling schemes will enable rapid estimation of
probabilities associated with rare events, e.g., system collapse, over a full
range of wind load and modeling uncertainties. By leveraging the high-
performance computing infrastructure of NHERI, fundamental knowledge on the
collapse fragility of typical building systems will be created through the
collapse analysis of a suite of archetype buildings specifically identified for
the advancement of PBWE. This knowledge will provide the foundation for not only
the development of practical and validated probabilistic methodologies for the
holistic collapse assessment of engineered building systems, but also the
advancement of guidelines and standards for PBWE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.