* 2118756
* RII Track-2 FEC: Rapid Qualification for Additively Manufactured Safety-Critical Components
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Wen Meng, Southern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Additive Manufacturing (AM) such as metal powder based 3D printing part
qualification has been identified by the America Makes &amp; American National
Standard Institute (ANSI) Additive Manufacturing Standardization Collaborative
(AMSC) as a standardization gap with high priority in our nation. To make 3D
printed metal parts more commercially viable, a rapid parts qualification
process is a must. This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused
EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award will permit researchers from two
EPSCoR jurisdictions (LA and AL) institutions, Southern University (SU),
Louisiana State University (LSU), in Louisiana and the National Center for
Additive Manufacturing Excellence (NCAME) at Auburn University (AU) in Alabama
to establish a Consortium for Additive Manufacturing Qualification (CAM-Q).
CAM-Q will exploit research opportunities at the intersection of materials
science and data analytics, with a technological focus on Laser Beam Powder Bed
Fusion (LB-PBF) additive manufacturing (AM), to radically transform the AM parts
qualification process. The major outcomes of this project will be an overall
framework for AM process design and rapid fatigue performance qualification,
together with significant contributions to the education, training, and
development of a highly-skilled, multidisciplinary, and diverse workforce to
support the industry in the United States. The planned research represents a
significant change from the current AM qualification practices. Successful
execution of this project will enable the fabrication of metal/alloy parts with
a significantly accelerated qualification cycle, make the AM process
commercially viable, and propel the US industry to a global leadership
position.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make LB-PBF AM more commercially viable, a
rapid parts qualification process is a must. By coupling multiscale simulations
and characterization with data analytics and by structuring a meso-scale
mechanical testing framework, CAM-Q will establish processing strategy-
structure-performance (PSP) relationships for meso-scale building strategies and
subsequently demonstrate a new qualification approach on the structural
integrity for LB-PBF parts. CAM-Q’s goal is to establish a science-driven, non-
destructive evaluation (NDE) based framework for the rapid qualification of AM
parts for safety-critical applications. A new PSP database for a crucial
collection of Discrete Building Strategy Sets (DBSS) will be generated to
support the qualification process by combining experimentation, data analysis,
and physics-based modeling. For each Discrete Building Strategy set, this
database will include: 1) location-specific process control parameters; 2)
detailed microstructure maps, including volumetric distributions of pores/cracks
collected via X-ray computed tomography (XCT) scans, three-dimensional (3D)
"slice and view" data cubes in combination with data analysis and
reconstruction, and physics-based simulations linking defects to fatigue
performance; and 3) micro-to-meso scale mechanical testing to pinpoint location-
specific mechanical performance, with emphasis on fatigue performance. Data
analytics will be utilized to evaluate the performance of components and provide
guidance on processing strategies for making parts with improved performance,
thus achieving rapid quantification. The research outcomes will be incorporated
in the education and workforce training program, consisting of year-long
projects for undergraduates and dissertations for graduate students with direct
industry participation. Tight integration and coordination between research,
education, and workforce development and training programs will be supported by
well-coordinated project management, evaluation, and assessment
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.