* 2118915
* Old Dominion University/Synthetic Conducting Cable for Trace Metal-clean Sampling Winch SSSE
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Gregory Cutter, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 12/31/2021
* USD 180,320.00

A request is made for the acquisition of an 8000 m long, 14 mm diameter
synthetic (Vectran) conducting cable that is part of a trace metal-clean
oceanographic sampling system. It would be replacing an existing 12-year-old
cable that has been damaged during water sampling in the Arctic, Atlantic, and
Pacific Oceans. Trace elements are crucial to biological and chemical processes
in the worldâ€™s oceans due to their roles as essential micro-nutrients or
toxicants. However, conventional oceanographic sampling methods contaminate
water samples for these constituents. Unfortunately, rigorous trace metal-clean
procedures are labor-intensive, require specialized equipment, and are very
slow, limiting our ability to study trace elements on ocean basin scales. As a
part of the international GEOTRACES program a rosette/CTD sampling system that
allows rapid, high resolution trace element sampling was developed using NSF
funding. Since the cable is the only thing above the sample bottles, it has to
be non-metallic wire to assure quality samples while still being as fast as that
of conventional CTD/rosettes. The existing cable has been damaged after 10 years
of use and must be replaced to continue high resolution trace element sampling
in the world's oceans. There are two NSF-funded cruises in the next three years
that require this cable. The request to the SSSE Program is:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Synthetic conducting CTD cable, 8000 m x 14 mm $180,340
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 19-602). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.