* 2118725
* Collaborative Research: Common Error Diagnostics and Support in Short-answer Math Questions
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 239,307.00

One important way to help struggling students improve in math is to deliver
personalized support that addresses their specific weaknesses. Many math
questions have common wrong answers (CWAs) that correspond to specific errors
students make during their answering process, caused by misconceptions or a
general lack of knowledge on certain math skills. To date, CWA identification
and support remains a labor-intensive process at a limited scale because it
requires significant effort by teachers and/or domain experts. In this project,
the investigators will develop artificial intelligence (AI)-based mechanisms
that can automatically identify CWAs from students’ answers to short-answer math
questions and diagnose errors. Once these errors are identified, the
investigators will enlist the help of teachers to design feedback and support
mechanisms in various formats such as textual feedback messages and short
videos. In turn, the investigators will integrate these diagnosis and effective
support mechanisms into a teacher interface to support them in either classrooms
or online learning environments. Overall, this project has the potential to lead
to i) better understanding of CWAs in math questions and the underlying errors
and ii) effective CWA support mechanisms for each error type. The project will
be grounded in ASSISTments, a free web-based learning platform, therefore
directly benefiting the 500,000 US students and 20,000 teachers using it and
potentially an even larger number of students and teachers through the
dissemination of research findings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project consists
of four main research activities. First, the investigators will leverage math
expression embedding methods to learn the representations of student errors by
clustering CWAs across multiple questions in the latent math expression
embedding vector space. These learned representations will enable the automated
diagnosis of student errors in real time. Second, the investigators will develop
new knowledge tracing algorithms that go beyond typical correctness analysis and
analyze the full answer each student submits to each question. These algorithms
will enable the automated tracking of students’ progress in correcting their
errors. Third, the investigators will crowdsource multiple types of student
support from teachers and integrate both student error diagnostics and support
mechanisms into the existing ASSISTments teacher interface. This interface will
provide feedback to teachers on which students are struggling in real time and
recommend a support, which the teacher can either adopt and customize or reject
and create their own support instead. Fourth, the investigators will conduct a
randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effectiveness of each support
mechanism in helping students correct their errors. This experiment will
identify which support mechanisms are most effective at helping students correct
each error type and improving learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.