* 2118017
* Exodermis Differentiation and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Siobhan Brady, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2025
* USD 690,231.00

The climate across the United States is increasingly unpredictable, with rising
temperatures and longer stretches of extreme changes in water availability such
as drought and flooding. These events change arable land availability and reduce
crop yield. Cells in the plant root are responsible for transporting water and
mineral nutrients to the rest of the plant and their cells are the first
responders to changes in water availability. One of these cell types is the
exodermis, which is known to produce a barrier in its cell wall that is proposed
to aid plants in becoming drought tolerant. However, little is known regarding
the genes that control its development or response to the environment. In this
project, classical developmental biology approaches coupled with single cell
genomics and CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing will be used to map the pathways that
produce the root exodermis and its barrier, and to determine how this barrier
helps tomato plants tolerate drought. The results of this research can be
directly used to generate plants better able to respond to changes in water
availability and facilitate more sustainable agriculture. The research will be
fully integrated into education efforts for undergraduate and graduate students
at the University of California, Davis and will provide them with cutting-edge
training and expertise. These students will further establish a compendium of
root cell barriers that plants produce to counter a harsh environment. These
will enable scientists to harness natural solutions for future plant
breeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Botanical studies report that up to 93% of plant
species have an exodermis cell type that underlies the root epidermis and which
produces a barrier. In tomato, the exodermis first forms a polarized lignin cap
that restricts passive diffusion between cells. The genes that regulate
formation of the exodermis lignin barrier are distinct from those that regulate
endodermis development and production of the Casparian Strip barrier. The goals
of this project are to map the genetic pathway that produces the exodermis and
its barrier, to show how the barrier regulates the transport of specific mineral
ions and to determine how the barrier functions to help a plant tolerate drought
stress. Existing exodermis differentiation genes will be ordered in a genetic
pathway using developmental genetics. CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing will be used in a
targeted approach to generate pair-wise mutations of exodermis-enriched
transcription factors and signaling genes to determine which of these promote
formation of the lignin barrier. This approach will be directly integrated as a
Course-Based Undergraduate Research opportunity at UC Davis and will form the
basis of long-term undergraduate research projects. Single cell transcriptome
sequencing will be used to identify genes that control exodermis specification
via asymmetric cell divisions of its stem cell precursors. Finally, the
exodermis and endodermis lignin barriers will be genetically uncoupled in order
to determine how each of these directly contribute to plant drought responses
and mineral ion transport using inductively coupled plasma mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.