* 2118310
* Quantum Integration of Data and Emergence at Atomic Scales (Qu-IDEAS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Markus Greiner, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2027
* USD 2,402,082.00

An intensely computational and data-intensive theme of modern quantum materials
research is to search for new materials platforms with desired properties and
understand them. Quantum materials have key properties and exhibit phenomena
deeply rooted in the laws of quantum physics and the collective behavior of
their constituent electrons. These materials are foundational for innovative
future quantum-based technologies. A successful search requires connecting data
to theoretical insight. Rapid advances in research on quantum materials presents
an opportunity for significant progress; however, the volume and novelty of the
ever-growing datasets present a problem for analysis and search. Rapid advances
in quantum technologies have led to development of Noisy Intermediate-Scale
Quantum (NISQ) devices, the current quantum computer technology. NISQ devices
present new opportunities to compare the complex reality of the material world
and idealized theoretical models that contain the essential physics but are
notoriously difficult to compute with conventional computers. The need for
optimal control of NISQ devices and understanding image-like data that results
from their use places quantum materials research and quantum simulation on NISQ
devices at a crossroads of opportunity that can benefit from new solutions to
data-driven challenges and optimization. This project addresses the challenges
using machine learning tools based on artificial intelligence. New insights will
be fed into synthesizing new quantum materials and optimizing use of the NISQ
devices. In the process, new software infrastructure for conventional computers
and those using NISQ technology will be developed and made available to the
broader community. Internship opportunities will help train students in machine
learning, quantum computation, and materials discovery for the next-generation
quantum workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop ML tools guided
by the structure of the data, scientific meaning, and objectives. The tools will
then be used to gain new theoretical insights, and feed the insight back into
material synthesis and optimal use of NISQ devices. Specifically, data from the
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database and Materials Project, guided by quantum
chemical reasoning, will be used to discover new descriptors, and predict new
topological materials. Quantum-classical hybrid approaches for NISQ computing
will be developed, exploiting their advantage in encoding sampling problems.
This project plans to deliver new topological materials, suites of ML tools for
solving the data problems, and new AI algorithms for quantum-classical hybrid
optimization. The effort will help build the next-generation quantum workforce
through internship opportunities. The suit of classical ML tools and quantum-
classical hybrid AI tools will be openly available in a user-friendly
formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Computer and Information Science and Engineering Directorate and the Division of
Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate jointly
supported this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.