* 2118482
* GP:IN:Fostering STEM Education and Career Opportunities in a Diverse Wisconsin Community
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rosalyn Pertzborn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 358,892.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like many school districts in the
United States, the School District of Beloit, Wisconsin struggles with
pronounced racial and ethnic inequities and achievement gaps, particularly
notable in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). In order to
confront these academic and societal challenges, the PIs propose to develop an
informal network known as the Wisconsin Educational Leadership for Community
Outreach and Mentoring for the Environment (WELCOME). The School District of
Beloit is an ideal setting for investigating the potential to enhance STEM
literacy, self-confidence, and career interests among a diverse student
population that has been largely excluded in the geosciences. The broad
challenges to be tackled by the WELCOME initiative are the persistent diversity
crisis in the geosciences; STEM barriers for youth with disabilities;
insufficient nature-based and community-focused active learning opportunities;
and deficient knowledge base and confidence among geoscience teachers. The
proposal aims to introduce youth to the field of geosciences and contact with
geoscientists early on, during middle school, as early exposure is a known
indicator for later interest in the field, and aims to foster a STEM-literate
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs will develop an informal network, WELCOME,
aimed at enhancing STEM education for historically marginalized youth. WELCOME
combines collaborative learning and hands-on experiences among middle and high
school students, pre-service undergraduate teachers, and in-service teachers
that is focused on the coupled Earth climate system and benefits from the
informal, community-based learning environment of the Welty Environmental
Center. The key partners will include the Center for Climatic Research at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison, Welty Center, School District of Beloit, Beloit
College, Achieving Collaborative Treatment, Autism Society of South Central
Wisconsin, and Global Learning and Observations to Benefit the Environment
(GLOBE) program. The objectives are as follows: (1) Enhance the enthusiasm and
perception of self-competency in STEM among youth across southern WI, while
confronting barriers related to race, ethnicity, and disability status including
stereotypes regarding geoscience professions. (2) Foster students’ skills in
hypothesis building, scientific inquiry, instrument calibration and usage, and
data collection and analysis, focused on Earth’s coupled system, through the
implementation of GLOBE’s protocols, including special measurement protocols for
student-designed local environmental investigations of high community relevance
that effectively engage marginalized youth. (3) Broaden geoscience opportunities
for youth on the autism spectrum through STEM summer camps that engage
analytical inquisitiveness in a non-threatening, inclusive learning environment.
(4) Support the professional development of pre- and in-service teachers through
GLOBE training to meet the state teacher licensure requirements for proficiency
in environmental education, and the development of active-learning units that
engage all geoscience students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.