* 2118924
* Supporting Designers in Learning to Co-create with AI for Complex Computational Design Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Lining Yao, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 866,000.00

As modern design tasks grow increasingly challenging, artificially intelligent
(AI) design tools have the potential to provide new support to designers and
engineers. This project will work to enable a future of computational co-
creation, in which humans and AI collaborate and learn from each other to create
new designs. The project addresses a vital national need: to prepare the
emerging workforce in design, engineering, and manufacturing to better solve the
complex problems of today by collaborating with AI design tools. In practice,
co-creation with AI presents a significant learning curve for designers. The
research team will study how people learn to collaborate with AI on real-world
design tasks. The team will continuously build and test new ways for AI and
designers to learn and interact through conversational and graphical interfaces.
Success in this project is expected to advance our understanding of how people
learn to collaborate with AI on complex computational co-creation tasks. This
project is expected to lead to new training techniques and software design
guidelines for AI-enabled design tools and other human-AI co-creative tasks. The
research team will share their new interface designs and strategies to support
other researchers in studying human-AI co-creation and to support companies in
developing new AI-enabled design tools. The team will also incorporate the
developed tools and research knowledge into classes for university and high
school students, introducing them to human-AI collaboration and preparing them
to work with and develop such systems in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will conduct iterative, human-centered design research to advance
our understanding of how people learn to collaborate with AI on complex design
tasks, while using widely available AI design tools, in the context of designing
actively transforming structures. This is a complex, emerging manufacturing
task. Steps in the research include: (1) Conduct a series of think-aloud
activities to investigate how designers (try to) learn to collaborate with
currently available AI design tools. The findings from these activities are
expected to provide understandings of current challenges in human-AI design
collaboration and will surface the strategies and mental models that people use
when learning to collaborate with AI. (2) Prototype novel interface features to
advance humanâ€“AI co-creation and learning. These will include a range of
interactions and interface modalities, building upon theories of effective
conversational exchange and supporting controlling actions, delegating actions,
and negotiating goals and means. (3) Evaluate these interfaces and interactions
to see how well they support designers in learning to interact and productively
work with the AI. (4) Use a mix of conversation analysis and multimodal
observations to understand how the interface prototypes influence human-AI co-
creation. The research is expected to produce new approaches to help researchers
study and design human-AI co-creation, including: (a) measures for assessing
learning and collaboration in the context of human-AI co-creative tasks; (b)
prototyping methods for human-AI collaborative systems; (c) interaction design
guidelines for onboarding and supporting designers in human-AI co-creation; and
(d) new theory about how conversational interfaces can support designers in
learning to co-create with AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.