* 2118607
* Sensory Plasticity in Fathers
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2025
* Wendy Saltzman, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,186,340.00

In order for their infants to survive, mammalian parents, including humans, must
engage in specific types of behavior toward infants, such as feeding,
transporting, and protecting them. To do so, parents must respond appropriately
to sensory cues from infants, such as odors and cries. Behavioral responses to
these cues often differ between mothers and females without offspring, with
mothers being more attracted to these cues and more likely to engage in
caregiving behaviors. Mothers in some species also show changes in how the brain
responds to infant-related sensory cues, so that mothers are better able to
detect and identify these stimuli. However, almost nothing is known about how
fathers’ brains respond to specific types of sensory information from infants.
This research will evaluate whether fathers show different behavioral and brain
responses to odors and cries from infants, compared to males without infants,
and whether this difference is influenced by the hormone oxytocin, which plays a
role in infant care and social bonding. The results will provide new information
about how being a father affects males’ brains and changes how males respond to
infants, which might ultimately improve understanding of interactions between
human fathers and their children. These studies will provide training for
graduate and undergraduate students, including students from underrepresented
populations, and will be used as the basis for outreach activities in the local
community and in schools for special-needs
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mammalian parents must alter their behavior to
meet the needs of their offspring. This behavioral plasticity is mediated by
plasticity in neural processes influencing parents’ motivational, cognitive, and
affective responses to offspring-related stimuli. Sensory processing, too, can
undergo plastic changes in parents, enhancing their ability to detect and
discriminate infant-related sensory cues. In mothers, changes in sensory
function may be mediated by the pronounced hormonal shifts that occur during
pregnancy and lactation; however, the mechanisms of parenthood-related sensory
plasticity are only beginning to be understood. Coordinated plasticity in
multiple parts of individual sensory pathways has received scant attention, for
example, and little is known about how stimuli in different sensory modalities
interact to determine neural and behavioral responses. Moreover, almost nothing
is known about sensory plasticity in fathers. This research will use biparental
California mice (Peromyscus californicus) to test the hypotheses that 1)
fatherhood alters males’ behavioral and neural responses to stimuli from
infants, 2) these effects are enhanced by simultaneous exposure to stimuli in
multiple modalities, and 3) oxytocin plays a key role in mediating sensory
plasticity in fathers.¬¬ Pup odors and vocalizations will be presented, both
separately and simultaneously, to fathers and non-breeding males, and neural
responses will be quantified using immunohistochemistry for the immediate-early
gene product Fos in numerous brain regions as well as electrophysiological
recordings in the auditory cortex. Oxytocin signaling will be manipulated
pharmacologically to determine its role in fatherhood-induced sensory
plasticity. Results will provide unique insights into plasticity of the paternal
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.