* 2118002
* Blind Carbon Copy on Dirty Paper: Seamless Spectrum Underlay made Practical
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Nikolaos Sidiropoulos, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 06/30/2024
* USD 388,000.00

From smart homes to smart cars and highways, and from smart health to precision
agriculture, emerging technologies will soon demand ubiquitous connectivity for
billions of wireless devices. The demand for more spectrum has finally started
to outweigh resistance to spectrum reuse. There is currently strong impetus for
introducing innovative spectrum sharing modalities that enable improved spectrum
utilization and seamless cohabitation, without requiring tight coordination
across legacy, scientific, government, military, and commercial users. Spectrum
underlay is a promising paradigm towards this end. It provisions secondary
transmissions that operate without disturbing the primary user. Practical means
of accomplishing this without requiring tight coordination between the primary
and the secondary system have remained elusive, however. This project develops
practical spectrum underlay solutions which enable reliable secondary
communication in scenarios where this would otherwise seem untenable: without
primary-secondary coordination or channel state information, under potentially
strong and time-varying interference from the primary system. The scope of
potential applications includes Internet of Things (IoT), vehicular, and local
area (e.g., WiFi) networks in congested spectrum
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ensuring United States leadership in spectrum
research, technologies, and commercial/scientific applications requires
investments in spectrum sharing innovations and developing a well-educated and
diverse spectrum workforce. This projects makes contributions towards both of
these goals. The proposed research builds upon the principal investigator's
prior work on statistical signal processing, machine learning, and matrix
theory, as well as practical communications engineering -- an ideal combination
to educate and engage diverse graduate and undergraduate students on the board
and in the lab. The research will develop state-of-the-art theory and
engineering solutions geared towards practical implementation. The scope of the
work includes the following synergistic components, organized in five thrusts:
T1) Incorporating finite alphabet and error control coding constraints into the
basic algebraic framework. T2) Developing multi-access and random interleaving
solutions to ``orthogonalize'' multiple secondary transmissions in multiuser
settings. T3) Analyzing performance under fading scenarios, with adaptive
modulation and coding. T4) Addressing key engineering issues, namely, secondary
user synchronization and analog-to-digital conversion, which are challenging
when the secondary signal is much weaker than the interfering primary signal.
T5) Developing a software radio testbed and conducting experiments to validate
the proposed solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.