* 2118020
* Chemical Bonding in Redox-Active Oxyfluorides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Redox intercalation reactions are reactions
during which electrons (negative charges) are transferred from one chemical
building to a different one. In solid materials these reactions are essential to
create battery technologies currently on the cusp of transforming human
mobility. Ideally new electrode materials allow large changes of charge, which
maximizes energy storage, but these changes must also be reversible for
extensive cycling and long battery lifetimes. This project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research at NSF, seeks to build comprehensive descriptions of the chemical bond
in oxyfluoride materials that are emerging as alternatives to pure oxides in
cathodes for Li-ion batteries with high energy density. The researchers
investigate the role of fluoride ions to manipulate the underlying redox
reaction, with especial attention to its participation in charge compensation.
The research not only assesses the viability and design rules of oxyfluoride
materials as practical battery electrodes, but also amplifies existing general
theories of bonding in inorganic crystalline solids. The research has the
potential to inform the discovery and design of mixed-anion materials with
groundbreaking properties, even beyond battery applications. The research topic
provides the driver for an educational plan with the unified goal to guide
students toward energy applications, an area of the job market where growth and
demand are still just onsetting. Professor Cabanaâ€™s portfolio of education and
outreach activities spans from elementary to graduate school, from local
institutions to national events, with an emphasis in diversity by targeting
members of Hispanic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The capacity of transition metal oxides as battery cathodes is
maximized when high oxidation states can be achieved, but these states are not
stable, leading to irreversibility and failure. Oxyfluorides have recently been
explored as alternatives, but the resulting synergies between anions remain to
be ascertained, particularly the role of the halide when metals reach high
formal oxidation states. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, leverages and
expands methodologies of X-ray spectroscopy to uncover the balance of burden of
metals and anions in redox compensation of oxyfluorides. The research spans to
phases with late metals because their high formal oxidation states are known to
place the most stringent chemical demand on the anions, while also providing
relevance to modern trends in batteries. This research aims to define fresh
avenues to tailor materials to effectively and reversibly store large amounts of
electrochemical energy, building new knowledge of the chemical bond that has the
potential to transcend current boundaries of both chemistry and battery
research. A tightly integrated educational component promotes materials
chemistry and energy topics among the next generations. It includes outreach to
local elementary schools and a national Summer workshop on the frontiers of
research in electrochemistry. The researchers also recruit undergraduates to
conduct projects in support of this research, including through partnerships
with Hispanic organizations at the University of Illinois at
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.