* 2118528
* I-Corps:  Next Generation Composite-based Interbody Cages for Spinal Fusion
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Prabaha Sikder, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a new class of spinal interbody fusion cages with multi-
functional features. Specifically, the medical device is designed to promote new
bone formation in the intervertebral space and also inhibit infections. Both of
these implant capabilities are critical as they will result in the expedited
recovery of patients undergoing spinal fusion surgery. The proposed technology
also may reduce the total treatment cost for patients as the cage holds the
potential to eliminate the use of additional proteins and implant coatings as
well as reduce the use of antibiotics. The spinal fusion device market is
projected to increase substantially in the future, and the proposed technology
may fill a key gap by introducing a product that may enhance the recovery rate
in patients with degenerative spinal problems at a lower cost than current
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a medical device that uses a multi-functional, polymer-bioceramic
composite to create a spinal interbody fusion cage. Previous fundamental
research indicated that the composite formulation may address the limitations
related to the currently used polyether etherketone (PEEK) polymer cages.
Specifically, the proposed cage composition may bind to neighboring bone
effectively and also promote new bone formation promptly as shown using in vitro
and in vivo models. Based on these results, the proposed implant may challenge
the usage of traditional PEEK cages and establish the advantages of utilizing
PEEK-bioceramic composite cages in spinal fusion. In addition, the inclusion of
the bioceramic, magnesium phosphate, as the bioactive component may challenge
the usage of its well-known counterpart, calcium phosphate. The proposed implant
also may support the development of polymer-magnesium phosphate composite
formulations not only for interbody cages but for other orthopedic implants and
implant accessories. If successful, the proposed technology may confirm the
feasibility and generate the knowledge required to use the Fused Filament
Fabrication technique to design composite interbody cages as an alternative to
other manufacturing methods. Biomechanical testing of the implants may provide
the necessary knowledge required to design market-ready interbody
cages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.