* 2118206
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Microstructure by Design: Integrating Grain Growth Experiments, Data Analytics, Simulation, and Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Katayun Barmak, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2026
* USD 774,628.00

Most technologically useful materials are polycrystalline microstructures
composed of a myriad of small monocrystalline grains delimited by grain
boundaries. An understanding of the evolution of grain boundaries and associated
grain growth (coarsening) is essential in determining the properties of
materials across multiple scales. Despite tremendous progress in formulating
microstructural models, however, current descriptions do not fully account for
various grain growth mechanisms, detailed grain topologies and the effects of
different time scales on microstructural evolution. As a result, conventional
theories have limited predictive capability. The goal of the project is to
develop a predictive theory of grain growth in polycrystalline materials through
the construction of novel, closely integrated data-driven numerical simulation
and mathematical modeling combined with data analytics, analysis, and a set of
critical experiments. This interdisciplinary project, requiring the
complementary expertise of applied mathematicians and materials scientists, is
firmly aligned with the Materials Genome Initiative. The new knowledge and tools
that will emerge from the project will have a profound impact on the performance
and reliability of polycrystalline materials used in many technologically useful
systems and structures, thereby expediting advanced materials development and
deployment. Predictive computational algorithms and data will be made available
and accessible to other researchers. For the training of the next-generation
materials workforce, in addition to mentoring of graduate and undergraduate
students, the PIs (from Columbia University, Illinois Institute of Technology,
Lehigh University and University of Utah) will participate in outreach
activities and will continue to work towards increasing diversity and broadening
participation within STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Grain growth is a very complex
process and may be viewed as the anisotropic evolution of a large metastable
network. One of the main thrusts of the project will be to uncover possible
stochastic processes that define the evolution of various statistical measures
of grain growth, discover relations among them, and establish links to materials
properties. Results from structure-preserving numerical simulations alongside
critical sets of experiments and new experimental data will be invaluable in
navigating the modeling and analysis. The project will also create and employ
specific data analysis techniques for the study of dynamic evolution of grains
in experimental and computational systems with the goal of validating and
further refining the microstructural models. This component of the project, will
lead to a) the development of new materials informatics methods, b) innovative
stochastic differential equations/differential equations models of grain growth,
c) new mathematical and numerical analysis techniques for coarsening systems, as
well as d) improved computational tools. In turn, the results of combined data
analytics, modeling and analysis will be used to guide the design of subsequent
experiments. Experimentally, grain growth will be examined in prototypical
metallic thin films (Pd, Ni, Cr, Fe). As most elemental metals and many metallic
alloys have cubic structures, the proposed studies will have broad
applicability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.