* 2118082
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in Body Composition in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Faye Harwell, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on primate biological
variation can be used in a comparative framework in human evolutionary studies
and to provide excellent opportunities for student training and mentoring in
STEM. This doctoral dissertation project examines primate body composition
differences through non-invasive measures to better understand body shape, size
and physiology. The study advances knowledge about the relationship between
physiological biomarkers and muscle mass and the development of sex differences
in body composition, with the potential to inform research on human physiology
and health. The findings from this study are disseminated through presentations
at scientific conferences and publications in scientific journals,
recommendations for zoo husbandry and primate conservation efforts, and outreach
to the general public in popular science articles and zoo talks. Undergraduate
students, including individuals from groups traditionally underrepresented in
STEM, are involved in the data collection, analysis, and dissemination efforts
of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Male bimaturism is an intriguing aspect of
orangutan biology and there is still much that is unknown about the flanging
process and the physiological differences between the two morphs. Flanged males
weigh approximately twice as much as adult females and unflanged males, but it
remains unclear if this weight gain results from increased bone, muscle, or fat
mass, or a combination of the three. This project analyzes creatinine and
C-peptide of insulin levels in the three adult morphs of orangutans to assess
relative levels of muscle and fat mass, respectively. It also utilizes body
weights and testosterone levels in males to further assess these biomarkers of
body composition. The investigators hypothesize that the body composition of the
different sexes and morphs reflects their distinctive reproductive roles and
social behaviors. While both male morphs compete for mating opportunities with
females, they use different strategies, which are suggested by their respective
morphological and physiological traits. Thus, the investigators predict that
flanged males are more muscular than either unflanged males or females, that
female orangutans possess greater fat deposits than either male morph, and that
males in particuar experience a decline in muscle mass associated with
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.