* 2118240
* HDR Institute: Imageomics: A New Frontier of Biological Information Powered by Knowledge-Guided Machine Learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Charles Stewart, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2026
* USD 8,999,046.00

The traits that characterize living organisms, in particular, their morphology,
physiology, behavior and genetic make-up, enable them to cope with forces of the
physical as well as the biological and social environments that impinge on them.
Moreover, since function follows form, traits provide the raw material upon
which natural selection operates, thus shaping evolutionary trajectories and the
history of life. Interestingly, most living organisms, from microscopic microbes
to charismatic megafauna, reveal themselves visually and are routinely captured
in copious images taken by humans from all walks of life. The resulting massive
amount of image data has the potential to further understanding of how
multifaceted traits of organisms shape the behavior of individuals, collectives,
populations, and the ecological communities they live in, as well as the
evolutionary trajectories of the species they comprise. Images are increasingly
the currency for documenting the details of life on the planet, and yet traits
of organisms, known or novel, cannot be readily extracted from them. Just like
with genomic data two decades ago, our ability to collect data far outstrips our
ability to extract biological insight from it. The Institute will establish a
new field of Imageomics, in which biologists utilize machine learning (ML)
algorithms to analyze vast stores of existing image data—especially publicly
funded digital collections from national centers, field stations, museums and
individual laboratories—to characterize patterns and gain novel insights on how
function follows form in all areas of biology to expand our understanding of the
rules of life on Earth and how it evolves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Institute
will introduce structured knowledge from the biological sciences to guide and
structure ML algorithms to enable biological trait discovery from images,
establishing the field of Imageomics. With images captured and annotated by
scientists and the public serving as the basis for the work, the Institute’s
convergent approach uses structured biological knowledge to provide
scientifically validated inductive biases and rich supervision for ML, and ML
will in turn enrich the body of biological knowledge. The resulting ML models
and tools will help to make what was hidden visible, so that scientists from a
wide range of biological communities can discover and infer the traits of
organisms; assess shared similarities and differences between individuals,
populations, and species; and come to see the world in new ways. Imageomics will
accelerate and transform the biomedical, agricultural, and basic biological
sciences as they seek to understand and control genes that relate to specific
phenotypes and enable an overarching understanding of how the genome evolved in
tandem with the organismal phenome. Because traits are the essential links
between genes and the environment, using ML to help characterize them will lead
to emergent understandings of how they function. Harnessing the insights that
arise from these new visualizations will stimulate the use of new genetic
technologies, such as CRISPR gene editing, and more nuanced ecological
practices, such as modified land use schemes that emerge from better
understanding the connections between individual decision-making within species
and their impact on their population dynamics. With the emergence of new and
better targeted practices that generate fewer unintended consequences, the new
linkages resulting from a better understanding of traits and their consequences
will bolster the nation’s bioeconomy. In addition, by leveraging and expanding
existing diverse, inclusive and intellectually wide-ranging collaborative
networks, the Institute will also educate the next generation of scientists and
engage the broader public in scientific inquiry and knowledge discovery so that
Imageomics can transform and democratize science for public
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Big Idea activities in Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR). This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Division of Biological Infrastructure within the NSF Directorate for Biological
Sciences, and by the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems within the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.