* 2118718
* DMREF: AI-Accelerated Design of Synthesis Routes for Metastable Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* James Hamlin, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,849,116.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the current grand challenges
in materials science and physics is the control and processing of matter away
from equilibrium. This project aims to identify design rules and novel pathways
to synthesize desired materials that are metastable and survive for long times
at ambient conditions. This research can dramatically expand the materials
design space to enable future applications â€“ one of the goals of the Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI). A motivating example is the challenge of room-
temperature superconductors. That is, recently discovered high-pressure hydrides
have reached the longstanding goal of room temperature superconductivity.
However, they are difficult to implement in practical technologies because they
decompose when they return to ambient pressure. Similar problems are encountered
with other materials, such as magnets and superhard systems. In this work,
metastable materials will be developed to address this critical need as they
offer a promising way forward on this important
front.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses the science of nonequilibrium processes by searching for and
identifying the design rules for synthesis pathways of metastable materials. The
effort will establish methods to transform amorphous precursor materials into
desired phases that are kinetically stable at ambient conditions, preventing
their transformation to the thermodynamic ground state. It will combine
materials informatics and machine-learning for data mining and structure
prediction with the application of external pressure via diamond anvil cells,
temperature via fast laser heating, and high magnetic field to transform
amorphous precursor materials into desired phases that are metastable at ambient
conditions. The research is expected to lead to new metastable synthesis
methods, machine learning approaches for structure prediction and
characterization of their thermodynamics and kinetics, and metastable materials
with a wide variety of desirable properties such as superconductivity,
magnetism, and superhardness. The project will train four junior researchers and
teach them scientific techniques and professional skills beyond their research
projects through interaction with the broader team. The proposal will also
develop and provide in-school testing of a new K-12 experimental kit on crystal
growth for a Lending Library of Experiments. The team will train science
teachers from across the southeastern U.S. in its use through workshops, and it
will make the kits available to them by mail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.