* 2118416
* Establishing Liquid Crystals of Boron Nitride Nanotubes for Aligned Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Geyou Ao, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 06/30/2024
* USD 353,902.00

Manufacturing strong and multifunctional nanomaterial-based films and fibers
with improved alignment and properties enables many applications, including
thermal management materials and protective fabrics. Lyotropic liquid crystals
of nanomaterials with long-range order and fluidity are recognized as a
promising precursor to produce solid assemblies with improved alignment and
performance. This award supports fundamental research to provide the framework
for establishing liquid crystals of boron nitride nanotubes – a lightweight
nanomaterial with excellent thermal conductivity while being an electrical
insulator. These material properties meet the critical need for manufacturing
electrically insulating thermal interface materials for the next generation
electronics and solar cells as well as high strength fibers for protective
textiles. Aligned assemblies from this new material system are desirable for a
wide array of applications from electronics, energy, aerospace, defense, to
thermal packaging industries. Therefore, results from this research will benefit
the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several disciplines
including manufacturing, liquid crystal science, nanotechnology, and
engineering. The multidisciplinary approach will simultaneously advance
scientific discovery and a broadly inclusive, innovative, next-generation
science and engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The liquid crystals of
boron nitride nanotubes for manufacturing aligned assemblies have not yet been
achieved. This research is to fill the knowledge gap on the liquid crystalline
phase behavior and the controlled assembly of boron nitride nanotube films and
fibers with ordered structures for performance improvement. The cellulose
nanocrystal matrix – a renewable and low-cost nanomaterial that is known to form
chiral nematic liquid crystals – will be utilized as a structural template for
forming liquid crystals of boron nitride nanotubes. Additionally, stable liquid
dispersions of boron nitride nanotubes will be achieved by noncovalent
complexation with biopolymers. This approach will preserve the intrinsic
properties of nanotubes and further stabilize them in cellulose nanocrystal
dispersions. The phase transition of liquid crystals will be investigated by
rheology and optical microscopy and the assembled films and fibers will be
characterized by various imaging techniques, mechanical testing, and thermal
conductivity measurements. Combined, this research will test the broad
hypothesis that lyotropic, chiral nematic liquid crystals can be obtained from
the cellulose nanocrystal-templated nanotube system and the ordered liquid
crystalline structures can be translated into solid assemblies for property
enhancement, thus establishing the structure-processing-property relationships
of the new nanomaterial system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.