* 2118164
* CMMI-EPSRC: Multi-Driver Furnace Processing of Magneto-Functional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Laura Lewis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2024
* USD 415,000.00

Magnetic systems and materials are essential to modern society, permitting the
interconversion of electrical, mechanical and, increasingly, thermal energies
for the automotive, aerospace, energy and biomedical fields, among others. The
need for more efficient and sustainable magnetic systems is acute, with both
global end users and manufacturers acknowledging that magnetic materials with
improved performance and comprised of non-critical elements are crucial for
next-generation and future technologies. Improvements in performance can only be
achieved through better understanding and control of the magnet structure at
multiple length scales during manufacture. To this end, this award applies an
integrated experimental-computational approach to hone in on the roles of
thermal, magnetic and/or strain fields in the development of magneto-functional
materials during their construction from atoms to crystals and finally to useful
microstructures. This project has the potential to realize new and sustainable
materials and processes to support national prosperity, security and
environmental imperatives. It develops a bilateral cohort of under-represented
minority students who have interest in conducting research at the intersection
of manufacturing, energy and environment. This research is funded under the NSF
Engineering - UKRI Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council
collaborative research opportunity NSF 20-510.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Guided by
first-principles nanoscale and finite element analysis (FEA) computation,
testbed proxies including magnetostrictive and permanent magnet systems for
technologically important magnetic materials are processed using the
Northeastern University custom-built lab-scale “MultiDriver” Furnace that can
apply a saturating magnetic field and/or uniaxial stress during thermal
treatment. In addition to uniform magnetic fields, the MultiDriver Furnace has
the unique capability to apply a large yet entirely passive gradient magnetic
field, offering the exciting prospect of accelerating elemental diffusion
without the need for highly elevated temperatures that can damage
microstructures. This research integrates a novel processing approach that is
based on a fundamental Gibbs energy framework and relies on multi-scale
computational insight for realizing improved magnetic systems. The theoretical
work is done in collaboration with researchers at the University of Warwick, UK.
While the research techniques can be applied to almost any type of material,
they have the greatest effects on magnetic materials as the magnetic response is
extraordinarily sensitive to synthesis and processing effects, including
degree/scale of crystallinity, chemical homogeneity, defect state and strain.
The project generates new knowledge concerning unifying principles to identify
the types and magnitudes of, and interactions between, various free energy terms
that are important in magneto-responsive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.