* 2118809
* DMREF: III-nitride Monolayers and Extreme Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Mackillo Kira, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,799,998.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The project will serve the Materials Genome
Initiative by creating a new family of nano-quantum materials (nQMs) that are
confined down to a few atoms. In partnership with Sandia National Labs and Air
Force Research Lab, the research will establish a nQM platform with unique
quantum functionalities by using the most accurate quantum theory to design the
quantum optoelectronic properties of nQMs. The nQMs will establish a unique
controllably interacting semiconductor qubit platform needed for quantum
information science application, including the possibility to control many-body
states in two-dimensional (2D) materials. The project will develop ordered
extreme quantum dots (XQD) arrays with state-of-the-art growth and metrology
facilities. The research breakthroughs have the potential to dramatically
enhance the efficiency AlGaN-based deep UV LEDs. This would create the much-
needed technology for replacing conventional mercury lamps in water and air
purification as well as sterilization, thereby eliminating mercury emissions and
significantly reducing electricity consumption. The highly interdisciplinary
nature and the appealing potential social impacts of the research will be
leveraged to encourage underrepresented minorities and women in careers in
science and engineering. At the same time, the research will provide opportunity
to involve undergraduate students in frontier research. Through the popular
“Saturday Morning Physics” public lecture series at the University of Michigan,
the project will educate the broader public on quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The focused
theory-epitaxy-characterization-quantum optoelectronics collaborative research
will develop a systematic quantum theory that integrates three first-principles
methods, including Density-Functional Theory, Many-Body Perturbation Theory, and
Quantum-Dynamic Cluster Expansion, to precisely predict and determine the
electronic, optical, excitonic, and entanglement properties of III-nitride
quantum nanostructures. The presence of disorder and spectral diffusion,
deleterious effects that plague conventional quantum dots, will be addressed by
i) deterministically growing and positioning XQDs on hBN whose atomically smooth
surface eliminates any interface interdiffusion and disorder, and ii) creating
interface excitons with well-aligned dipole and with emission wavelengths
largely determined by the intrinsic band alignment of hBN/AlN. The combination
of deterministic position, size, and type of excitons within XQD qubits provides
a new level of flexibility to adjust quantum-light emission as well as
qubit–qubit and XQD–2D exciton interactions by orders of magnitude. The research
will combine deep-UV time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy and
differential transmission spectroscopy to demonstrate controllable XQD–XQD
coupling as well as the controlled formation of direct and indirect excitons,
biexcitons, and dropletons at room temperature. The realization of controllably
interacting qubits with III-nitride nQMs will establish the detection, source,
and processing of entanglement on a common semiconductor platform that has a
known and established industrial-level scalability. Furthermore, the potential
of the nQMs platform will be demonstrated by taking key steps toward
extraordinary quantum optoelectronic devices, including deep UV light emitters
and coupled XQD systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.