* 2118077
* Collaborative Research: Research: Investigating Jonassen’s Design Theory of Problem Solving in Support of Pedagogical Change in Introductory Aerospace Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Scott Ferguson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 96,961.00

This project is focused on the design and facilitation of problem based learning
experiences for engineering undergraduates. Problem based learning provides
students with real world problem solving experiences similar to those faced in
the profession. It has been embraced by universities that train healthcare
workers for several decades and more recently for the training of engineers.
However, faculty find the creation and management of problem based learning
experiences quite challenging. This can lead to negative experiences for both
students and faculty, which can undermine learning and lower overall interest in
the profession. Further, it can lead faculty to abandon such practices for more
traditional, less effective teaching approaches. This project will improve our
understanding of faculty-student interaction in problem based learning
environments. Additionally, this project will lead to methods that help faculty
in the design and facilitation of formative problem solving experiences for
engineering students. This work is important to supporting faculty in the
creation and facilitation of problem-based learning which will improve the
professional preparation of engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problem
based learning (PBL) has demonstrated promise in providing a range of desirable
learning outcomes that are often deficit in engineering undergraduates. However,
implementation is challenging for faculty for a variety of reasons. In this
research, we will investigate two acute challenges of PBL implementation;
generating appropriately ill-defined problems and facilitating students’ problem
solving. Two research questions govern the proposed work: RQ1) How can
Jonassen's design theory of problem solving be operationalized to help faculty
in developing a range of authentic problem-solving opportunities? and RQ2) How
can Jonassen’s design theory of problem solving be operationalized to facilitate
faculty-student interaction and scaffolding of problem solving? We will develop
problem solving experiences for an introductory aerospace engineering course at
an R1 institution as it transitions to integrate PBL experiences. This
transition will be guided by the theoretical foundations of problem typology and
problem-solving characteristics as described by Jonassen. Four central research
activities are planned: 1) sampling and characterizing current problems used in
introductory aerospace engineering education; 2) capturing and analyzing the
problem generation process for four different problem types at varying levels of
difficulty using structuredness and complexity serve as “controllable factors”;
3) observing and analyzing faculty-student interactions and student problem-
solving trajectories with and without an instructional scaffold; and 4)
discussion of this research with engineering faculty to understand issues
impacting extensibility and scalability of findings. To ground this research, we
will use Jonassen’s widely cited design theory of problem solving as a
theoretical foundation. Specifically, we will leverage two facets of his theory
– problem variation as characterized by “structuredness” and “complexity,” and
problem typology, which recognizes distinct problem types that provoke distinct
problem-solving strategies. Through a mixed-methods, design-based research
protocol, we will use these facets to map the current state-of-the art of
problem creation, capture the process of engineering problem development within
a single course context, and trace the problem-solving facilitation process to
evaluate the degree to which faculty design intent (i.e. learning outcomes) is
realized by students. The research will lead to two outcomes. First, it will
improve our understanding of the problem development process for faculty in
terms of “PBL overhead” - i.e. time, resources, and alignment with intended
learning outcomes (RQ1). Second, it will improve our understanding of the
dynamics of faculty-student interaction in PBL environments (RQ2). The proposed
work will lay foundations for the development of standards and methods that can
support faculty in more systematic development of problem-solving experiences
that are well-aligned with engineering practice. This research project is a
collaboration between the University at Buffalo and North Carolina State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.