* 2118453
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: The Alliance for Identity-Inclusive Computing Education (AIICE): A Collective Impact Approach to Broadening Participation in Computing
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Shaundra Daily, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Subrata Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 4,076,270.00

While nationwide enrollment in undergraduate computing programs continues to
increase, computer science (CS) is still overwhelmingly dominated by white and
Asian, able-bodied, middle to upper class, cisgender men. Effects of this lack
of diversity are evident in academic/workplace cultures and biased/harmful
technologies (e.g., facial recognition, predictive policing, public services
decisions, healthcare, and financial software) that negatively impact and
exclude non-dominant identities. Despite this, identity (as defined in social
science) is rarely, if ever, included in CS curricula, pedagogy, research, and
policies. As computing becomes more ubiquitous, it is imperative that technology
creators from a diverse range of identities are in development and leadership
positions to ensure that harmful technologies are avoided. This requires
creating academic cultures in computing that emphasize the importance of
identity, its societal impacts, and the impacts of technology on people from
non-dominant identities. The Alliance for Identity-Inclusive Computing Education
(AIICE) aims to increase the entry, retention, and course/degree completion
rates of high-school and undergraduate students from groups that are
historically underrepresented in computing through evidence-based, identity-
inclusive interventions. AIICEâ€™s collective impact approach to broadening
participation convenes national leaders in K-16 CS education to transform high-
school and postsecondary CS education using innovative strategies that target
the people (educators), policies [state (K-12) and institutional (postsecondary)
policies, as well as postsecondary accreditation criteria], and practices
(classroom/department cultures) that directly impact student entry, retention,
and course/degree completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AIICE is founded upon
evidence that student-focused (and often deficit-based) strategies do not
adequately address institutional cultures, policies, and practices that have
marginalized people from non-dominant identities. AIICE will collectively create
systemic change by blending aspects of social science with CS to 1) increase CS
student and educator knowledge and use of identity and related topics, 2)
support CS educators and leaders in fostering academic cultures that are more
inclusive of non-dominant identities, and 3) increase K-16 policy-driven changes
to CS education that infuse identity-inclusive strategies. The Alliance
leverages the constellation model for assembling diverse partners to solve
complex and pressing social problems through a common agenda, shared measurement
system, mutually reinforcing activities, continuous communication, and dedicated
backbone support. Each Alliance domain (training, curricula &amp; pedagogy,
research, and policy) represents a permeable, action-focused working group
(constellation) comprised of various activities at the high-school and
postsecondary levels. This flexible structure supports governance and
communication that leverages the strengths of each organization and allows for
several ways to join, support, and scale the Alliance at the individual,
department, and organization levels. Successful implementation of the Alliance
will directly impact a total of 7,000 high-school CS teachers, 2,000
postsecondary CS faculty/staff, 5,000 teaching assistants, and 500 U.S.
computing departments. This will, in turn, impact a total of 525,000 high-school
and 35,000 undergraduate CS students nationwide. AIICE will also directly impact
industry diversity, equity, and inclusion efforts, as better-trained graduates
will enter technical positions more aware of identity-related issues during
development, properly advocate for and implement change, and decrease the
development of harmful technologies. This effort will also increase the number
of computing departments implementing identity-related interventions, as well as
create new annual data and reports on identity-inclusive computing (including a
repository of resources and best practices).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES Alliance is funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of
Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in
discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening
participation in STEM at scale, with co-funding from the CS for All program and
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.