* 2118618
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing microbial transformation of marine DOM at the molecular level using untargeted metabolomics
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Linda Kelly, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 378,161.00

Collaborative Research: Characterizing microbial transformation of marine
dissolved organic matter at the molecular level using untargeted
metabolomics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dissolved organic matter is an important
component of the global carbon cycle. Dissolved organic matter provides food and
energy for microbes living in the ocean and influences microbial diversity.
Microbes convert some dissolved organic matter to CO2 (respiration) whereas
other forms of dissolved organic matter are altered by microbial processes and
persist in the ocean. Thus, it is important to understand how microbes change
dissolved organic matter composition and reactivity. This project will examine
the chemical structure of dissolved organic matter to identify: 1) molecules
that fulfill carbon demand (biomass produced minus losses from respiration) and
2) transformation processes that result from microbial activity. The project
will combine lab experiments and field studies at the Moorea Coral Reef Long
Term Ecological Research site. The project will support training for three
graduate students in marine biogeochemistry. Undergraduate training is aimed at
sustained mentoring of underrepresented minority (URM) students. Undergraduates
will be recruited from existing programs at Minority Serving Institutions at San
Diego State University and the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa. Undergraduates
will participate in the Scripps Institution of Oceanography SURF Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program, where they will conduct research in
marine chemistry. The goal is to provide a mentoring approach that can
successfully overcome roadblocks to URM engagement in STEM and increase
retention of these students in marine science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will combine field and lab studies using advanced molecular-level chemical
characterization tools to explore how bacteria alter the composition and
bioreactivity of organic compounds dissolved in seawater. Additionally, this
project will develop informatics-based tools to identify a larger proportion of
chemical structures in marine dissolved organic matter (DOM) than is currently
possible using traditional approaches. The project will use tandem mass
spectrometry and networking techniques to comprehensively classify organic
compounds into molecular families and determine common chemical transformations.
Then, using a well-developed field-based experimental ecosystem to produce
diverse labile DOM pools the research team will track microbial transformation
using expression of hydrolytic enzymes and measure selection for particular
microbial taxa and metabolisms. This approach defines the reactivity of
individual molecules and broader compound classes participating in carbon fluxes
that underpin DOM-microbe interactions. Field surveys conducted within the
Moorea Coral Reef Long Term Ecological Research program will explore methods to
track transformation of specific molecules in the environment and validate
experimental observations of compound classes that appear to accumulate as semi-
labile DOM. By integrating laboratory and field experiments and oceanographic
surveys with the refinement of analytical tools for untargeted metabolomics,
this project will characterize the fate of reactive DOM in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.