* 2118357
* Transition To Excellence: From Single-Molecule Force Spectroscopy to Single-Particle Cryogenic Electron Microscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Piotr Marszalek, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This Transition to Excellence Project will support the Principal Investigator’s
Professional Development to learn the cutting edge high-resolution microscopy
technique: Single-Particle Cryogenic Electron Microscopy (SP Cryo-EM). After the
learning phase of the Project is completed, these new techniques will be applied
to gain insights into fundamental biological processes responsible for the
acquisition of structure and for structural maintenance of large and complex
proteins. These processes are currently poorly understood for large proteins,
yet they are critical for proteins’ correct biological functions; malfunction
may lead to a number of serious illnesses including neurodegenerative disorders
such as Parkinson’s disease. SP Cryo-EM has recently revolutionized structural
biology and therefore this project has a potential to contribute to the basic
knowledge of protein structure acquisition and restoration processes at a
hitherto unattainable level of three-dimensional detail, which will be extremely
useful for understanding protein folding, misfolding and structural recovery
mechanisms. The project involves intense theoretical and experimental training
in SP Cryo-EM and will professionally advance one senior investigator and a
number of postdoctoral, doctoral and undergraduate students. This project will
promote the use of novel high resolution structural methods of cryogenic
electron microscopy to characterize protein folding pathways, which have been
difficult using traditional methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
allow the Principal Investigator to undergo a major expansion of research
capabilities into the field of high resolution (near atomic) cryogenic electron
microcopy structural studies of protein folding and protein structure recovery
mechanisms by chaperones. This transition will allow new insights into complex
interatomic interactions inside and between macromolecules that determine
structure formation and dynamics, which are critical for the acquisition or
restoration of biological function. A combination of molecular-level resolution
techniques such as atomic force microscopy with high resolution structural
methods of cryogenic electron microscopy will allow detailed characterization of
the relationships between protein biosynthesis and folding pathways for very
large proteins such as ankyrins and firefly luciferase, which could not be
studied before at atomic resolution under near native
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.