* 2118890
* DMREF: Accelerated discovery of metastable but persistent contact insecticide crystal polymorphs for enhanced activity and sustainability
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Michael Ward, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,713,569.00

Non-technical Description: The World Health Organization estimates that malaria
and other vector-borne infectious diseases, such as Zika or dengue fever, are
responsible for more than 700,000 deaths worldwide annually. An essential
component in the fight against malaria is the control of disease vectors through
the use of contact insecticides for indoor residual spraying and insecticide-
treated nets. Contact insecticides are powders of organic crystalline materials.
As mosquitoes rest on the powder particles, they absorb the active substance
through their tarsi (feet) to lethal effect. New York University investigators
previously demonstrated that the efficacy of contact insecticides strongly
depends on the identity of their crystalline forms, otherwise known as
polymorphs, which have identical molecular compositions but different crystal
structures. The more active polymorphs must also exhibit a high stability
against transformation to less active polymorphs for the duration of their
application. The central objective of this project is a knowledge-guided design,
through computation and experiment, of metastable crystalline forms with
superior properties for their target application. In the context of contact
insecticides, this will allow less toxicant to be used, reduce environmental
impact, and, thereby, meet key sustainability goals on multiple fronts. Various
workshops, including Computer Crystals for Kids, Machine Learning for Kids, and
Crystal Kaleidoscope, will convey the science of the project to K-12 students.
Special attention will be provided to engage Black, Latino, and Native American
students through the Collegiate Science Technology Entry
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The application of
metastable polymorphs of molecular crystals in the management of vector-borne
diseases such as malaria and dengue fever through innovations in contact
insecticide formulations represents a new and sustainable target of opportunity.
Accelerated discovery of such metastable polymorphs with low thermodynamic yet
high kinetic stability constitutes a key challenge that can only be met using a
tightly integrated computational and experimental workflow. Starting with twelve
known contact insecticides approved by the World Health Organization for indoor
residual spraying (including pyrethroids, organophosphates, carbamates, and
neonicotinoids), the project will explore innovative approaches to crystal
polymorphs that meet the aforementioned criteria, which are essential to
insecticide efficacy that relies on physical contact between insect tarsi and
crystal surfaces in indoor residual spraying applications and insecticide-
treated nets. Experimentally, these metastable polymorphs can be obtained from
melt or solution, by (cross-)nucleation, phase transformations, or growth under
nanoconfinement. The experimental work will be complemented by the development
of a theoretical framework focused on the formation of energetically accessible
polymorphs – driven by both thermodynamic and kinetic factors – as well as the
transformation between different polymorphs and their surface properties. These
tasks are beyond the reach of standard computational tools, requiring the
development of new theoretical methodologies that combine the strength of
enhanced molecular simulations and machine learning. Initial computational
results will be validated by experimental data to improve the theoretical
framework. Similarly, theoretical predictions will be used to guide and refine
experimental protocols. This iterative loop of mutual feedback will eventually
converge toward comprehensive and reliable workflows that will accelerate the
discovery and development of metastable polymorphs with exceptional properties,
in accord with the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative. Various workshops,
including Computer Crystals for Kids, Machine Learning for Kids, and Crystal
Kaleidoscope, will convey the science of the project to K-12 students. Special
attention will be provided to engage Black, Latino, and Native American students
through the Collegiate Science Technology Entry
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.