* 2118813
* GP-IN: An immersive urban environmental geochemistry research experience as a pathway to careers in the geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vanessa Boschi, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,155.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban communities often suffer the
greatest damage from poor water, air, and soil quality. Yet, while undergraduate
geoscience programs are the foundation for jobs tasked with remedying these
problems, the racially minoritized residents who disproportionately experience
environmental burdens are vastly underrepresented in these fields. Furthermore,
the traditional curriculum offerings in geoscience do not adequately cover
issues of relevance to urban populations. The PIs propose to create a novel high
school environmental geoscience education and research program using a
community-centric environmental justice approach. PIs hypothesize that an
immersive, locally-based, culturally responsive research experience in urban
environmental geochemistry will broaden a pathway to the geosciences for
underrepresented minoritized (URM) students. This will address two pressing
issues of social justice: underrepresentation of racial minorities in geoscience
careers and disparities in urban environmental
contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to engage students from
racially minoritized groups by using a two-phased activity approach: (1) an
academic year, school-based, inquiry-driven research experience which will
involve co-mentoring by Villanova geoscience faculty and a graduate student, to
investigate water, soil and air contamination within the studentsâ€™ local
community, and (2) the Villanova Environmental Geochemistry Summer Institute
(VEGSI), an immersive, on-campus, four-week long summer research experience
where high school students (9 per year) collaborate with 3 Villanova
undergraduate geoscience majors on existing, local urban environmental
geochemistry research projects with established community partners. VEGSI will
include a professional development series featuring a diverse panel of
Philadelphia-centered experts speaking to the importance of both lived
experience and professional efforts to redress environmental harm, furthering
participant aspiration and awareness of geoscience professions. PIs plan to
evaluate project success through a series of assessments, including focus
groups, pre- and post-period attitude and knowledge surveys that gauge changing
interest in geoscience fields and agency to engage in environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.