* 2118117
* Collaborative Research: How do ultrahigh pressure metamorphic sheets form and exhume? A case study from the Tso Morari complex, India
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sean Long, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2025
* USD 284,698.00

Ultrahigh pressure metamorphic rocks provide a rare opportunity to investigate
Earth processes that occur at depths of c. 100 km at the onset of continental
collisions. The Tso Morari complex in northern India represents one of the
largest and youngest of these ultrahigh pressure terranes. The size and youth of
this complex, coupled with analytical advances over the last decade, permit us
to collect uniquely precise metamorphic pressures, temperatures, ages, and
structural measurements across a wide geographic region. These spatially
distributed datasets will allow us to discriminate among competing models for
how such ultrahigh pressure rocks form and are exhumed during continental
collisions. This work will advance science and US interests by supporting the
directed research and education efforts of 2 PhD students and 2-6 undergraduate
students. Additional educational benefits will accrue to as many as 25 geology
majors per year at Boise State University in mineralogy and petrology classes,
25 geology majors per year at Washington State University in a structural
geology class, and 1500 undergraduates per year at Washington State University
in general geology classes. Both Boise State and Washington State Universities
serve an unusual demographic with high Latino and military veteran student
populations. Co-PI Long recruits students at local community colleges, which
will allow research results and educational opportunities to be disseminated to
a broader regional audience. Both PIs will also present results at the Wadia
Institute, India, reaching a broad international demographic and advancing
science internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrahigh pressure metamorphic
rocks form within or above the coesite stability field and are observed in many
orogens. The mechanisms by which ultrahigh pressure rocks form and exhume is a
long-standing problem in tectonics. Based on data collected from the Tso Morari
complex in India, we will test two important hypotheses that derive from
thermal-mechanical models of ultrahigh pressure metamorphism: 1) Ultrahigh
pressure cycles (burial to peak P-T conditions and exhumation to ~1 GPa) occur
in c. 5 Myr, and 2) Ultrahigh pressure rocks are buried, exhumed, and emplaced
as coherent sheets. Specifically, we propose to answer the following questions:
1) At what time and at what pressure-temperature conditions were Tso Morari
complex rocks metamorphosed, and how long did ultrahigh pressure metamorphism
last? 2) At what time and at what pressure-temperature conditions did
amphibolite-facies overprinting occur, and how long did the Tso Morari complex
rocks remain hot? 3) What was the rate of cooling? 4) Over what temperature
range did exhumation-related shearing occur? 5) What is the spatial distribution
of pressure-temperature-deformation-time paths? Data collected will include
pressure-temperature conditions using inclusion and rim thermobarometry, Lu-Hf
ages on pre-ultrahigh pressure garnet cores and ultrahigh pressure garnet rims,
U-Pb ages on any high-U rutile inclusions, 40Ar/39Ar ages of hornblende and
muscovite, quartz c-axis opening angle thermometry, and diffusion modeling of
chemical gradients in garnet. Pressure-temperature-deformation-time paths will
be collected from at least 8 localities located at extremes along the subduction
and exhumation transport directions. Systematic along-transport differences in
these paths will discriminate whether the ultrahigh pressure unit was
metamorphosed and exhumed as a coherent sheet (as currently assumed) or as
multiple or complex structures. Results will be integrated with diverse thermal-
mechanical models of UHP metamorphism using multiple chronometers in single or
proximal outcrops to minimize geographic extrapolation, determine ages along-
and across-strike, make direct comparisons to published thermal-mechanical
models, and identify when mid-crustal emplacement of the Tso Morari complex
occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.