* 2118171
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Pilot: A Cybertraining Program to Advance Knowledge and Equity in the Geosciences
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Mark Piper, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 51,556.00

This project will build and evaluate sustainable pathways for participation in
cybertraining within the Earth science fields. The project will enhance
inclusivity by focusing on underrepresented geoscience students for training in
cyberinfrastructure (CI), including computer programming, data analysis, and
modeling, which are not typically parts of the geoscience curriculum. The
project will enhance programming education for geoscience students and increase
access and mentoring relationships in STEM fields, thus building sustainable CI
for geoscience programing. Consequently, this project will lower barriers to
entry for STEM students while developing networks and mentoring relationships in
the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide geoscience
graduate students with skills training that promote knowledge proliferation in
software development and science communication. Students will learn to automate
workflows, test code, manage code repositories, visualize data, and communicate
research effectively, which will accelerate their research foundation and
provide future professional opportunities. Given the size of the Spanish-
speaking STEM student population in the United States, the current effort will
focus on bi-lingual cybertraining. This CI project will provide opportunities to
enhance coding skills and communication abilities, while expanding students’
professional network and establishing mentors at multiple career stages.
Cybertraining will occur in a series of virtual and in-person terms, where
students will learn Python coding and data analysis, and will be exposed to a
Hackathon to provide practical application of these skills. Course materials
will be open source, which will create a sustainable cybertraining
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.