* 2118945
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Uncovering Mechanisms of Grain Boundary Migration in Polycrystals for Predictive Simulations of Grain Growth
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Gregory Rohrer, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,417,540.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most solid materials, including
metals, ceramics, and even some polymers, have an internal network of grain
boundaries that separate individual crystals. This grain boundary network
strongly influences materials properties and, therefore, is important for the
design of automobiles, aircraft, computers, and many other devices. The goal of
this research is to develop accurate predictive simulations for the evolution of
the grain boundary network in metals and ceramics. These simulations will
accelerate the incorporation of polycrystalline components into devices and
structures by defining processing conditions to achieve specific microstructures
and properties. The project will rely on iterative feedback between experimental
observations of grain growth, new theories for grain boundary migration, and
computer simulations of the evolution of the grain boundary network. In this
way, it is aligned with the Materials Genome
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structure of the grain boundary network is determined by grain boundary
migration when the material is processed at high temperature. Therefore,
controlling materials properties is predicated on understanding and controlling
grain boundary migration. The two prevailing models for grain boundary migration
are diffusive migration and defect-controlled migration. To accurately simulate
microstructure evolution, it is necessary to know if, and under what conditions,
these two models provide an accurate description of grain boundary migration.
X-ray microscopy will be used to measure the structure of the grain boundary
networks in ferritic iron, nickel, and strontium titanate, and how they evolve
with time. In situ heating experiments will be used to measure the migration
rates of grain boundaries in polycrystals as a function of temperature. The
results will be compared to atomistic simulations of grain boundary migration
and to predictions from two theories for grain boundary migration to determine
which one provides a superior description of the temperature dependence. The
mechanistic information will then be used to parameterize three-dimensional
mesoscale grain growth models. The outcome of this process can then guide the
experiments to the most important temperature ranges or time scales for
annealing. Understanding the mechanism of interface migration will make it
possible to better predict microstructure evolution, a necessary step in
accelerating the development of polycrystalline
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.