* 2118397
* The evolutionary significance of genetic pleiotropy in species interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Corlett Wood, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Carling
* 08/31/2024
* USD 875,000.00

Nearly all plants and animals rely on other species for food or to attract
mates. These beneficial partnerships between species are known as mutualisms.
Although mutualisms are necessary for survival and reproduction, they come at a
cost: often, forming a mutualism leaves an individual defenseless against
parasites and other infections. This research will investigate when and how
parasites affect the function and evolution of mutualisms. The researchers will
test these questions in legume plants (alfalfa, peas, and beans) that rely on
mutualistic bacteria for a key nutrient, nitrogen. In a series of experiments
using alfalfa and its relatives, the researchers will determine how parasites
affect the evolution of plant genes used to form mutualisms, and test whether
some mutualistic partnerships (i.e., plant-bacteria pairs) are less affected by
parasites than others. This research is important because nearly all crop plants
rely on fungi or bacteria for nutrients, so understanding when and how parasites
jeopardize mutualisms like these is essential to protect these economically and
ecologically significant partnerships. The broader impacts of this project
include training junior scientists and two new programs to teach data
analysis—an essential scientific skill—to undergraduate biology
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to test
the central hypothesis that genetic pleiotropy—when the same gene influences
multiple traits—is a widespread and evolutionarily significant feature of
species interactions. This project will test this hypothesis in the model
mutualism between legumes in the genus Medicago and nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
Many plant genes involved in the bacterial mutualism are implicated in
resistance to parasitic root-knot nematodes, creating a genetic tradeoff between
the two interactions. This project has three objectives: (1) Test whether
pleiotropy linking mutualism and parasitism constrains the evolution of genes
underlying both interactions by comparing population genomic signatures of
selection at pleiotropic genes to mutualism- and parasitism-specific genes. (2)
Evaluate whether pleiotropy is context dependent by testing whether pleiotropic
tradeoffs with parasitism persist across multiple strains of mutualistic
bacteria, integrating population genomics and quantitative genetics. (3)
Determine whether pleiotropy is evolutionarily conserved by comparing the
genetic tradeoff between the bacterial mutualism and resistance to parasitic
nematodes across six Medicago species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.