* 2118414
* Dilute Magnetic 2D-Semiconductors: Fundamentals for Device Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2025
* USD 456,956.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic semiconductors are
materials with magnetic properties that are also semiconductors. They can be
utilized in applications such as non-volatile memories and enable spin-based
electronics with applications such as quantum computing. However, most
semiconductors are non-magnetic. There has been some success in making magnetic
semiconductors through doping conventional semiconductors with magnetic
impurities. Usually only low magnetic transition temperatures have been
achieved, limiting potential applications. This project will investigate two-
dimensional (2D) magnetic semiconductors that have the potential to reach room
temperature magnetism. 2D materials are extended in a plane but are only a few
atoms thick. Such planar materials have potential for future devices because
two-dimensional crystals can be stacked with atomically sharp interfaces. 2D
materials are also sensitive to their environment and thus their properties can
be tuned through interfaces or external stimuli. In this research the
fundamental properties of magnetic dopants in 2D materials will be investigated
in order to gain insight on the mechanisms that allow introduction and tuning of
magnetism in these materials. The ultimate goal is to develop reliable
approaches to realize 2D magnetic semiconductors that function above room
temperature. The research has the potential to lead to the development of
tunable spintronic devices based on new multifunctional materials. Importantly,
this project provides training for graduate students in contemporary materials
science with technological relevance and will broaden their experience through
international collaborations and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores magnetic dopants in the 2D-semiconductors MoS2 and WSe2. Doped
films and monolayers will be grown by low temperature-molecular beam epitaxy to
enable the efficient incorporation of various transition metal dopants. The
successful doping and the atomic scale dopant-structures will be investigated by
scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy to gain insight on the dopant
induced defect states that control the local magnetic moments. The role of
dopant-element, structure, and concentration on the magnetic properties is
investigated by systematically varying materials processing conditions and
investigation of the magnetic properties by magnetometry and synchrotron x-ray
magnetic circular dichroism studies. The experimental observations are
correlated to theoretical density functional calculations. Tunability of the
magnetic properties by charge transfer doping in ultrathin films is also
studied. This study will give insight on the magnetic coupling mechanism of the
dopants and the role of secondary defects in tuning of the magnetism. The study
exploits the 2D nature of the material systems for both gaining better insight
in the general mechanism for diluted magnetic semiconductors, as well as for the
potential of exploiting their atomically sharp interfaces in van der Waals
heterostructures for combining magnetic materials with materials with diverse
quantum properties as well as for magnetic device structures. Fundamentally,
this activity aims at determining the magnetic coupling between magnetic dopants
to find the reason for the apparently higher Curie temperatures in 2D magnetic
diluted semiconductors compared to traditional
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.