* 2118253
* Regulation of root meristem differentiation by cell wall composition
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dior Kelley, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 07/31/2024
* USD 985,454.00

Plant cells are surrounded by cell walls that give structure to the plant and
serve many functions, including determining the ultimate size and biomass of the
plant body. Composition of cell walls has an impact on these important
structural and functional roles, particularly when cells are first growing and
differentiating into new cell types. How this occurs is not well understood,
particularly in roots, which are not readily accessible for study. Several
factors contribute to the growth, expansion and differentiation of root cells
including the local soil environment, internal plant hormones, and other
developmental events in the plant. This project focuses on understanding the
role of hormones in contributing to important changes in root cell wall
composition during differentiation. By uncovering the molecular pathways in root
cells associated with hormone action, the project will clarify how cell walls
respond to growth hormone signals. Understanding the molecular underpinnings of
changes in cell wall composition during root differentiation will provide basic
knowledge that can be used ultimately to manage plant growth to optimize
biomass, ensure food security, and stabilize plants as critical renewable
resources for the nation. Through training, education and outreach opportunities
at all levels, the project will support the mentoring and education of next
generation of scientists, including undergraduate, graduate students and post-
doctoral scholars &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Post-embryonic plant development relies
on meristem populations in the shoot and root. It has long been appreciated that
auxin-induced changes in cell walls mediate cell elongation and/or division
within meristems. In the primary root apical meristem (RAM), auxin positively
regulates the stem cell niche and influences differentiation of various
progenitor cells, including distal columella cells, lateral root cap/epidermal
initials, cortex/endodermal initials and vasculature initials. An unanswered
question is how auxin regulates cell wall properties in the RAM as progenitor
cells differentiate from the quiescent center. It is not well understood how
cell wall composition changes as RAM cell differentiation occurs. The research
team has recently identified an auxin regulated galacturonosyltransferase,
GAUT10, which regulates RAM size in a sucrose-dependent manner. This project
focuses on testing the hypothesis that GAUT10 plays a key role in cell-wall-
mediated auxin regulation of root apical meristem differentiation. This
hypothesis will be tested by three aims: (1) Determination of how GAUT10
influences RAM cell wall structure, (2) Characterization of how GAUT10 regulates
root stem cell differentiation, and (3) Identification of how GAUT10 is
regulated by auxin in roots. The proposed studies will result in novel
mechanistic insights regarding how auxin influences cell wall properties to
regulate root development using in vivo, in vitro and in silico strategies
applied to multi-scale systems, including recombinant proteins, plant and yeast
cells, and whole Arabidopsis roots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Plant, Fungal and Microbial Development program in the
Developmental Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems
(IOS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.