* 2118784
* Surface Engineered and Highly Redox Active Polar Oxide Host Materials Immobilizing Lithium Polysulfides for Long-Life and High-Performance Li-S Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ruigang Wang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2024
* USD 345,250.00

Electrical energy storage is one of the most critical needs in power systems for
a more sustainable future. Lithium–sulfur (Li-S) batteries are promising
candidates because of their higher energy density and reduced cost due to the
use of sulfur. However, a key limitation of the Li-S system is polysulfide
shuttling. Shuttling occurs when polysulfide molecules from the cathode dissolve
into the electrolyte and shuttle across the separator to react with the anode
materials. This process is irreversible and leads to a rapidly fading capacity.
This project addresses the fundamental shuttle effect of lithium polysulfides in
lithium sulfur batteries with emphasis on developing surface engineered host
materials for immobilizing lithium polysulfides and promoting their conversion.
A series of surface engineered and shape-controlled cerium oxides will be
developed and characterized to understand which structural features best limit
polysulfide shutting. Such knowledge is critical for designing novel host
materials and long-life energy storage systems, which will have a potentially
immense impact on portable electronics, electric vehicles, and devices for
intermittent renewable energy storage from solar and wind resources. The
investigator will continue to support the outstanding recruitment, mentoring,
and retention of minority students in STEM by providing unique research
opportunities for undergraduates as early as their freshman year and with
continuing scholarships to promote their retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of this proposal is to elucidate the effect of surface
engineered polar CeO2 addition as a host material via shape control (nanorods,
nanocubes, and nanoctahedra with different exposed crystal planes: (110), (100)
and (111)) and chemical etching treatment on the lithium polysulfides
immobilization, catalytic conversion, and electrochemical performance in
lithium-sulfur batteries. These findings will provide insight into a fundamental
understanding of sulfur conversion chemistry and act as a guide for the future
design and screening of new host materials toward achieving high sulfur
loading/utilization in lithium-sulfur batteries. The investigators hypothesize
that physical confinement and surface engineered polar CeO2 with distinct
termination surface structures would effectively store and entrap sulfur species
to prevent the dissolution and migration of intermediate lithium polysulfides
avoiding the shuttle effect and capacity degradation during the electrochemical
cycling. In addition, ex situ/in situ transmission electron microscopy and
electron energy loss spectroscopy characterization techniques will be employed
to achieve a deeper understanding of dynamic adsorption/desorption, liquid/solid
and solid/solid interactions, and structural/compositional changes at the
lithium polysulfides/CeO2 interface. New insights (quantitative dynamic atomic-
level structural and chemical characterizations) into lithium polysulfides/CeO2
interfacial structures will provide powerful practical strategies to promote or
suppress various kinds of interface phenomena. The obtained knowledge on battery
chemistry of sulfur-oxide additive interaction promises long-life and high
energy/power density lithium-sulfur batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.