* 2118423
* DMREF: Designing Optical Materials with Small-Molecule Ionic Isolation Lattices (SMILES)
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Sudhakar Pamidighantam, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,800,000.00

The research team will undertake a multidisciplinary project to create advanced
materials with desired optical properties by computational design. This effort
will address a long-standing problem in which most fluorescent molecules, which
work perfectly in solution, lose their brightness when turned into the solid
forms needed for making robust consumer products. This project will attempt to
solve this problem by using the brightest fluorescent materials ever discovered,
which were created by members of this project team and their collaborators. The
materials are called small-molecule ionic isolation lattices (SMILES). They are
easily made by mixing two chemicals together; one is a dye that generates the
ability to manipulate energy in the form of light and the other is a structure-
making compound, called cyanostar, that helps organize the dyes into a checker-
board lattice of positive and negative ions. The significance of this project
stems from the importance of optical materials in modern technologies such as 3D
displays, and for clean energy technologies such as the harvesting of low-energy
solar radiation. The project will benefit society by training graduate students,
undergraduate students, and postdoctoral coworkers in research, communication,
data science and multi-disciplinary collaboration. Outreach will be conducted
with museum exhibits and web-based materials for careers in STEM. Technology
transfer will be undertaken with start-up, Halophore, Inc. Open-source software
and databases will be generated. This project aligns with the Materials Genome
Initiative by developing a data-backed computing and experimental workflow for
making materials twice as fast or even faster, with a target of also reducing
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team will design a
materials creation workflow relying on data extraction, quantum chemical
calculations, and rule-based screening for selecting optimal candidates to use
in the discovery and development of optical materials. The rules governing how
molecular building blocks assemble into SMILES materials, and the rules
dictating how the resulting structures control the optical properties, will be
derived by experimental verification and used iteratively to improve the
screening. The project has three Aims. Aim 1 seeks to establish the
cyberinfrastructure, database, and quantum chemistry methods for a materials
creation workflow capable of predicting the optical properties of SMILES-based
materials. Aim 2 seeks to expand the classes of dyes that can be used to make
SMILES materials and to establish the crystal engineering rules for assembling
dyes with different shapes, charges, and redox properties into optical
materials. Aim 3 seeks to create materials with blue emission colors, to create
materials with superior circular polarized luminescence, and to undertake a
high-risk/reward project to discover a solid-state platform for photon
upconversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.