* 2118329
* HDR Institute: Geospatial Understanding through an Integrative Discovery Environment
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Mohan Ramamurthy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2026
* USD 12,855,245.00

This project establishes the Institute for Geospatial Understanding through an
Integrative Discovery Environment (I-GUIDE). In today’s interconnected world,
disasters such as floods and droughts are rarely isolated events, and their
cascading effects are often felt far beyond their locations of origin. I-GUIDE
creates an integrative discovery environment that enables the harnessing of
geospatial data for understanding interconnected interactions across diverse
socioeconomic-environmental systems to enhance community resilience and
environmental sustainability. I-GUIDE nurtures a diverse and inclusive
geospatial discovery community across many disciplines by bridging disciplinary
digital data divides with broader impacts amplified through a well-trained and
diverse workforce and proactive engagement of minority and underrepresented
groups. The project leverages existing collaborations with its diverse member
and partner organizations, representing academic, governmental, and industrial
institutions, thereby extending its reach across the U.S. and the globe. The
influence of I-GUIDE’s new knowledge frontiers impact solutions to real-world
problems and geospatial decisions, with significance ranging from the nation’s
economic development to security. I-GUIDE builds upon relationships with the
museum and informal science education communities as well as libraries and news
media to raise public awareness about the contributions of the geospatial data
revolution to society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Globalization has intensified and
extended the impacts of socioeconomic-environmental interactions across long
distances, a process known as telecoupling. I-GUIDE’s integrative discovery
environment is vital to transform innovative theories, concepts, methods, and
tools focusing geospatial synthesis that drive novel capabilities for addressing
scientific questions of how to harness geospatial data for multi-scale and
telecoupling discoveries to enhance community resilience and environmental
sustainability. Two substantive and convergent scientific problems are
addressed: (1) Water security, to evaluate geospatial and socioeconomic impacts
of hydroclimatic extremes that are related to environmental and infrastructure
sustainability, and (2) Biodiversity and food security, to enhance basic
understanding of biodiversity dynamics in the face of nearby and distant
disasters, global changes, international trade, and dynamic land use
transitions. Transformative geospatial understanding gained from solving these
interrelated problems are translated into digital resources and tools made
available online through an open I-GUIDE platform for a variety of educational
and training activities to serve a broad and diverse audience. Through this
platform, the next-generation workforce can acquire geospatial knowledge coupled
with data-driven technological skills for decision-making and problem-solving
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science
Foundation's Big Idea activities in Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR). The
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Division of Behavioral and Cognitive Sciences, the Division of Social and
Economic Sciences, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities within the
Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences; the Division of Earth
Sciences within the Directorate for Geosciences; the Division of Mathematical
Sciences within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by
the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems within the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.