* 2118594
* RAPID: Nearshore Sound Propagation of and Species Response to Active-Source Seismic Surveys
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Scott Heppell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,993.00

During a high energy geophysical survey along the Cascadia Subduction Zone,
measurements of sound pressure and particle motion will be made to investigate
potential impacts of sound on fishes and invertebrates. Using a vector sensor
array, which is an underwater listening device used to detect sounds in water,
the PIs would use this data to assess behavioral responses of rockfishes
(Sebastes spp), Dungeness crab, and longnose skate to the sound resulting from
the geophysical survey. This survey provides a unique opportunity to
characterize ocean noise and investigate the responses of nearshore Northeast
Pacific species. The results of this project would be of scientific interest to
advance understanding of the energetics of acoustic propagation and responses of
marine species to geophysical surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vector sensor
array will be used to provide in-situ measurements of acoustic particle motion
and pressure amplitude levels as a quantifiable description of the environmental
acoustic stress induced by the seismic survey. This approach will enable the PIs
to evaluate changes in the bioacoustic soundscape during and after the seismic
survey relative to pre-survey conditions. This study will be an opportunity to
obtain valuable and relatively unique nearshore acoustic data from a seismic
sound source that can be used to validate and improve sound propagation models
in these challenging nearshore coastal areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.