* 2118861
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Machine Learning and Robotics for the Data-Driven Design of Protein-polymer Hybrid Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Michael Webb, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 484,054.00

Non-technical Description: Proteins are widely employed as agents for disease
therapy and diagnosis, as well as catalytic components of commercial and
industrial processes. In almost all applications, polymers are used as
stabilizing constituents to increase durability of proteins in harsh and foreign
environments, but the vast majority of stabilizing polymers provide modest
protection due to non-specific interactions with the protein surface. Moreover,
the surface properties of proteins used in these formulations are the result of
evolution for working in mild, biological environments as opposed to the desired
harsh, abiological ones. In principle, complex protein-polymer hybrids with
tailored chemistries would facilitate superior protection by tightly wrapping
polymer around the protein based on engineered complementary interactions. Such
tailored formulations would stabilize the protein in its native state even under
remarkably harsh conditions and have tremendous value in myriad industrial and
military applications. However, these new materials are extraordinarily
difficult to design due to their complexity. To address this challenge, this
project will combine machine learning (ML) with robotics to rapidly discover new
protein-polymer hybrid materials using data analytics and optimization tools.
Over time, aggregated data will be used to train advanced ML models that can be
applied to the prediction and design of functionality in a wide variety of novel
materials. Equally important, this research will focus on the cross-disciplinary
training of young data material scientists who will be prepared to enter the
workforce and help revolutionize and engineer future materials. This research
will feature a large collaborative effort between Rutgers University, Princeton
University, and the Air Force Research Laboratory
(AFRL).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Current approaches to
designing complementary protein-polymer interactions rely on labor intensive
trial-and-error experimentation due to the lack a generalizable physicochemical
framework that can guide the simultaneous design of both polymer and protein
constituents at multiple length scales. This research will implement a novel
machine learning-driven, bottom-up materials engineering paradigm for the design
of protein-polymer hybrid particles; these hybrid particles will then be
organized into protein-polymer hybrid assemblies to enhance stability in
abiological environments. High-throughput polymer and protein production,
characterization, multi-scale molecular simulation, and machine learning will be
combined in a closed-loop fashion to both discover novel protein-polymer
compositions and understand the physicochemical drivers for enhanced stability.
Using these iterative Design-Build-Test-Learn cycles, underlying design
principles for generating robust protein-polymer hybrids will be ascertained and
the lead time for designing tailor-made protein-polymer hybrid materials will be
substantially shortened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.