* 2118883
* Using AI to Focus Teacher-Student Troubleshooting in Classroom Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jean Oh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 09/30/2024
* USD 847,832.00

Maintaining effective instructional interactions between teachers and students
around content is challenging, especially in open-ended problem-solving domains
such as computer programming. Troubleshooting student programs at the classroom
scale becomes difficult, even more so in remote or hybrid instructional
contexts. Yet an instructor’s adaptability, insight, rapport with students, and
leadership role in the classroom remain indispensable. This project will explore
the use of Machine Learning (ML) algorithms to offload the time-consuming tasks
of finding and deciphering student errors while also focusing teacher-student
troubleshooting interactions around algorithmically identified episodic "clips"
of student work-in-progress. This approach differs from the current state of the
art in that it neither replaces nor simply informs the teacher, but instead
convenes students and instructors around instructionally rich portions of the
students’ own code and output. Design, development, and refinement of a
prototype Convening AI system for middle school robotics programming will
directly impact more than a dozen educators and 2000 of their students,
including several schools serving underrepresented minority populations. It will
also produce generalizable know-how about the design of Convening AI systems for
other educational domains and ultimately inform future directions for the design
of human-AI systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
technical and sociotechnical integration challenges of an AI-driven convener
through design-based research by developing a proof-of-concept Formative
Assessment Suggestion Tool (FAST) in the context of middle school robotics
programming. FAST will compare the efficacy of different probabilistic and
neural network-based self-supervised learning approaches in identifying a
student’s intended solution from their source code and simulated robot run
telemetry, e.g., by comparing the plan generated by a student with that by an
optimal planner. It then uses a rollback planner to identify the point at which
the student’s current implementation no longer has a likely path to that
solution, such that this point can be expressed to the teacher. FAST’s ML models
are initially trained on an archival data set of 35,000 student code submissions
to isomorphic robot programming scenarios. Each source file is re-simulated in
an instrumented environment to reconstruct position, collision, and other
information. Additional data including longitudinal student code-writing
behavior will be collected using instrumentation upgrades developed and deployed
to the simulator curriculum’s active user base during the project. Data from
classroom observation will be used to model and monitor proportions of time
spent engaged in different instructional actions with and without the tool. User
experience around convening will be refined through participatory co-design with
teachers and students. Structural equation modeling will be used to test a
theory of action around uptake of the tool into classroom practice: faster, more
accurate troubleshooting increases student learning and engagement as well as
teacher satisfaction, leading to acceptance and continued use of the technology
in a virtuous cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.