* 2118193
* CyberTraining: Pilot: A Professional Development and Certification Program for Cyberinfrastructure Facilitators
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dirk Colbry, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,993.00

This CyberTraining pilot project is initiating the Certified Cyberinfrastructure
Facilitator Training and Development (CCIFTD) program, a first-of-its-kind, non-
matriculated certification of professional development for Cyberinfrastructure
Facilitators. The Cyberinfrastructure (CI) workforce suffers from a critical
deficit of CI Facilitators, who work directly with researchers to advance the
computing-intensive/data-intensive aspects of their research. CCIFTD's purpose
is to attest to proficiency in core skills needed for facilitating
computing/data-intensive research, across all Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The focus is on crucial
professional/interpersonal (soft) skills, and complementary research computing
technical topics. CCIFTD will establish both (A) the set of skills and (B) a
means for determining whether a CI Facilitator has these skills and thus merits
certification. This project promotes the progress of science by accelerating
STEM research, in particular by training and certifying a national cohort of
research computing professionals who work directly with STEM researchers to
advance the computing/data-intensive aspects of their research. Such research is
becoming increasingly important across all STEM disciplines, while at the same
time large scale and advanced computing is becoming more challenging to learn.
Financial efficiency is achieved via a "train the trainers" approach: every
Facilitator trained by CCIFTD is anticipated to work with dozens or hundreds of
researchers over their career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a well-
defined methodology: 1. Determine the skills that are most valuable for CI
Facilitation, by surveying (i) experienced CI Facilitators, (ii) CI organization
leaders such as supercomputing center directors, and (iii) STEM researchers who
use CI. 2. Develop for each such skill a training mechanism, an examination
instrument, and its scoring rubric, via pilot testing at workshops and via
online resources. 3. Construct certification pathways, namely subsets of badges
that, collectively, merit certification. 4. Test badging methods. 5. Evaluate
the success of the CCIFTD program both during this pilot project and at the end,
to improve CCIFTD as it progresses and to determine how successful it has been.
The project objectives include: 1. From the perspective of CI Facilitators: (a)
Provide both training and proof of mastery in skills that are mission critical
to CI Facilitation; and (b) Cultivate and expand the CI Facilitators community.
2. From the perspective of CI organizations: Increase uptake of CI Facilitation
services, and therefore of CI. 3. From the perspective of STEM researchers:
Increase computing/data-intensive STEM research productivity, by applying CI
expertise that many STEM researchers lack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.