* 2118274
* Transitions: Modeling microbial community metabolic interactions under extreme conditions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Amy Schmid, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2024
* USD 899,031.00

This goal of this research is to determine how microbes living in extreme
conditions communicate metabolically. Microbial extremophiles are remarkable
examples of life’s resilience, thriving in hot springs at boiling temperatures,
in brine lakes saturated with salt, and in deserts once thought to be sterile.
This project uses extremophiles that live in high salt as a test system to map
and model how nutrients flow through microbial communities, enabling resilience
during times of food scarcity. The metabolism of salt-adapted microbes is poorly
understood but produces chemicals and enzymes of interest to biotechnology. The
proposed research is therefore expected to reveal general principles of
biological resilience and present novel approaches for future industrial
applications of extremophile metabolic products. These activities will enable a
transition in the PI's research direction from molecular experiments in pure
laboratory cultures to field ecology and metabolic modeling. The goal of the
education plan is to foster inclusive learning experiences that span
disciplinary lines. Together with students and postdocs from her group, the PI
will form “co-learning teams" in which the team leader learns, alongside
students in the field, how to sample and collect data. In these vertically
integrated teams, the perspective that everyone is learning together is expected
to lessen power dynamics and promote a positive research culture where all team
members feel welcome and valued. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
tests the hypothesis that hypersaline microbial communities interact to maintain
stability despite changes in salinity and nutrient availability. Hypersaline-
adapted archaea, or halophiles, provide a unique model for investigating the
metabolic interactions in microbial communities. Member species share a common
hypersaline habitat but exhibit extensive diversity in how they generate energy.
Nutrients are intermittently available in hypersaline lakes during seasonal
variation, resulting in severe energy stress. In response, halophiles have
evolved a wide array of possible metabolic solutions to survive on the same pool
of scarce resources. Hypersaline microbial communities have great potential to
reveal general principles of community resilience to environmental perturbation.
However, knowledge regarding the mechanisms of community interactions remain
largely uncharacterized. In the proposed work, the PI and collaborators address
these questions by pursuing the following objectives: (a) constructing
constraint-based models for hypersaline communities to explain and predict
metabolic interactions; (b) sampling the Great Salt Lake microbial communities
over temporal and spatial gradients to test model predictions; (c) testing model
predictions in synthetic communities grown in the lab under ecologically
relevant conditions. To accomplish these aims, a comprehensive Professional
Development Plan is proposed, including intensive study in metabolic modeling
and training in field ecology during trips to the Great Salt Lake. The proposed
models are expected to enable highly accurate predictions of flux distributions
in microbial communities. This research enables the PI to launch a new and
exciting research direction, building on prior work that discovered mechanisms
of transcriptional regulation of metabolic networks in archaeal
extremophiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.