* 2118810
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Design and Optimization of Granular Metamaterials using Artificial Evolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Joshua Bongard, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2025
* USD 401,103.00

Metamaterials capable of accessing multiple properties will lead to systems
possessing a wide range of functions. Such multifunctional metamaterials will
increase the autonomy, efficiency, and lifespan of systems and structures by
dynamically adapting to task demands or changes in the environment. Granular
metamaterials are an advantageous platform for such dynamic programmability, as
the grain properties can be widely tuned to achieve different responses.
Granular metamaterial response is dependent on many variables, including the
grain arrangement, grain mass, modulus, and shape, friction or other
interactions between grains, as well as whether the walls of the container are
held fixed or can move in response to forces from the grains. With such a vast
number of possible combinations of micro-structural variables, the task of
designing the complex relationship between micro-structure and bulk properties
is daunting. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future
(DMREF) research applies evolutionary algorithms to efficiently search the
immense parameter space of granular metamaterial designs for specific material
properties, as well as identifying how a design can be perturbed to actively
transition from one set of desired bulk properties to another. The project will
establish a new artificial intelligence-driven approach to the design and
optimization of granular metamaterials with adaptable properties. These
materials will aid US productivity and prosperity by providing additional means
to find and use materials impacting robotics and other technical
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future granular metamaterials will exhibit increased
dynamic plasticity, enabling responses to different environmental inputs or task
demands by reconfiguring their physical structure. This project addresses two
issues: (1) How can granular assemblies with specific desired material
properties be automatically designed? (i.e., What should the grains'
arrangement, moduli, shapes, masses, friction coefficients, and other grain-
scale properties be to yield a given bulk material property?); and (2) How can a
series of granular assemblies that allow continuous, time-ordered changes in
material properties be automatically designed? (i.e., Which set of grain-scale
variables should change and by how much? If multiple solutions are found, which
ones can be realized in experiments most easily?) To address these issues, a
closed-loop procedure will be developed and implemented wherein physics-based
discrete element method (DEM) simulations, evolution-based optimization, and
physical realizations are combined to produce granular metamaterials with
desired, optimal, and adaptable material properties. New knowledge and tools
that will be generated by this project include: (i) alternative evolutionary
algorithms for designing granular metamaterials capable of changing their own
configuration and properties; (ii) physics-based DEM simulations that can
predict the properties of granular materials with active grains; and (iii) New
synthesis strategies for multifunctional grains and grain
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.