* 2118617
* Collaborative Research: Diel dynamics of dissolved organic matter production and remineralization as a driver of coral reef nutrient recycling
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2020,12/31/2024
* Linda Kelly, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 359,083.00

This project develops a core understanding of diel microbial ecology and
biogeochemistry in coral reef ecosystems. It contextualizes how crucial nutrient
recycling processes vary across gradients of coral cover and nutrient
availability, two factors highlighted as the main drivers of reef decline in the
Anthropocene, making the results useful to managers seeking to enhance
ecosystem-based approaches to reef restoration. The investigators are collecting
diel measurements of microbial and biogeochemical processes at coral reefs
around Mo’orea at the Long Term Ecological Research site there (MCR-LTER). They
are using established spatial gradients of benthic cover, from coral to
macroalgal dominance, and nutrient inputs. Overall the research improves our
understanding of how these key environmental factors influence diel microbe-DOM
interactions and nutrient recycling. The ongoing macroalgal phase shifts
observed at Mo’orea are hypothesized to be related to nutrient pollution, and
this work directly informs understanding of how these changes are impacting
nutrient cycling in the reefs of Mo’orea. The training of several undergraduate
students and two graduate students, one in Biology and one in Oceanography is
shared between two minority serving institutions of higher education. The
project also supports active outreach programs with the Ocean Discovery
Institute focused on engaging underrepresented high school students in ocean-
oriented careers in San Diego, and with the UH College Sea Grant Program to
support coral reef resilience initiatives locally in
Hawai‘i.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs exhibit some of the highest rates of
primary production and decomposition of any ecosystem type yet persist in some
of the most oligotrophic waters on the planet, implying tight recycling of
macronutrients through organic matter. The last half century of work on the
biogeochemistry of reefs have highlighted this bacterial decomposition of
organic matter as a likely mechanism for maintaining nutrient retention and reef
productivity. This project applies modern metagenomics and untargeted
metabolomics to test clearly defined hypotheses of how diel microbe-DOM
interactions drive nutrient recycling and retention in reefs. The investigators
are first resolving coupled in situ diel dynamics of organic and inorganic C, N
and P (using bulk elemental and spectroscopic methods), microbial abundances and
population structures (using DNA sequencing and flow cytometry) and the chemical
composition of DOM (using untargeted tandem mass spectrometry) in multiple reef
habitats across a gradient of benthic cover and nutrient availability. These
patterns inform the second in situ diel sampling campaign resolving the dynamic
coupling of metabolic pathways (using metagenomics), exoenzymatic activity
(using transcriptomics and enzyme assays) and transformations of specific
metabolites (tracked via molecular networking) to distill common mechanisms of
microbial organic matter decomposition that play a role in nutrient cycling.
This project is being conducted within the Moorea Coral Reef Long Term
Ecological Research program, leveraging a wealth of time series data on multiple
reef habitats as well as contextualizing our in situ sampling with ongoing
physical, geochemical and biological monitoring programs. By integrating cutting
edge molecular approaches with well-established techniques in field ecology and
microbial oceanography, this research program identifies key microbial and
molecular players in the nutrient decomposition and remineralization processes
long hypothesized to be central to maintaining healthy
reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.