* 2118523
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Symmetry-Guided Machine Learning for the Discovery of Topological Phononic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Susanne Stemmer, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,040,000.00

Non-technical Description: Fundamental understanding and control of heat
conduction processes in materials are important for energy infrastructure,
electronic devices, and renewable energy generation systems. This project
focuses on a novel property of phonons â€“ vibrations of atoms that carry the heat
in materials - called "topology". This property may allow new phenomena, such as
heat conduction perpendicular to the temperature gradient direction and more
efficient transport of heat waves on the material surfaces. To discover
topological phonons, the research team will exploit a Materials Genome approach
to search for materials hosting these special heat carriers. Once candidates are
identified, the research team will synthesize and characterize them, and the
results will be used to refine the search algorithm. The research team plans to
establish a public database storing the heat conduction properties of a large
number of materials. This research will not only advance the fundamental
understanding of how topology affects heat conduction in real materials, but
also provide new routes to realizing unusual functionalities such as heat
conductors that can be switched on and off. This project also supports
educational activities to teach basic materials physics concepts to K-12 and
undergraduate students through hands-on class projects and short courses. To
promote diversity in the materials science workforce, the team also provides
research opportunities to high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: While the topology of electronic states has been a central theme in
condensed matter physics for the past decade, topological phononic states have
received much less attention. Unlike their fermionic counterparts, topological
states in the entire phonon spectrum can contribute to observable material
properties, making topological phononic materials ideal testbeds for emerging
new physics in topological bosonic systems, including phonon thermal Hall
effects, novel topological phonon-electron interactions and the resulting
phenomena, such as unusual superconducting states. This project aims to
systematically identify materials hosting intrinsic topological phonons in the
thermal regime, where the topological phononic states explicitly modify
intrinsic material properties, including thermal transport, electron-phonon
interactions, and surface phonon modes. The research team will seek to
accelerate material discovery by incorporating symmetry-guided machine learning
based on Euclidean neural networks. Machine learning predictions will be
verified using first-principles phonon simulation and topological invariance
analysis. Promising candidate materials will be synthesized as thin films and
bulk single crystals and characterized using inelastic neutron and x-ray
scattering, thermal transport, and surface-sensitive spectroscopy and scanning
probe measurements. This research will advance fundamental understanding of
topological bosonic systems and examine new thermal functionalities enabled by
topological phonons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.