* 2118209
* Uncovering the self-sustaining cycle in the outer region of turbulent boundary layers
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Theresa Saxton-Fox, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 355,159.00

Chaotic motions of fluid near surfaces (turbulent boundary layers) cause up to
70% of drag on ships and 50% of drag on planes. Certain fluid motions are
repeatedly observed in turbulent boundary layers and contribute significantly to
drag on surfaces. Mechanisms that sustain turbulent motions in the inner region
of the boundary layer were previously identified and have inspired control
strategies for drag reduction and simple models for prediction. This research
will seek to identify mechanisms for coherent motions in the outer region, which
could then be better modelled to more accurately predict vehicle drag and could
lead to drag reduction strategies. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students will be trained and mentored in the laboratory through the research
initiative and graduate students will be educated in a research-based class at
the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Additionally, math tutor and
introductory engineering educational programs will be implemented at the
Danville Correctional Facility, a medium security menâ€™s state prison in
Illinois.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to evaluate a
hypothesized cycle that generates and sustains coherent motions in the outer
region of turbulent boundary layers. The project has three tasks: two that focus
on mechanisms through which different coherent motions can interact and one that
focuses on the characterization of the coherent motions involved. The
interaction of a small von Karman vortex street with a turbulent boundary layer
will be studied using time-resolved particle image velocimetry, yielding
insights into the interaction of large- and small-scale coherent motions. The
amplification of small-scale coherent motions will be investigated by performing
a resolvent analysis of the Navier-Stokes equation with a quasi-base flow, which
includes both the mean and a single large-scale coherent motion. The small-scale
coherent motions will be characterized using a new sampling approach for
turbulent boundary layer data that leverages the current understanding of the
interaction of coherent motions in turbulent boundary layers. Together, these
three tasks will identify the coherent motions and the mechanisms that sustain
them in turbulent boundary layers, enabling prediction and control of drag on
transportation vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.