* 2118708
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: A Disciplined Approach to Scaling in the Post-Moore's Law Era
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Simone Campanoni, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 06/30/2023
* USD 91,300.00

General-purpose processor speeds have not increased at their historical rates
for over 15 years. Designers have instead offered scalable computing systems
with additional barriers to realizing the performance gains that once came "for
free" with each processor generation. This situation has slowed the progress of
all endeavors that involve scalable computing. A disciplined approach to
reversing this trend must start and end with a direct engagement with the
scalable-system users and programmers faced with these barriers. With this goal,
the investigators are performing in-depth face-to-face interviews with a broad
set of users. In addition, with these users, the project team is also examining
codes, exchanging ideas, and offering assistance. This is producing a deep
understanding of how users are coping with their growing demands for computing
while computing is placing more demands upon them. The project’s novelties are
this in-depth study and the resulting formulation of an approach to address the
limitations of scalable computing based on real users' needs. The project’s
impacts are the dissemination of the survey results and a recommended approach
forward that restores meaningful layers of abstraction to scalable systems,
freeing programmers from being drawn deeper into the complexity of scalable
computing while delivering higher performance to them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators performed a similar study in 2011. With this planning grant: (1)
They are conducting a more ambitious study with a&lt;br/&gt;greater diversity of
subjects. By re-engaging as many 2011 subjects as possible, this becomes a
longitudinal study capable of revealing&lt;br/&gt;trends not visible in any
single point-in-time study. (2) The investigators are using these interactions
to explore transitioning&lt;br/&gt;their foundational work to practice, to build
a larger team, and to expand the scope of future work. The results of the 2011
study inspired the investigators to produce breakthroughs in speculation,
dependence handling, latency tolerance, and automatic parallelization. The 2021
study serves as a vehicle to explore ways to transition these results to
practice. (3) The investigators believe that hardware can be more domain-adept
without being domain-specific. Using prior insights, they are exploring
hardware/software concepts that deliver top performance levels without undue
programmer burden. By testing these ideas in the context of the study, the
investigators can best frame the problem, refine approaches, and test hypotheses
in the context of actual needs, opportunities, and constraints. All of these
activities ensure that future work in scalable systems will have greater
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.