* 2118285
* HDR Institute: HARP- Harnessing Data and Model Revolution in the Polar Regions
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Aneesh Subramanian, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2026
* USD 9,700,002.00

Climate-change induced loss of polar ice sheets impacts many lives and increases
coastal flooding by rising sea level and affecting ocean circulation. However,
it remains difficult to accurately predict how quickly the ice sheets will
continue to shrink. In particular, we are still challenged by a limited
understanding of transdisciplinary processes that determine ice sheet change,
such as the role of subglacial topography and ice-atmosphere-ocean interactions.
Timely investment in machine learning and data intensive research can
revolutionize the way that scientists currently answer questions related to ice
dynamics. This HDR Institute serves as a research hub where experts in data
science, Arctic and Antarctic science, and cyberinfrastructure in academia,
government, and private sectors come together to develop transformative and
integrative data science solutions to reduce uncertainties in projecting future
sea-level rise and climate change. i-HARP researchers investigate the potential
of novel physics-aware data science and machine learning approaches to address
national priorities and challenges on Navigating the New Arctic, climate change,
and sea-level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HDR Institute aims to harness
massive heterogeneous, noisy, and discontinuous data in space and time and
integrate data with numerical and physical models. Researchers at i-HARP are
investigating novel data science techniques including deep generative
adversarial networks, graph neural networks, meta learning, hybrid networks,
physics-informed machine learning, causal artificial intelligence, data
assimilation, spatiotemporal deep learning, and scalable algorithms. Due to the
fundamental nature of data science problems that i-HARP addresses, the solutions
can be translated to other disciplines such as remote sensing, medicine, and
autonomous driving. Moreover, the convergence team champions multiple clusters
of research-integrated educational initiatives, with a specific focus on
facilitating cross-disciplinary collaborations, training next-generation multi-
disciplinary researchers and engaging the public in scientific inquiry as
related to climate change and data science. In partnership with related
communities, i-HARP designs curricula, and offers hands-on community workshops,
lecture series, conference tutorials, and training. i-HARP engages students from
underrepresented minority groups by leveraging several existing organizations
for underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the National Science Foundation's Big Idea activities in Harnessing the Data
Revolution (HDR). This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is
jointly supported by the Section for Antarctic Sciences and the Section for
Arctic Sciences within the NSF Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.