* 2118163
* R/V Marcus G Langseth - Oceanographic Instrumentation 2021
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2021,02/28/2022
* David Goldberg, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 02/28/2022
* USD 128,000.00

A proposal is made to fund instrumentation on the R/V Marcus Langseth, a 235â€™
Global seismic vessel with general oceanographic capabilities. The vessel is
owned by Columbia University and operated by Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of
Columbia University under a cooperative agreement with NSF. The Langseth is
unique in the Academic Fleet in that it provides a unique combination of
capabilities for imaging the oceans, the seafloor and the solid earth beneath
the sea. It is the only vessel in the world dedicated to academic research that
is capable of conducting 3D seismic surveys as well as extended offset 2D
surveys. The tuned, linear source array, consisting of up to 36 air-guns, with a
total capacity of 6,600 cu in is also unique asset of this vessel.&lt;br/&gt;All
of the requested equipment in this proposal is for upgrading existing systems.
Instrumentation requested in this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;1) 2x Sercel Seal
Radial Vibration Isolation Module (RVIM) $46,620 &lt;br/&gt;2) Concept Systems
Orca Navigation System Hardware Upgrade $28,184 &lt;br/&gt;3) FGPS Seispos and
P1Tools Software $27,500 &lt;br/&gt;4) 2x Sercel Seal Tail Swivels $25,696
&lt;br/&gt; $128,000 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.