* 2118592
* DMREF: GOALI: Salt Separation Membranes Based on Modifiable Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Zachary Gray, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,769,806.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global disruptions to standard operations that
are occurring due to changing climate conditions, changing rainfall patterns,
and increased human population will continue to stress the world’s freshwater
supplies. This is predicted to result in half of the population facing
freshwater shortages by 2030. Because only about 3% of all water on Earth is
suitable for human consumption and the oceans contain 97% of the Earth’s water,
energy-efficient desalinization (salt separation) technologies are crucial for
maintaining society’s quality of life. Reverse osmosis (RO) is currently the
most employed and reliable method for water desalinization; however,
improvements in process efficiency are needed to make it a more sustainable
treatment option. These improvements center on the physical and chemical
characteristics of the membrane materials and membrane modules to address issues
related to salt selectivity, water permeability, and chemical tolerance. This
project will produce new generations of membrane materials that could possibly
be more stable, selective, and energy-efficient than current RO membranes.
Moreover, these materials and systems have the potential to be modified for
other water purification applications such as the removal of specific
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
new membrane materials will be based on two-dimensional covalent organic
frameworks (2D-COFs), 2D polymers with a defined but modifiable pore structure,
which can be synthesized with a high degree of order. Furthermore, the effort
will develop synthetic strategies for putting a wide variety of functional
groups in the pores. The 2D flake-like nature of the materials make them
naturally suited for semipermeable membrane applications. The focus of the
project will be on placing charged functional groups in the pores and changing
the pore sizes to make ion-selective membranes that reject either anions or
cations with a specific size threshold. The interdisciplinary team associated
with this project consists of a synthetic organic chemist, an
electrochemist/materials scientist, a membrane engineering specialist, and a
computational scientist. Thus, the project will use a feedback loop between the
organic synthesis of the membrane, membrane performance testing, and
computational modeling and machine learning to guide the syntheses of the new
membrane materials and optimize their performance for a particular separation.
When this is combined with the input and actions of the industrial partner on
the effort, this project will take a Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) approach
to research such that materials discovery and deployment is
accelerated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.