* 2118083
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Building Future Research Workforce in Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Zhipeng Cai, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,245.00

The goal of the project is to train current and future research workforce
members in trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI) by developing instructional
materials that expose students to various challenges of trustworthy AI systems.
The project is focused on the vital national need for well-trained and highly
knowledgeable researchers in trustworthy AI who are capable of solving real
world problems in complex AI systems and help enable secure and safe adoption of
AI systems. The project will have direct and long-term impact in both the public
and private sectors by training the research workforce to address trustworthy AI
challenges. Georgia State University is a minority-serving institution (MSI),
and the project will form a coordination network consisting of research
universities, 4-year colleges, historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs), Hispanic-serving institutions (HSIs), and women’s colleges in Metro
Atlanta and the broader region. The collaboration will significantly increase
the collective impact of the project, benefit numerous students from
underrepresented groups and help increase the diversity of the research
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will develop interactive
instructional materials including a set of hands-on labs that employ state-of-
the-art trustworthy AI techniques to address the various challenges of AI
systems. The instructional materials to be developed include modules on
adversarial machine learning, evasion attacks and defenses, data poisoning
attacks and defenses, privacy attacks and defenses, testing and verification,
and fairness, accountability, transparency, and ethics (FATE). The project
employs learning science principles, specifically the active learning and
inquiry-based learning strategies that result in deeper understanding by
students and provide formative feedback to instructors. The instructional
materials are based on real-world systems and are designed to systematically
cover fundamental principles in trustworthy AI and practical skills. The project
also will provide guidelines to help instructors integrate the modules into
their curriculum. The hands-on labs will be built based on only open-source
software and tools that are free to use for educational purposes and will be
distributed via free cloud platforms. The project evaluation includes formative
and summative evaluations that use both quantitative and qualitative approaches
and will be conducted by an experienced external evaluator with help from the
project team. The project will disseminate the developed materials through
training workshops for the educational and research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.