* 2118179
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Runtime Verification at the Edge
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Houssam Abbas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Today's autonomous technologies are now instrumented as limited-resource nodes
collecting large amounts of data in real-time to better track and explain their
system’s and environment’s behavior. A 2019 Cisco study found that there are
28.5 billion networked devices and connections in the world. Within this massive
ecosystem, one class of future critical applications stands out: software
applications that use networked nodes to provide detection of safety risks in
the system or its physical environment. Example applications that require such
monitoring include fleets of autonomous vehicles, health-monitoring wearable
devices, search-and-rescue, and climate monitoring. These applications are
already transforming lives, but suffer from a lack of timely, reliable and
energy-efficient tools to monitor their correct operation. The focus of this
project is to provide precisely such a monitoring infrastructure. This requires
overcoming several difficulties. First, the monitoring code must be
automatically generated, rather than hand-written, as this reduces the
likelihood of errors. The monitor must be able to deal with analog/physical
signals produced by the observed phenomena, such as wave heights or
temperatures. It must also deal with drifting clocks on the different nodes,
which do not read the same moment in time. It must also be resilient to node
crashes and malicious attacks. Finally, it must be distributed over the nodes,
rather than centralized, since this is less prone to catastrophic failures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project radically extends the reach of runtime
monitoring to new and economically important edge applications. This is achieved
by implementing three research thrusts. (1) Develop theory and algorithms for
distributed monitoring of continuous-time, asynchronous signals. The algorithms
perform distributed optimization on the edge nodes themselves, thus eliminating
the need for a central monitor. The algorithms incorporate partial knowledge of
signal dynamics, where available, to accelerate convergence. (2) Develop theory
and algorithms for incremental monitoring, where intermediate calculation
results are still usable by the application should some nodes crash. The
monitors will also accommodate nodes that intentionally falsify their data. (3)
Conduct a rigorous validation of the algorithms on realistic autonomous
vehicles, to establish their performance within a full software stack and in the
presence of real-world noise and failure conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.