* 2118522
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Developing Damage Resistant Materials for Hydrogen Storage and Large-scale Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Wei Cai, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

With the promise of a hydrogen economy being closer to reality than it has even
been, there is an important need for the design, development, and deployment of
appropriate materials that can support and sustain the promise of a hydrogen-
based infrastructure. One of the important scientific challenges associated with
developing a hydrogen-compatible infrastructure is an understanding of the
fundamentals of hydrogen-induced degradation in materials and developing
appropriate hydrogen-resistant materials for storage and transport applications.
By developing a computationally driven multi-scale modeling platform that will
be informed by, and integrated with, experiments, this Designing Materials to
Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project aims to accelerate the
pace at which the controlling mechanisms of hydrogen embrittlement are
discovered. As envisioned by the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), this project
will aim to enable the faster development of hydrogen-resistant materials for
the energy transportation sector as it transitions from the transport of fossil
fuels to hydrogen-based sources. Beyond the field of hydrogen storage and
transport, the fundamental insights obtained from this project could also be
helpful in designing fatigue- and corrosion-resistant sub-surface steel
structures with longer lifetimes, which could enable materials designs for many
other industries as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance
fundamental knowledge of crack tip processes that control damage accumulation
and propagation under fatigue loading and the role of hydrogen in making the
material more susceptible to fracture. It is hypothesized that the controlling
mechanisms occur in the plastic zone around the crack tip, over a length scale
of about 1 to 10 microns, which is too small for continuum theory to be
predictive and too large for atomistic simulations to handle by brute force.
Such a knowledge gap at the mesoscale will be closed through a tightly coupled
experimental-computational program. Computational efforts will build upon the
recent advances made in atomistic simulations, dislocation dynamics simulations,
with insights on crystal plasticity and continuum-level modeling. The
experimental efforts will leverage improved and unique capabilities that include
nanoindentation, x-ray tomography (in conjunction with Brookhaven National
Laboratory), and in situ testing in hydrogen environments (to be conducted at
Sandia National Laboratory). By combining modeling and experiments over multiple
length-scales, an experimentally validated multi-scale model for hydrogen
effects on fatigue evolution in ferritic steels could be established. Insights
obtained from this project have the potential to lead to the development of
reliable engineering roadmaps for life prediction and risk assessment for
hydrogen storage and transport structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.