* 2118380
* Bimodal Haptic-Mixed Reality (HMR) Needle Insertion Simulation for Hand-Eye Skills
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeremy Jarzembak, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 693,500.00

Although performing intravenous (IV) insertion is a very common medical
procedure, it is technically difficult to master as demonstrated by the 35%-50%
failure rate resulting in a negative cycle of re-insertions leading to increased
patient harm and costs to the healthcare system. Faulty IV insertions in real-
world conditions are related to vein variables (vein rolling or resistant to
puncture) and patient variables (touch skin, skin coloring). Experts in nursing
education have advocated for self-paced integration of simulation-based
technologies to deliberately practice IV skills while receiving immediate
feedback for error correction. However, using currently developed simulators or
manikin arms fails to capture the actual realism and psychomotor techniques
adaptive to variability needed to gain procedural mastery of the skill. To
enhance the current learning environment, technological advances are needed to
create a realistic learning platform with variability that maximizes the skill
transfer and long-term retention. The proposed work is to fill the gap by
developing a novel simulation system using haptics and mixed reality (HMR) and
investigating the learning impacts. This work is significant because current
haptic technologies combined with extended reality do not yet provide sufficient
realism and variability to effectively develop the fine motor skills. Further,
studies have not been conducted on the educational impact of bimodal HMR
simulation with variable conditions that can adaptively create realistic patient
environments during training. Upon developing the successful nature of the
proposed research, new insight into effective learning technology as well as
causes of improved learning in hand-eye skills will be provided, which may be
used to improve learning in similar settings or be transformative to other
fields such as cyber teaching and learning, hand skill training at work,
immersive dexterous interfaces, motor skill development for people with
disabilities, STEM learning, robotic surgery, and medical
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a bimodal HMR system,
using emerging technologies, haptics and MR, to simulate IV needle insertion
with variable conditions that will create a realistic learning environment for
students to master insertion tactile skills using two hands; and investigate
whether variability in practice (disuse theory) improves needle insertion
skills. To achieve these goals, the project will be divided into two phases:
Phase I and II. Phase I will focus on developing the bimodal haptic simulation
using two complimentary haptic devices, a haptic glove and a stylus haptic
device, integrated with MR to simulate virtual patients and IV needle insertion
with variable training conditions (skin color and stiffness, vein rolled, or
resistant to puncture). In Phase II studies, 360 (180 per year) nursing students
will be randomly assigned to experience training sessions in one of the three
modes (HMR-static, HMR-variable, manikin arm). To measure learners’ IV insertion
skills, trained evaluators (faculty members) from the College of Nursing will
observe and evaluate participants’ skills based on an established IV insertion
skill checklist through exams. Post training surveys will be collected in terms
of the realism and the user experience (usability) and those data will be used
for continuously improving the HMR system. This research will advance the
knowledge related to developing innovative learning and teaching environments
using emerging technologies and provide empirical evidence of impactful
variables that affect learning performance. The developed platform as an
automatic self-practice system will provide free access to this medium for
instructors and students alike in healthcare or related communities to extend
and use even under a pandemic, for broadening participation for under-
represented and financially challenged groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.