* 2119103
* DMREF: AI-Guided Accelerated Discovery of Multi-Principal Element Multi-Functional Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Ibrahim Karaman, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,799,981.00

Shape Memory Alloys (SMAs) are a class of metallic alloys that undergo
reversible and repeatable martensitic transformations (MT) upon applying stress,
magnetic fields, and/or temperature changes. These transformations can enable a
wide range of technologies, including compact solid-state actuators, solid-state
refrigerators, thermal storage and management systems, and structures that are
stable against wide temperature changes. Unfortunately, current alloy
formulations (with relatively simple chemistries) have been found to have
significant limitations in their performance that prevent their widespread
deployment in transformative technologies. This has pushed the field towards
exploring alloys with increasingly complex chemistries and with more than three
or four constituents being present in significant amounts [i.e., multi-principal
element multi-functional alloys (MPEMFAs)]. Navigating this vast chemical space
is extremely challenging. To address this challenge, this project will develop a
novel closed-loop materials design framework, which can integrate experiments,
computational materials science models, and machine learning (ML) / artificial
intelligence (AI) approaches, with customized interfaces connecting experiments,
models, existing data, and more critically, researchers across disciplines. This
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project
aims to result in an enhanced understanding of an important class of materials
to enable a wide range of technologies. Participating students will be trained
in interdisciplinary approaches to materials discovery in the spirit of the
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
discover MPEMFAs with extreme property combinations, such as ultra-high
temperature martensitic transformations (MTs) with low hysteresis, stable
reversible shape change under stress, superelasticity at temperatures
significantly beyond state-of-the-art; extreme properties, such as Invar and
Elinvar effects up to 800Â°C; or uniquely tailored properties, such as SMAs-as-
phase-change-materials (PCMs) with high thermal conductivity and transformation
enthalpy but also with widely different MT temperatures. To navigate this vast
chemical space a new framework will be developed that: (i) employs novel
physics-informed machine learning to efficiently identify the feasible regions
amenable to optimization; (ii) fuses simulations and experiments to obtain
efficient ML models; (iii) develops new Batch (parallel) Bayesian Optimization
(BO) strategies to make globally optimal iterative experimental design; and (iv)
is capable of simultaneously considering multiple objectives and constraints.
The aim is to go beyond accelerated discovery, seeking to address questions
about the underlying factors responsible for the multi-functional behavior in
MPEMFAs. The generated metadata, together with the computation and ML models,
open-access code, end-to-end workflows, as well as high quality databases, will
provide a testbed for developing and validating ML/AI frameworks when learning
complex systems under data scarcity, particularly in ML/AI-drive materials
discovery. The project will leverage the recently established interdisciplinary
graduate certificate on materials science, informatics and design, Data-Enabled
Discovery and Design of Energy Materials (D3EM), to train the PhD students
supported by this effort, contributing to the workforce development goals of the
Materials Genome Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.