* 2119308
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Machine Learning Algorithm Prediction and Synthesis of Next Generation Superhard Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Sara Kadkhodaei, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,414,494.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
discover new materials that possess the properties needed to enable the
technologies of the future. Many materials have outstanding properties that make
them desirable for some applications but are deficient in other properties that
limit their use. A well-known example is diamond, which is the hardest known
material but is also an electrical insulator. Is there a material yet to be
discovered that could satisfy the need for a superhard material that also has
the high electrical conductivity of a metal or other useful properties? This
project will combine diverse areas of expertise to search for new superhard
materials that also possess other desirable properties that enable them to
fulfill uniquely demanding technological requirements. Both three-dimensional
and two-dimensional forms of these materials will be synthesized. A feedback
loop between experiment and theory will be used to characterize the materials,
rationally design those with desired properties, and optimize the synthesis
protocols. Students will be trained in an interdisciplinary collaborative team
of theoreticians and experimentalists whose expertise includes chemistry,
physics, and materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine newly developed crystal
structure prediction with experiments for the discovery and synthesis of novel
superhard materials, including those with additional functionality. The
theoretical effort will pioneer a novel method for crystal structure
calculations that merges a priori evolutionary algorithms with machine learning
techniques. The experimental effort will employ high pressure-temperature
synthesis methods along with techniques such as chemical vapor deposition to
create metastable materials starting with thin films. The project will focus on
the creation of new materials consisting of the light elements boron, carbon,
and nitrogen, either alone or combined with heavier metallic elements. The new
materials will be characterized by a variety of methods, including advanced
spectroscopic techniques such as those now available at synchrotron facilities.
The theoretical techniques will guide the choice of target materials for
synthesis and the most promising precursor materials and synthesis pathways. The
developed computational tools will be made available under open source licenses,
thereby contributing towards cyberinfrastructure. Student training in theory and
experiment will advance STEM initiatives through summer research experiences and
undergraduate course development, including those targeting underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.