* 2119303
* Inclusively-designing sensory extensions for STEM inquiry learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Emily Moore, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 850,000.00

This project investigates innovative sensory extension device technologies to
create learning materials that are accessible and enable diverse learners to use
multiple modalities in science and mathematics learning. The new technologies
will be designed, crafted, customized, and personalized by STEM learners with
diverse needs. Humans think and communicate using multiple sensory modalities,
including sight, sound, gesture, movement, and touch. Most science and
mathematics learning materials convey information visually, with displays such
as diagrams and simulations, resulting in learning experiences with limited
sensory engagement. For many learners with visual or print-related disabilities,
visual learning materials are inaccessible. Even for others, these materials
constrain learning opportunities. Sensory extension incorporates materials and
devices to enable new or enhanced perceptions of real or virtual environments.
Familiar sensory extension devices include eyeglasses (refractive lenses improve
vision), and Geiger counters (auditory perception of radioactive decay). In an
inclusive co-design process, the project team will partner with diverse members
of the learning community, together co-designing flexible, adaptive, and
personalizable technologies, which enable new sensory experiences (e.g., sound,
gesture, movement, and touch) to augment popular and widely used interactive
simulation learning tools. The project team brings together experts in
educational technologies at the University of Colorado Boulder (PhET Interactive
Simulations and the Craft Tech Lab) and partner organizations serving youth with
learning disabilities and visual impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will work to create new learning materials, practices and processes for
inclusive design with youth, as well as theories and frameworks for the use of
sensory extension technologies as learning resources. To accomplish this, the
team will investigate (1) pedagogical and design practices within inclusive
inquiry learning in STEM learning settings; (2) the co-design and evolution of
sensory extension devices; (3) learnersâ€™ experiences of the impact of the
inclusive design process on their own perceptions of self-efficacy and STEM; and
(4) the learning experience of youth with diverse needs using sensory extension
devices for STEM inquiry. The sensory extension devices are expected to enable
new forms of collaboration among learners with differing sensory needs, and
couple with existing educational technologies to expand their inclusive and
accessible use and enrich the learning experience for all users. A rich corpus
of data will be collected, tracking the trajectory of each design, including
video and audio recordings of co-design sessions and the sensory extension
devices in use, photographs of design artifacts and group activities, co-
designer reflections and interviews, and self-efficacy survey responses. Through
the inclusive co-design process, the project will work to advance foundational
understanding of egalitarian processes of educational technology development,
embrace sensory diversity, and empower educationally marginalized learners
through the creation, customization, and personalization of their own innovative
learning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.