* 2119691
* RII Track-2 FEC: Artificial Intelligence on Sustainable Energy Infrastructure Network (AI SUSTEIN)  and Beyond towards Industries of the Future
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Haitao Liao, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,999,179.00

A sustainable energy supply is a critical driver for our nationâ€™s continued
industrial and economic growth. Therefore, it is necessary to make current and
future energy infrastructures more responsive and resilient. This Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2
FEC) award, led by North Dakota State University with collaborators: University
of Arkansas - Fayetteville, University of Nevada - Las Vegas, and Nueta Hidatsa
Sahnish College, aims to enhance technological progress and economic growth of
the jurisdiction states and the nation, while creating a new generation of
workforce ready for the era of AI. The unique challenges faced by the
jurisdiction states, including dispersed populations, extreme weather
conditions, weak positions in energy networks and/or agriculture-based
economies, motivate the team to explore an AI-based framework capable of
identifying the vulnerable elements in the energy and related infrastructure
networks, quantifying the health of the energy infrastructure, and providing
automated resilience strategies against the impacts of catastrophic failures for
a secured energy supply. This project will overcome critical regional and
national issues related to vulnerable energy systems by creating holistic
solutions against the negative impacts of energy disruptions on complex
interdependent infrastructure networks via the exploration of innovative AI,
engineering, economics, and operations research methodologies. The
interdisciplinary team, consisting of experts in industrial engineering, civil
and environmental engineering, computer science (especially AI), electrical
engineering (especially power systems), public policy and economics, will
explore the related methodologies that will be widely disseminated and
implemented in a broad cross-section of industries where AI can contribute. The
collaborative effort will promote AI as an industry of the future and generate
immediate tangible impacts on industries in desperate need of an AI-proficient
workforce by offering an AI-related associate degree and minor programs. The
team will also support early career faculty, postdocs, graduate and
undergraduate students, especially Native American and Hispanic participants
from tribal and minority serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit goal of the Artificial Intelligence on Sustainable Energy
Infrastructure Network (AI SUSTEIN) is to establish a collaborative research
program to investigate the potential of AI as a driving force for bringing about
radical changes to critical infrastructures and industries. AI SUSTEIN will
conduct the following research activities: (1) understand and quantify the
interdependency in infrastructure networks and perform risk and economic impact
assessment on both the industrial and economic aspects using AI; (2) develop a
decentralized AI-based health monitoring and failure prediction system of energy
infrastructure using real-time data; and (3) create a strategic framework for
improving the resilience of energy infrastructure and local industries via AI-
enhanced maintenance planning, optimization, and decision-making. The broader
impact goals of AI SUSTEIN are to 1) serve as a vital source of information and
resources; 2) partner with all the stakeholders especially industries to
ultimately form a research center in AI and data analytics, and 3) develop
diverse workforce and empower them with necessary AI skills. AI SUSTEIN will
engage in the following workforce development/educational efforts: (1) develop
an interdisciplinary team-taught course on AI and data analytics in critical
infrastructure and provide research training to students from tribal and
minority serving institutions; (2) mentor and support junior faculty; (3) create
and offer a technical assistance program for infrastructure industry on AI and
big data approaches for real-time condition monitoring, maintenance planning,
and reliability issues and partner with the industries to secure their
commitment and support for establishing an NSF Industry-University Cooperative
Research Center; and (4) facilitate and coordinate the formation of an associate
degree program on AI at a tribal college and offer an AI minor at the
participating universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.