* 2119671
* DMREF/GOALI/Collaborative Research: Physics-Informed Artificial Intelligence for Parallel Design of Metal Matrix Composites and their Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Wenda Tan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2025
* USD 622,222.00

This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF)
research enables physics-informed artificial intelligence (AI) design of metal
materials reinforced with ceramic particles (metal matrix composites) and their
additive manufacturing (3D printing). Such materials can exhibit superior
mechanical performances at higher temperatures relative to the same metal
material without ceramic reinforcements. Additive manufacturing provides
unprecedented fabrication capability for high performance, lightweight
structural components made from metal matrix composite materials. However, the
design of metal matrix composites and their additive manufacturing is largely
performed with expensive, time consuming trial and error methodologies; quality
assurance of such parts is similarly challenged. AI-guided design and
qualification of materials and their manufacturing can significantly lower the
time and cost barriers to such technologies. The basic research performed in
this program will fill critical gaps to enable AI discovery and optimization of
these materials and their manufacturing toward reducing deployment times and
costs by half, to meet the Materials Genome Initiative vision. The outreach
programs and diversity, equity, and inclusion plans include AI manufacturing
course curricula spanning kindergarten - graduate which include example problems
and tools developed from this program. Atlanta and Salt Lake City high school
teachers and students from underrepresented minority populations will receive
hands-on experience and instruction in these curricula. The research maintains
and expands robust programs supporting fundamental research in alloys, ceramics,
and their composites; support modalities for free-flowing interactions among
universities (Georgia Tech and Utah), start-up ventures (GOALI partner Elementum
3D), and national laboratories (Air Force Research Laboratory); expand
investments in automated materials manufacturing research to ensure the U.S. is
the leader in the field by 2030; all using, when appropriate, computational
methods, data analytics, machine learning, and autonomous experimental 3D
characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program enables physics-
informed artificial intelligence (AI) - driven parallel design of metal matrix
composites and their additive manufacturing. The concept of AI that discovers
and optimizes new materials and their Additive Manufacturing (AM) in parallel
promises to further revolutionize AM but is yet to be realized. Basic research
is to enable autonomous AI discovery and optimization of materials and their
manufacturing toward reducing deployment times and costs by half, to meet the
Materials Genome Initiative vision. Five critical data-driven algorithmic gaps
will be filled: 1) data analysis-interpretation-curation algorithms to enable
automatic, pedigreed data curation from requisite process-structure-property
data sources. 2) Algorithms that automate data cleaning and concatenation of
databases so that AI can modify and append the data spaces when new data sources
or data features are incorporated into a research problem. 3) Algorithms that
automate data feature mapping across multiple length and time scales to complete
process-structure-property data ontologies. 4) Data feature engineering
algorithms that improve the AI performance. 5) Process-structure-property
machine learning models that learn global relationships across multiple nested
submodels. Physics-based models and experiments will be advanced to predict and
verify their utility in discovering and optimizing metal matrix composites and
their additive manufacturing at multiple length and time scales. High throughput
one-dimensional, two-dimensional, and three-dimensional characterization data
analyses will be automated. GOALI partner Elementum 3D will provide a techno-
economic baseline study of commercializing a new metal matrix composite for
additive manufacturing to be used as an overall assessment metric for the
advancements made in this program. The development of a new AM test artifact
will benefit researchers around the globe. The protocols and standards developed
for automating data workflows can benefit materials science and engineering
researchers around the world by increasing access to high-throughput and high-
fidelity data sources, including machine learning models and AI knowledge
systems, for all kinds of materials and manufacturing
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG), the Division of Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) in
the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), and
the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.