* 2119689
* RII Track-2 FEC: Natural Resource Supply Chain Optimization using Aerial Imagery Interpreted with Machine Learning Methods
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2026
* Joel Harper, University of Montana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,925,956.00

The University of Montana and the University of Alaska, Anchorage will conduct
scientific research that is responsive to the needs of their natural resource
based economies. Specifically, questions from the areas of snow water resources,
wildland fire management, and abandoned oil well monitoring will drive the
research agenda. The scientific work is united by a common set of techniques for
answering questions. Moreover, the common approach is to: 1) Use unmanned flying
vehicles called drones to collect pictures and other measurements. While the
information acquired by drones is high quality, it is also a large amount of
complex data. 2) To aid in the data’s interpretation and address the science
questions, we use machine learning methods that train computers to identify
patterns in data. Collecting data using drones and the use of machine learning
are critical skills for America’s future workforce. Our activities are aligned
with career training through partnerships with local companies and internships
for participating students. With the emphasis on internships, the focus will be
retention, rather than recruitment of students. Diversity and inclusion efforts
will work in tandem with workforce development to ensure that Indigenous, low
income, and rural members of our jurisdictions are integral to the efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is proposed to use machine learning (ML) to process
imagery and other data acquired by autonomous aerial systems (UAS). Processed
data will support scientific research in natural resource management by
providing a clear means of testing hypotheses. The three areas of natural
resource management to apply this approach are: 1) snow water resources, because
energy production, agricultural output, and economic growth require improved
assessment of the natural capital banked in the mountain snowpack. 2) fire
management and science, because an advanced understanding of the physical and
ecological processes driving wildfire is required for management practices that
better protect forests and the critical infrastructure within them. 3) abandoned
oil well monitoring, because detecting and mapping uncapped or improperly sealed
oil and gas wells will provide critical data for improved mitigation, site
reclamation, and hazard removal. The team bring together the University of
Montana and the University of Alaska Anchorage to conduct locally relevant
research. The local focus strengthens the relations with nearby commercial
interests to identify questions common to academic and commercial endeavors in
modern natural resource based economies. Attention is called to UAS and ML as
skills vital to both commercial and academic work. To advance the natural
resource based advanced manufacturing industries of the jurisdictions, special
consideration is given to developing a workforce that spans from two-year
college graduates to junior faculty members. This award's plan centers on paid,
credit-bearing internships with key partners, drawing commercial interests into
the proposed work, and bringing junior faculty to the research. Diversity and
inclusion efforts will work in tandem with workforce development to ensure that
Indigenous, low income, and rural members of the jurisdictions are an integral
part of efforts. With the emphasis on internships, the focus will be retention,
rather than recruitment of students. The project engages with disruptive
technologies that have long reaching consequences for workers. To address the
consequences related to these technologies, the team enlisted the aid of a
social scientist to conduct studies evaluating the social and economic
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.