* 2119902
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: The Alliance of Students with Disabilities for Inclusion, Networking, and Transition Opportunities in STEM (TAPDINTO-STEM)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2027
* Overtoun Jenda, Auburn University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Christopher Atchison
* 07/31/2027
* USD 3,779,001.00

Persons with disabilities are one of the most significantly underrepresented
groups in STEM education and employment, comprising a disproportionately smaller
percentage of STEM degrees and jobs compared to their percentages in the U.S.
population. The NSF INCLUDES Alliance of Students with Disabilities for
Inclusion, Networking, and Transition Opportunities in STEM, also known as the
NSF INCLUDES TAPDINTO-STEM Alliance, will employ a collective impact approach
with dozens of partnering organizations to increase the number of students with
disabilities (SWDs) who complete associate, baccalaureate and graduate STEM
degrees and enter the STEM workforce. Auburn University is leading this NSF
INCLUDES Alliance’s primary partnerships with five institutions of higher
education (IHE) that will direct regional hubs of collaborating IHEs to address
this national need. The hubs will be championed by Auburn University
(Southeastern Hub), Northern Arizona University (Mountain Hub), The Ohio State
University (Northeastern Hub), the University of Hawaii-Manoa (Islands Hub), the
University of Missouri-Kansas City (Midwest Hub) and the University of
Washington (West Coast Hub). The NSF INCLUDES Alliance partners include 27 IHEs
with three professional organizations: The Association of University Centers on
Disability, the Association on Higher Education And Disability and the Learning
Disabilities Association of America. The partners will expand the NSF INCLUDES
TAPDINTO-STEM Alliance to include over 50 IHEs to address the broadening
participation vision of increasing the education of SWDs in STEM at the post-
secondary academic levels and their transitions to STEM employment. The
University of Missouri-Kansas City serves as the backbone organization, led by
Alexis Petri, to support communication, engagement, networked systems, data
collection and analyses, sustainability, scaling and dissemination. An internal
evaluation will be led by Auburn University personnel, and a team of external
evaluators will be led by Linda P. Thurston, who is a professor emerita at
Kansas State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary project work targets
three objectives, two focused on students and the other on institutions: 1)
Increasing the quantity of SWDs completing associate, undergraduate, and
graduate degrees in STEM; 2) Facilitating the transitions of SWDs from STEM
degree completion into the STEM workforce; and 3) Enhancing communication and
collaboration among IHEs, industry, government, national labs, and local
communities in addressing the education needs of SWDs in STEM disciplines. To
support SWDs in successfully completing their degrees, the NSF INCLUDES
TAPDINTO-STEM Alliance will provide professional development for faculty, staff
and STEM professionals to increase their formal involvement, as mentors and
research collaborators, with SWDs. Furthermore, the Alliance will increase
collaboration among IHEs, industry, government, national labs, and communities
to address the education needs of SWDs in STEM disciplines, leading to increased
opportunities for SWDs in internships, apprenticeships and employment in the
STEM workforce. Additionally, each of the Alliance’s hub institutions will lead
a research study about SWDs in STEM. The Auburn University team, which leads the
Southeast Hub, will investigate the relationship between student background
experiences and dispositions (e.g., student demographics, family background,
motivation, academic efficacy) and persistence; and they will study the
relationship between organizational context factors and student experiences on
student commitment, persistence, and academic retention. The Northern Arizona
University team, which leads the Mountain Hub, will investigate, using an
intersectionality lens, what are the disconnections and gaps between: a) the
experiences of students related to bias, discrimination and stigma; b) the
information and messaging available to IHE faculty and staff pertaining to
inclusion and recognizing intersectionality; and c) IHE faculty and staff
perceptions that perpetuate bias, discrimination and stigma. The Northeast Hub
team, led by The Ohio State University, will study what support services used by
students with autism spectrum disorders promote academic success and are valued
by students; and which academic, social and employment experiences are
correlated with increased employment outcomes. The Islands Hub team, led by the
University of Hawaii-Manoa, will investigate how a variety of factors (e.g.,
historical, social, cultural, disability, and personal) facilitate or impede the
development of student attitudes toward and access to postsecondary education in
STEM, identity development in STEM, and persistence towards and graduation with
a STEM degree. The Midwest Hub team, led by the University of Missouri-Kansas
City, will examine how the student success model each NSF INCLUDES TAPDINTO-STEM
Alliance institution implements increases the access, entry, progress and
completion of students in their programs; and they will study how the student
success model each institution implements aids in the transition of students
from college to the workforce. The University of Washington team, which leads
the West Coast Hub, will compare information from the NSF INCLUDES TAPDINTO-STEM
Alliance students with data from an ongoing longitudinal study to examine which
interventions students regard as most valuable, investigate patterns linking
student demographics or interests with the interventions used, and study
suggestions for improving or expanding interventions. Together, this research
will advance knowledge about the STEM academic pathways of SWDs and their
transitions to the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is
primarily funded by NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners
of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a
comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and
innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in
STEM at scale. The Alliance is jointly funded by the NSF Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.