* 2119446
* GP-UP: Geoscience Engagement: Growing Interest at Hispanic-Serving Institutions by Scaffolding Classroom Intervention to Service-Learning Projects
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Judith Haschenburger, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2025
* USD 403,859.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite concerted effort over the
last two decades, the size and diversity of the geoscience workforce has not
significantly changed to meet the projected demand for geoscientists, which has
major consequences for the sustainability of natural resources and overall
environmental quality that supports a strong economy and ensures the health and
welfare of all United States residents. This project aims to address this
shortfall using an innovative curriculum program to recruit and retain more
undergraduate students from historically excluded groups; it will promote
interest in geoscience within 2-year institutions where geoscience courses are
limited and facilitate transfer pathways from 2- to 4-year institutions and
retention to degree completion so students earn the educational credential
needed to enter the geoscience workforce. The new insights gained from the
program will form a model of best practices that can be adapted and implemented
at other universities to grow a larger, more diverse geoscience
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to broaden participation and
enhance retention in geoscience by implementing and testing the effectiveness of
a three-stage early intervention strategy within the undergraduate degree arena.
Conducted at the Hispanic Serving Institutions of Northwest Vista College and
the University of Texas at San Antonio, the three-year program will generate
greater awareness of and interest in geoscience in introductory STEM courses and
promote retention through extracurricular service-learning projects. In
introductory geoscience, chemistry, and physics courses, four modules will test
the effectiveness of a recruitment strategy that targets specific barriers and
motivations to broaden and diversify the pool of geoscience majors and minors.
Participants will be supported by multi-level mentoring, advising, a transfer
bridging event, and stipends; a program-specific interactive website will
facilitate formal and informal learning and interactions between students,
faculty, professionals, and community. The project design permits a critical
test of a recruitment approach that targets a wider pool of potential majors and
the critical elements of service-learning projects that promote learning and
retention. The new knowledge identified from formative and summative program
assessments will be widely transferrable because it focuses on introductory
courses that are generally offered at many institutions and experiential
learning experiences that can flourish independently from formal
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.