* 2119833
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Accelerating Adoption of Sintering-Assisted Additive Manufacturing Using Integrated Experiments, Theory, Simulation and Data Science
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Rajendra Bordia, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 799,368.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramic components are important for commercial and
strategic uses, ranging from tooling for materials processing and machining to
biomedical, energy storage, combustion, and other applications involving extreme
environments. Additive manufacturing approaches to produce ceramics include
binder jetting and robocasting of green ceramic parts, which are then sintered
at elevated temperatures to produce finished ceramic components. Progress in
this area is hampered by directional and spatial variations in the packing
density of the ceramic powder and multiple-scale defects within additively-
manufactured green ceramics. The result is undesired variations in the
properties and dimensional tolerances of the final parts. This project will
integrate experiments, theory, simulations, and data science expertise to
develop a new theory of sintering-assisted additive manufacturing to predict the
structure, properties, and dimensional changes of finished ceramic components.
The effort will use data-driven approaches to solve the inverse problem, so that
the required additive manufacturing and sintering conditions to achieve desired
high performance, high tolerance ceramic components can be specified in advance.
Anticipated outcomes include the tools and knowledge to significantly reduce
trial and error approaches to process advanced ceramics. A diverse team of
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the principles of the
Materials Genome Initiative, with experiential learning from three industrial
partners, the Air Force Research Laboratory, and two international research
centers. The research findings will be incorporated into graduate and
undergraduate courses taught by the investigators and meaningful partnerships to
reach out to middle and high school students will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of the proposed research is the development of a new type of
experimentally-guided and validated multi-scale model that accounts for the
micro- and macro-structural features arising from sintering-assisted additive
manufacturing (SAAM). A solution to the fundamental inverse sintering problem is
the ultimate objective of this project. It will enable the determination of the
optimal green state processing conditions, pre-sintered component shape, micro-
and macro-structures, and sintering conditions required to obtain the desired
shape, microstructure, and properties at the end of sintering. This project
concentrates on two commonly used additive manufacturing approaches – binder
jetting and robocasting. The proposed integration of computation and experiments
in a data-driven predictive framework addresses the complex interplay between
green-state processing conditions and anisotropic microstructure. The project
will provide fundamental knowledge and a novel practical approach to design and
optimize the manufacture of advanced ceramic systems with programmable
macroscopic characteristics, microstructure, properties, and performance. The
solution of the “inverse SAAM problem” will significantly reduce trial and error
experiments and will advance the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative by
accelerating the adoption of SAAM for advanced
ceramics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.