* 2119701
* Supporting Computational Literacy by Designing a Collaborative Platform at the Intersection of Music and Code
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Zang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 848,950.00

This project will design and build technology that empowers ensemble musical
performances with code while advancing the field of collaborative learning. It
addresses two critical challenges for science and technology learning in the
21st century. First, how do we develop broad-based computational literacy skills
for the next generation of learners? Second, how do we do that in a way that is
inclusiveâ€”engaging diverse learners who have been historically marginalized in
computational fields? The challenge of developing computational literacy is
important across scientific, creative, artistic, and trade professions because
computing is rapidly transforming all fields. As a result, skills such as
computer programming are becoming foundational for everyone. To support
motivation, learning, creative expression, and broadening participation, this
research will investigate the intersection of music (as an integral component of
contemporary culture) and computer programming in the design of a new
collaborative technology platform. The platform takes inspiration from
community-centered discourse and participation structures, such as drum circles,
improvisational performance, and jam sessions. Participants will collaborate in
online compositions by simultaneously writing computer code to play virtual
musical instruments. Through a close partnership with the YMCA of Evanston,
Illinois, the project will directly impact thousands of young learners in and
around Chicago, and beyond, with a focus on students of color. The platform and
learning materials (including audio and video tutorials hosted on YouTube) will
be made freely available via a website to facilitate widespread adoption. These
interconnections have the potential to serve as a foundation for prolonged
interest, learning, creative expression, and lead to positive attitudes towards
computing from a more representative, computationally empowered
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on conceptual connections
between music and computer science to contribute to computational literacy,
informal learning in STEM and the arts, and creative and embodied approaches to
computing. The project designs and studies a collaborative music+coding platform
designed to give students freedom to tinker creatively, learn from their peers,
and playfully confront culturally ingrained expectations about who can and
should be a "computer person". The project will investigate the following
thematic pairs of research questions: (1) Technology Innovation: How can we
design technology that empowers ensemble musical performances with code? What
are the foundational affordances of this technology to facilitate both co-
located (multiple learners on the same physical stage) and distributed (multiple
learners performing on a virtual livestream) musical performances? (2) New
Models for Learning with Technology: How do we best design collaborative
music+coding environments? What are the affordances of such environments for
distributed collaboration, creativity, and computational literacy? (3)
Broadening Participation: How can the intersection of music and computational
literacy provide a context for prolonged interest and engagement for young
people who have been historically marginalized in computing careers? Can code
become a socially and culturally relevant medium of expression for creating and
sharing music?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.