* 2119334
* EAGER International Type II: Sustainable International Collaboration in Spatiotemporal Modeling of Human Mobility and Contagion Dynamics for COVID-19
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Changqing Cheng, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;To tame the COVID‐19 pandemic, staggering pullback in economic
and social activities has been imposed globally. Yet, the containment measures
can rapidly succumb to human mobility not accompanied by adequate precaution.
Absent treatment or vaccine for mass inoculation in the near future, it is
indispensable to adopt target-oriented intervention to avert the infection
resurgence and eschew mounting economic fallout before the return to normalcy.
This entails an accurate spatiotemporal predictive model that accounts for the
spatial heterogeneity and human motion. Notably, research in human mobility and
contagion dynamics cannot be done in isolation, and innovative solutions are
increasingly emanating from cross-border intellectual interactions. However,
with lockdown and travel restrictions in play, the traditional academic
activities have ground to a screeching halt, and the academia is embracing
virtual mobility and connectivity. This has also triggered concerns over the
quality and engagement of participants, and sustainable international
collaboration over the long run. This EAGER project will investigate how
spatiotemporal human mobility will affect the contagion dynamics of COVID-19,
which is conducive for optimal design of nonpharmaceutical intervention. It also
brings research scholars from the U.S., Japan and Australia to study the impact
of COVID-19 prevalence on international collaboration, and design innovative
mechanism to render such cross-border cooperation resilient and sustainable
against future disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. &lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary collaborative research integrates epidemic dynamics,
computational social science, statistical learning and systems engineering at an
unprecedented scale. The PI’s team will pursue the following research thrusts:
(1) Spatiotemporal modeling for human mobility and contagion dynamics and the
connection to intervention policy: A spatiotemporal compartmental model
considering human motion and asymptomatic infection will be developed to
delineate dynamical geographical prevalence of the contagion and the inherent
uncertainty. (2) Dynamic graph modeling for collaboration network: International
publication co-authorship will be represented as dynamic networks, which along
with disease prevalence will uncover the contagion impact on cross-border
cooperation, reveal weak coordination in existing partnerships and identify
future trend of international collaboration. (3) Innovative mechanism design for
sustainable international collaboration: Leveraging the emerging novel digital
infrastructure, the team will collectively explore open-science initiatives for
research interaction, documentation, protocol formulation and assessment for
resilient and sustainable collaboration. This project is anticipated to decipher
the impact of COVID-19 on international collaboration and design strategic
mechanism to foster future resilient and sustainable cross-border
cooperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.