* 2119716
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Computationally Driven Design of Synthetic Tissue-Like Multifunctional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Manish Kumar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

In nature, living cells join to form tissues capable of collective behaviors,
such as sensing and responding to external cues, communicating, sorting and
storing chemical species, and adapting their mechanical properties to sustain
necessary loads. Biological tissues achieve these desirable properties because
of careful control over the contents, arrangements, and interconnections of
individual cells, an approach that yields hierarchical materials with high
levels of adaptability, responsiveness, and tunable mechanical strength.
Replicating these types of emergent properties in synthetic materials remains a
major engineering challenge. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) award supports basic research and scientific
development of material systems that mimic the composition, organization, and
properties of living tissues. The computationally led designs of tissues-like
materials with precise compositions and spatial arrangements seek to offer a
generalizable solution for applications in artificial tissue replacement, wound
healing, soft robotics, and embedded computing technologies. In addition, the
project will support the technical and professional development of the STEM
workforce by promoting the participation of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students, especially from the first-generation and underrepresented
groups, through various outreach and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study synthetic tissues
comprised of independent cell-like compartments coupled hierarchically through
mechanical tethering (i.e., self-assembling block copolymer microgels (BCPs) as
synthetic cytoskeleton) and selective transport (i.e., protein-enriched
biomimetic membranes (BMs) as selective barriers) mechanisms and incorporating
stimuli-responsiveness (e.g., via polymers and membrane proteins) into the
compartments. Computational approaches combine molecular transport, stimuli-
responsive coupled deformations of BCPs, intercompartment adhesion, and
biomembrane mechanics to predict failure behaviors, emergent properties, and
functionalities of tissue-like assemblies. An iterative feedback loop between
theory, computations, synthesis of BCPs, 3D bioprinting, and microscale
mechanical characterization is central to the project for validating
predictions, informing model development, and creating a modular database. The
construction of a compartmentalized material system that exhibits selective
internal transport pathways via lipid- and protein-based BMs and tunable
mechanical properties via BCPs will be achieved by understanding how the tunable
hydrophobic and hydrophilic regions of BCPs: 1) interact with amphiphilic BMs at
the nanoscale; 2) self-assemble and entangle to form solid-like gels at the
microscale; 3) cross-link between compartments at the macroscale to rigidify the
entire assembly. Ultimately, this project will provide the quantitative
knowledge base and modular design criteria to accelerate the assembly and use of
compartmentalized tissue-like materials that are multifunctional, stimuli-
responsive, adaptable, tough, and operate outside of
equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Division of
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate for
Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.