* 2119435
* RII Track-2 FEC: Fundamental Insights into the Durability and Efficiencies of CO2 Electrolyzers
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Yushan Yan, Louisiana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,999,980.00

The objective of this work is to advance industrially-viable CO2 electrolyzers
and to develop a diverse workforce for sustainable chemical manufacturing.
Currently, common products such as detergents, anti-freeze, and tennis shoes are
made using natural gas or crude feedstocks and non-renewable energy. A new
process, discovered in 1985, showed that CO2 could be converted into the
precursor chemicals needed for these products; however, the rates and
efficiencies were far from being economically viable. Outcomes from this project
will reveal the fundamental science that controls durability and efficiency of
CO2 electrolyzers. The work is critical to improve the sustainability of one of
America’s largest manufacturing sectors. Chemical manufacturing is responsible
for supporting over 25% of the GDP and over 6 million jobs in the US. The work
is particularly important to the economies of Delaware and Louisiana where
chemical manufacturing is ranked either first or second in terms of
manufacturing’s contribution to gross state product. Further, this research
project will directly engage a diverse group of 9 investigators and over 70
graduate and undergraduate students along with representatives from leading
chemical manufacturers. Other outreach activities are planned to provide
meaningful experiences related to STEM education and careers for thousands of
K-12 students in Delaware and Louisiana. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
outcomes from this project will advance electrolytic production of ethanol and
ethylene from CO2 and H2O. We seek to understand critical parameters that
control durability and efficiencies of CO2 electrolyzers including the
underlying science that governs failures. Our work focuses on two types of
polymeric membranes (anionic and bipolar) along with copper, silver and cascade
(molecular + copper) electrocatalysts. Research aims are organized into:
systems, materials and characterization efforts. The system work focuses on
electrolyzer design, integration and technoeconomic analyses. The materials work
focuses on interfaces of polymeric membranes and electrocatalysts.
Characterization work focuses on atomic and molecular interactions and will be
probed using synchrotron-source x-rays, operando Raman and identical location
tunneling electron microscopy. Outcomes from the work would reveal how anionic
exchange membrane and bipolar membrane approaches influence reaction behaviors
and stability over long periods of electrolysis, how failures occur, how to
mitigate failures (including designing ideal interfaces) and how to perform
accelerated testing of promising electrolyzer materials. The planned activities
and collaborations leverage unique strengths and improve the research capacities
of two flagship universities: Louisiana State University and the University of
Delaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.