* 2119846
* Reimagining Advanced Research for Human Good through Industry and Educational Partnerships
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Stacy Hobson, IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 02/28/2022
* USD 98,000.00

This project will develop and convene a cross-sector and cross-disciplinary
workshop focused on the reimagining of advanced research in artificial
intelligence, quantum computing, cloud computing and other science and
technology related areas have the opportunity to change the world as we know it.
To ensure an equitable scientific future, we propose an ecosystem approach to
educating and training the next generation of advanced researchers and social
entrepreneurs that embrace the social sciences, arts and cultural relevance and
responsibility. We propose a consortia of public education programs, minority
serving institutions and technology companies to nurture and engage
underrepresented students in advanced research leveraging connections from K-12
to PhD, with many career options along the journey. Together, addressing the gap
in representation in advanced research and addressing high human impact research
areas, we have an opportunity to reimagine the future of science and the
potential for itsâ€™ impact for social good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
aims to advance a technical framework for the acceleration of use-inspired
convergence research in this area of national importance by bringing together
practitioners from various public and private institutions including
institutions of secondary and higher education, industrial and academic research
organizations, social justice organizations, government agencies, tech companies
and startups, along with students to discuss and address four topics: 1)Support
for advancement of underrepresented groups in STEM 2)Social and human good
research foundations 3)AI and technology supported education 4)Data trust
development. An ecosystem approach to re-envision science and technology
research topics, human good interests and interdisciplinarity to accelerate
education in science technology and society has been
proposed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.