* 2119011
* RETTL: Facilitating socially constructed learning through a shared, mobile-based virtual reality platform in informal learning settings
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Ogle, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 849,999.00

Virtual reality (VR) technologies have great potential in STEM education because
they provide immersive learning experiences that one cannot have in the real
world. However, interactivity using VR head-mounted displays is often a solitary
experience, isolating learners from the social and learning context. This makes
it challenging to learn through collaborations with peers and instructors.
Furthermore, many learners are excluded from using virtual reality headsets,
including children, those who wear glasses, and those vulnerable to health
concerns such as motion sickness, nausea, and falling. The project will develop
and deploy a mobile-device-based VR platform to enable social learning. The
project partners with the Science Museum of Western Virginia and the Institute
of Creativity, Arts, and Technology at Virginia Tech to support socially
constructed, informal STEM learning for their wide range of visitors, including
young children with family members, college students, and local K-12 school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's overarching objective is to
design, develop, and deploy an inclusive, socially connected virtual reality
platform and educational content. With the system, museum attendees can
collectively interact with STEM topics in virtual reality. The system will use
social virtual reality to allow multiple learners to engage with the learning
material, the instructor, and one another via and beyond motion-tracked mobile
devices. A shared physical space with the mobile-based virtual reality platform
will grant a diverse range of learners access to immersive STEM learning content
and their peers beyond the screen. The researchers will study how the shared
display technology facilitates socially constructed learning and enables novel
active learning techniques in informal learning settings. The results will
advance understanding of integrating virtual reality into inclusive settings and
promoting collaborative learning with VR to enhance learning
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.