* 2119864
* GP-UP: Scientist at Sea: Pathways to the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebekka Larson, Eckerd College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 389,413.00

Over the past few decades there have been an increasing number of issues related
to the geosciences including, but not limited to climate, natural hazards,
energy resources, and contaminant input to marine systems. Simultaneously, there
has been a significant decrease in geoscience training at the undergraduate
level, and very little diversity. Consequently, there are few well-defined
pathways for students to enter the geosciences at critical junctures. The goal
of this project is to increase the number and diversity of students entering the
geosciences workforce by increasing awareness, accessibility and enhancing
pathways into the geosciences. The primary objective is to integrate ongoing
research with new and unique undergraduate courses, to build core geoscience
competencies, and by developing those competencies, enhance pathways for diverse
cohorts of undergraduates to thrive in geoscience careers. This is executed
through two new applied research courses offered at EC entitled “Scientist at
Sea” (S-A-S), which consist of on-campus and off-campus (research cruise)
components, as well as peer mentorship, professional productivity, and
networking opportunities. This program will be integrated with a new college
initiative “Diversifying the Marine Science Pipeline” which will facilitate the
recruitment and retention of a more diverse student population to geoscience
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will prepare a more diverse group of
undergraduate students, most of whom already possess a strong interest in the
marine sciences, to pursue careers in the geosciences. It is well documented
that culturally-relevant, problem-based research experiences, such as the
Deepwater Horizon oil spill, which serves as the foundation of this project, can
be a very successful recruitment tool. This project provides early exposure for
students to obtain research experiences at a critical juncture in their
education for determining career paths. The project also proposes to increase
the skills and quality of graduating students, and quantity of students
continuing into geoscience careers (higher-education/academia, industry,
government). The project revolves around a series of new applied research
courses entitled “Scientist at Sea” (S-A-S), to be offered at EC, including a
research cruise experience, peer mentorship and professional productivity
opportunities, that encompass practical applied skills for planning, execution,
and professional products associated with research. Specific activities include:
1) science communication and outreach, 2) research cruise design, planning, and
implementation, and 3) networking, collaborating with professionals in academia,
government, private industry and other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.