* 2119663
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Living biotic-abiotic materials with temporally programmable actuation
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Rae Robertson-Anderson, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 422,714.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A team of five physicists, biologists, and
engineers aim to design and create a new class of self-directed, programmable,
and reconfigurable materials inspired by cells and capable of producing force
and motion. This approach will capitalize on two important design principles of
living organisms: (1) cells are composite in nature to meet numerous functional
demands, and (2) decision-making and timing are achieved through biomolecular
circuitry. This effort will couple synthetic hydrogels to living layers of
active polymer composites infused with cellular timing circuits to produce next-
generation materials that self-actuate programmable cycles of work and motion.
The proof-of-concept design will be a gap-closing micro-actuator that closes
upon exposure to light and then autonomously re-opens at times and locations
programmed into the embedded cell circuits. The material development aims,
customized high-throughput characterization, and publicly shared property-
formulation libraries will empower the broader Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
community to manufacture and deploy such disruptive materials of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effort will provide opportunities to a diverse set of
undergraduate, post-baccalaureate, graduate student, and postdoctoral
researchers to broaden the STEM-trained workforce pool. Specifically, the effort
will build a new undergraduate research and professional development program
with students pursuing interdisciplinary materials research across the five
campuses. By developing a fundamental understanding of how to manufacture and
control such materials, this project will enable exciting future applications
for self-healing infrastructure, self-regulating delivery vehicles, self-
propulsive materials, micro-robotics, and programmable dynamic
prosthetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research is to develop the foundational technologies,
predictive models, and formulation libraries needed to pioneer a new class of
autonomous reconfigurable materials with self-generated spatiotemporal control.
The project will engineer active biotic-abiotic materials that uniquely emulate
living organisms–performing robust autonomous programs without intervention–in
contrast to current active matter systems that are labile in nature and require
external triggers or contrived conditions to enable activity. Leveraging
advances in synthetic biology and active matter physics, and guided by multi-
scale mechanistic modeling, the effort will functionalize layers of abiotic
hydrogels and active cytoskeleton composites with cellular circuitry for in situ
bioproduction of material-modifying proteins to impart temporal control of
mechanics, structure and activity. This will allow the research to
spatiotemporally program restructuring, work, and motion with an autonomous gap-
closing actuator built from abiotic-biotic layers programmed to produce
cytoskeleton-modifying proteins on a user-defined schedule. In this way,
iterative design-build-test-learn cycles will be utilized to accelerate
discovery–linking theory, fabrication, computation, and characterization to
establish a broad phase space of structure-mechanics-function relationships. The
modular material platform, multi-scale mechanistic modeling, mechanical and
structural characterization, and publicly disseminated formulation-property
database will contribute to the overarching goals of the MGI to harness
autonomous, biomolecular systems and create next-generation programmable living
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.