* 2119927
* GP-GO: Growing the number and diversity of non-geoscience undergraduates in Cornell's graduate programs in Atmospheric and Geological Sciences with a Geoscience Learning Ecosystem
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Arthur DeGaetano, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,506.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate studies in the
geosciences require diverse skills and have the potential to attract students
from myriad undergraduate majors including chemistry, engineering, computer
science, physics, biology, geography, mathematics and the social and behavioral
sciences. Further, many geoscience graduate programs prepare students for
careers in societally relevant fields such as natural hazards, energy, water,
and mineral resources, and climate change, that should engage students from
these diverse undergraduate majors. However, several studies have shown that
student perceptions of careers in the geosciences do not match reality. PIs
propose to develop a geoscience learning ecosystem that will increase the
awareness of geoscience careers in students from diverse undergraduate majors at
the critical juncture between undergraduate and graduate school. PIs seek to
answer the question: Which strategies are most effective for increasing the
number and diversity of non-geoscience undergraduate majors that pursue post-
baccalaureate degrees in geoscience? The over-arching goal of the Cornell
Geopaths Geoscience Learning Ecosystem (CorGGLE) program will be to design and
test a novel summer bridge program that helps students from non-geoscience
fields transition into geoscience graduate programs, specifically giving them
exposure to myriad socially relevant careers in the geosciences. The key
elements of the project include: (1) engaging diverse undergraduate institutions
and students, (2) offering societally relevant summer research projects in
geosciences at Cornell, (3) highlighting professional and social development
across Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics fields facilitated by
Cornellâ€™s award-winning Diversity Programs in Engineering, and (4) providing
career mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the creation of a
connected geoscience learning ecosystem, PIs plan to develop and implement a
nine-week summer bridge program, consisting of research and career mentoring for
six students per summer from outside the geosciences. A novel aspect of the
proposed program is that student research and experiences will span multiple
disciplines of high societal relevance, including climate change, natural
hazards, and water, energy and mineral resources. By the end of the experience
and proposed activities, students will 1) become aware of scientific
opportunities in geosciences in areas of high societal relevance, 2) be exposed
to multiple career paths, 3) develop a cohort of peers, and 4) will have letters
of recommendation from geoscientists that will enhance their chances for
successful admission to a graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.