* 2119883
* GP-IN: CUSP: Connecting Underserved Students to Polar STEM
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Deborah Shulman, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2025
* USD 452,008.00

Recent changes in the Polar regions such as atmospheric warming, permafrost
thaw, sea ice decline, and glacier retreat, are having global impacts.
Understanding these Polar changes and predicting their future global impacts
require a wide range of future science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) professionals. Unfortunately, less than 25% of high school students in
the United States receive Earth systems science training and Polar studies
represents a very small component of what is taught. Additionally, the majority
of Earth systems societal challenges disproportionately impact low income and
underrepresented populations, yet there is a significant deficiency in the
number of underrepresented students receiving training within these fields. In
fact, most Earth systems science programs lack gender, ethnic, and economic
diversity. Effective environmental solutions require communication between
scientists, policy-makers, and the public, and must also support all
communities, in particular, those most at risk. The project aims to help remedy
gaps in Polar STEM education by developing new opportunities for
underrepresented high school students to engage in real Polar STEM education in
the classroom and via field experiences. Additionally, the project aims to train
teachers in high schools to integrate Polar STEM experiences in their classrooms
to increase Polar STEM literacy within the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers specifically propose to help fill the gaps
in Polar Earth systems science education within the United States by developing
a collaborative consortium of education programs including the University of
Maine, Juneau Icefield Research Program (JIRP), and several Department of
Education funded Upward Bound Programs across the United States to offer 1) new
project-based field opportunities in Polar STEM for high school students from
low income or first generation college families, 2) teacher training in Polar
Earth systems sciences 3) help to teachers developing high school lessons using
authentic Polar STEM data, and 4) research focused on determining if our field
and classroom education program improves teaching and high-school student
learning about Polar environments. This project will specifically support
justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion, of underrepresented students within
the Polar geosciences and help develop a more diverse and representative next
generation of science leaders in more communities across the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.