* 2119843
* Collaborative Research: Probing feedbacks between thermal structure, petrologic transformation, and rheologic evolution within dynamically evolving subduction zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Victor Guevara, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Curtis Williams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 105,974.00

Subduction zones – places where one tectonic plate sinks beneath another – are
responsible for the generation of deadly earthquakes, explosive volcanoes,
global chemical cycling into the deep earth, and tectonic plate movements. The
thermal structure of a subduction zone (i.e., the temperature of different parts
of the subduction zone at depth) exerts a first order control on the strength
and mechanics of an individual subduction zone and also on what materials and
volatiles (e.g., water) are transported down to the deep earth within subducting
plates. Together, these temperature-dependent mechanical and chemical processes
dictate the occurrence of subduction zone hazards such as earthquakes and
volcanism. Thus, a longstanding goal of subduction research is a quantitative
understanding of subduction zone thermal structure. Because these zones are 100s
of km thick and 1000s of km long, we cannot directly measure their thermal
structure. However, we can create detailed numerical simulations (subduction
models) that predict thermal structure and allow us to investigate how it
evolves and influences these mechanical and chemical processes. These models are
guided by a broad range of tectonic observables in active subduction zones and
by studies of subducted rocks that have been exhumed back to the surface. These
data illuminate a range of thermal, chemical (petrological), and mechanical
(rheological) feedbacks that operate over the lifetime of a subduction zone but
are typically omitted from thermal subduction zone models. For instance,
chemical reactions (e.g., metamorphism) in subducting plates are not only
highly-temperature dependent, but also likely to affect the thermal structure of
subduction zones. This is because different metamorphic rocks have different
strengths and densities which, in turn, affect the subduction properties
(convergence velocity between the two plates, dip angle of the subducting plate)
that ultimately control subduction zone temperature. Motivated by these dynamic
interactions, we will develop a suite of subduction models that directly
incorporate these thermal-chemical-mechanical feedbacks. This modeling approach
will allow us to probe how, and how rapidly, subduction zone thermal structure
evolves, and also to characterize how this thermal variability impacts plate
boundary strength and chemical cycling in these important tectonic zones. In
addition to supporting undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral researchers,
this project will also benefit society and the geoscience community through a
combination of education, outreach, and scientific in-reach in the following
ways: (1) we will develop an online lab activity for introductory geology
classes to expose beginning geoscientists to computational methods, (2) we will
host an in-reach subduction zone workshop at the University of Washington, and
(3) we will reach out to the public by developing a digital exhibit on
subduction zones at The Beneski Museum of Natural History (Amherst
College).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To capture dynamic and time-evolving subduction
behavior for Earth’s range of subduction settings, we will fully integrate
geodynamic, petrologic, and rheological components into our modeling framework.
Petrologic modeling will reveal the loci of slab devolatilization and density
transformations through time. A suite of experimentally and geologically
constrained rheologies will be used to calculate the time-evolving crustal
viscosity structure. Both components will be fully integrated into the
geodynamic modeling component (i.e., a time-dependent subduction model) so that
calculated petrological phases, densities, and viscosities are dictated by, and
also affect, the thermal evolution of the geodynamic model. After iteratively
increasing the complexity of models (so as to preserve physical intuition as the
number of model components grow), we will run models for parameter combinations
corresponding to each subduction system on Earth. This will enable us place
bounds on the properties of Earth’s slabs (temperature, dehydration systematics,
density, viscosity), in space and time, and address three targeted questions
relating to the co-evolution of slab thermal structure, dehydration, and
mechanical properties: What evolutionary phase of subduction is associated with
the most water transport to the deep mantle? What is the mechanical control on
the so-called “decoupling depth” at subduction zones? And, lastly, what is the
dominant control on the bi-modal timing of subducted rock
exhumation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.