* 2119007
* Enhancing flexible STEM thinking by generating interactive diagrams at scale
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ken Koedinger, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 698,932.00

Math and science diagrams improve learning, both when diagrams are delivered
with instruction, and when they are created for self-explanation. The resulting
learning is often more flexible. For example, students that practice diagramming
are better at transferring their learning from the problems they have explicitly
practiced to more open-ended problems. Unfortunately, diagrams are too uncommon
in instructional materials, especially practice problems. This is primarily
because diagrams are much harder to produce than text and symbols. Teaching at
scale adds further challenges. Ideally, e-learning platforms should deliver
different problems to different students. These problems should be tailored to
knowledge components, prevent cheating by copying, and be tuned the amount of
practice to student needs. Problem templating systems aren’t built for diagrams
and grading student-authored diagrams is hard to do even manually. To address
the challenge, this project aims to develop a new tool for generating
diagrammatic instructional content. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This tool developed by
the project will enable content authors to generate large problem sets by
example. User will author one or two problems and the tool will synthesize a
problem set from the examples. The project introduces efficient interaction
techniques for viewing and editing these sets. The project will collect data
from teachers and students to guide, refine, and evaluate the design of the
tool. The project will conduct six studies, three will focus on the
effectiveness of the tool in supporting authoring of educational content and
three that focus on the impact of the resulting problems on student learning.
These studies will enhance our understanding of when and how diagrams can be
used to increase student understanding of science, technology, engineering and
math (STEM) principles and lead to more flexible STEM
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.