* 2119992
* GP-IN: Getting your feet wet: Advancing geoscience education using water-based field experiences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amanda Meek, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 330,094.00

Geoscientists are a crucial part of the U.S. workforce and help the nation
address societal challenges such as water security and climate change. Twenty-
seven percent of the existing geoscience workforce is predicted to retire over
the next decade, creating a gap between workforce needs and the availability of
career-ready geoscientists. A challenge is that most high school teachers and
their students are largely unaware of the geosciences as a potential career
pathway. Therefore, this project aims to increase recruitment of students into
this important field and overcome the awareness gap by training high-school
teachers on how to integrate place-based geoscience field activities into the
classroom. Using water as a theme, the project will show how the geosciences are
integrated into water resources and management activities. Geoscience faculty at
Missouri S&amp;T will work with teachers and 4H leaders to develop field
activities and accompanying curriculum modules. The activities will be field-
based and revolve around local field sites with streams, lakes, caves, and/or
springs. By providing teachers with the ability to deliver exciting geoscience
content to their high-school students, the project will ultimately increase the
number of students who pursue geoscience careers. This outcome will benefit
society, as a highly trained geoscience workforce is central to the needs of
current and emerging environmental fields in the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to increase the college
enrollment of students in the geosciences and geoscience-related disciplines,
thereby increasing the pool of career-ready geoscientists. The approach is to
train high-school teachers how to engage students outside the classroom using
the dynamic concept of local water resources as the geoscience entry point. In
this way the project will engage students in non-geoscience classrooms to learn
geoscience concepts, and use both formal and informal educational avenues to
test the efficacy of both venues. Through collaboration with Geoscience faculty
at Missouri S&amp;T, the project's focus will be on providing research and
training experiences for teachers and high school students in rural communities
in Missouri. Objectives are to: (1) Develop field-based and hands-on activities
for high school students that introduce them to careers in the geosciences while
building on interdisciplinary interests, (2) Prepare teachers in Missouri to
lead these activities and integrate them into classroom discussions, and (3)
Assess the efficacy of the activities for increasing applied geoscience content
knowledge and enthusiasm for geosciences career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.