* 2119740
* Development of a Polarimeter System for Solar Synoptic High-Sensitivity Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Deqing Ren, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 10/31/2024
* USD 627,030.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar coronal mass ejections
(CMEs) are a key component in generation of space weather and solar storms that
can impact our society. They can damage satellites, disrupt radio
communications, and even create blackouts of the electricity power grids. This
project will develop an instrument to provide high-sensitivity and high-fidelity
information about CMEs. The developed system will serve as a long-term platform
for training students from diverse backgrounds at the Big Bear Solar
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new polarimetry system will be developed to
observe the near infrared (NIR). This system has unique features including: (1)
High-speed solar polarization in the NIR. Polarization measurements in the NIR
can provide better sensitivity than the visible. Due to the atmospheric
turbulence disturbance and the fact that several images are required for the
polarization measurements, a low-speed polarimeter cannot reliably measure the
true polarization. This system will be the first polarimeter that can achieve a
polarization measurement speed up to 100 Hz at the NIR He I 10830 Angstrom line,
and thus provide a true polarization measurement with high sensitivity for solar
CME investigations; (2) the polarimetry system will be the first instrument that
acquires polarization measurements in the NIR He I line for CME associated
events on a regular and synoptic basis over an instant 2-dimensional field of
view (FOV) up to 320’’ x 256’’ without the need of the long slit scanning
currently used in the tradition spectrograph, which is mandatory to search,
monitor, and track CME events; (3) The high-speed 2-dimensional polarization
images will be used to derive the diffraction-limited images for each of the
Stokes vector components using the blind deconvolution technique, and thus to
provide diffraction-limited magnetic field images that current large ground-
based telescopes would not offer, and thus provide good image quality over a
large FOV that is close to that provided by a space-based
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.