* 2119135
* Exploring Artificial Intelligence-enhanced Electronic Design Process Logs: Empowering High School Engineering Teachers
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeff Rosen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 849,848.00

The Engineering Design Process (EDP) is a general theoretical framework often
used for teaching engineering, STEM, invention, and even science, particularly
in K-12 education. While most EDPs used in education are depicted as linear or
circular, true design processes are highly creative, non-linear, and often
involve ill-posed problem statements and solution criteria. These traits make it
particularly difficult for high school engineering teachers, who tend to skip
over key elements of human-centered design, where an engineer takes time to
understand the problem through research, interviews, prior literature searches,
market analysis, and brainstorming—the steps where diversity of thought and
experience are of the most value. In addition, it can be hard to provide
students with real-time feedback due to the asynchronous nature of group work
and large class sizes, and students may not feel comfortable asking for feedback
on incomplete work. This project will develop and pilot an artificial
intelligence (AI) enhanced Engineering Design Process Log to help students
navigate the design process, provide real-time feedback, and encourage
meaningful documentation of each step of the process. This project does not
propose to replace teachers with AI; rather, the project will explore a novel
approach in which AI systems assist teachers in the creation of instructional
modules that adhere to EDP best practices. This project is a collaboration
between researchers at Georgia Tech’s College of Computing (GT CoC) and
researchers at Georgia Tech’s Center for Education Integrating Science,
Mathematics and Computing (CEISMC). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is a
teaching-focused technological innovation, representing an early exploration
into AI-enhanced design pedagogy. Specifically, the project will: 1) Improve
upon an existing web-based Engineering Design Process Log (EDPL) by engaging in
teacher user studies, 2) Design, pilot, and implement an AI-based authoring and
tutoring system for teachers to customize feedback for students and for specific
projects with domain expertise, 3) Design and provide professional development
opportunities for alpha and beta testing teachers, and 4) Assess the impact of
an AI-based EDP Log (AI-EDPL) on engineering design pedagogy and classroom
practice. The AI-EDPL software system will use concepts initially pioneered for
intelligent tutoring systems, but applied to scaffolding the creation of custom,
teacher-made instructional materials that adhere to best practices in design
process pedagogy assessment. Unlike many other educational domains, engineering
design problems vary widely in scope and solution pathways, which means there
will not be a one-size-fits-all tutoring system that can provide feedback to
students. This project will examine (a) whether artificial intelligence can
support and scaffold teachers in the creation of the necessary models and
knowledge structures needed to scaffold and support learners, and, (b) what
professional development teachers need to be successful in developing these
models. A multi-phased approach will be used, using value-sensitive design
processes from the field of human computer interaction to develop minimalist
functional systems that can be tested with teachers in classrooms. In order for
AI to help teachers, who do not have a lot of time to tinker with software, they
must be able to express their intentions in natural language, which must be
automatically converted into functional approximations of the task models that
can be easily edited. This project will build on best practices in design theory
and pedagogy, design documentation, design instruction, design assessment, and
AI tutoring to create a one-of-a-kind technology suitable for engineering design
instruction at the high school level. It represents a first attempt at providing
real-time feedback in a computational setting for an open-ended design
challenge, and it does so without marginalizing or diminishing the role of the
instructor in the engineering classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.