* 2119203
* Collaborative Research:  PPoSS:  Planning:  SEEr: A Scalable, Energy Efficient HPC Environment for AI-Enabled Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Xingfu Wu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2022
* USD 59,999.00

AI-enabled science, where advanced machine-learning technologies are used for
surrogate models, autotuning, and in situ data analysis, is quickly being
adopted in science and engineering for tackling complex and challenging
computational problems. The wide adoption of heterogeneous systems embedded with
different types of processing devices (CPUs, GPUs, and AI accelerators) further
complicates the execution of AI-enabled science on supercomputers. The research
for AI-enabled simulations on heterogeneous systems is far from sufficient. The
project’s novelty is to explore key features essential for a scalable, energy-
efficient HPC environment for AI-enabled science on heterogeneous systems. The
unified team of researchers tackles the problem in a cross-layer manner,
focusing on the synergies among application algorithms, programming languages
and compilers, runtime systems, and high-performance computing. The project's
impact is to catalyze scientific discoveries by making scientific computing
faster, more scalable and more energy-efficient. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-
term research vision is to develop SEEr, a scalable, energy-efficient HPC
environment for scaling up and accelerating AI-enabled science for scientific
discovery. This planning project explores fundamental questions to realize the
research vision. The team focuses on scalable surrogate models for an
incompressible computational fluid dynamics application using OpenFOAM, cost
models for this application on heterogeneous resources, dynamic task mapping for
efficient execution, and performance and power monitoring and characterization
to explore tradeoffs among performance, scalability, and energy efficiency on a
state-of-the-art testbed named Polaris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.