* 2119861
* GP IN: Developing a Water Research, Assessment, and Networking Ecosystem (WRANE) for Informal Geoscience Instruction on Water Resources
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Puckette, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 321,227.00

This project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to increase the exposure of high school and community
college students to the geosciences and improve the diversity and quality of
geoscience education through the development of a sustainable Water Research,
Assessment, and Networking Ecosystem (WRANE). The project will recruit students
from historically excluded communities who attend Oklahoma schools and involve
them in hands-on research activities related to their lived experience to
improve their understanding of geosciences and increase the number and diversity
of future geoscience majors. The activities are designed to educate students and
teachers, encourage engagement in participatory science, and increase the
exposure of teachers, students, and the general public to geoscience and STEM
fields. To accomplish this, WRANE will establish out-of-school-time groups
directly supervised by a teacher at the school with regular assistance and input
from OSU Boone Pickens School of Geology professors, students, and other
mentors, create educational videos and activities, provide instruction in field
and lab techniques, and assist in the development, design, and execution of a
water-based citizen science research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
the Water Research, Assessment, and Networking Ecosystem (WRANE) program is to
improve long-term geoscience education at high school and community college
levels so that participating students will have better academic records and
scientific literacy and an interest in geoscience majors and careers.
Participants in the out-of-school groups will learn water-related geoscience
concepts and participate in water-related citizen science research projects,
mentored by PIs from Oklahoma State University. By focusing on water-related
research projects and stimulating students to develop research ideas, the
results of the WRANE citizen science projects will be of greater importance and
relevance to the local communities and could result in efforts to understand,
improve and protect water resources in Oklahoma. Products from this project
include instructional and content specific videos, scientific data from student
research projects, and assessments of program success, pedagogy, and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.