* 2119897
* I-Corps: Microheater Array Powder Sintering Technology for Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Wenchao Zhou, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a high-speed additive manufacturing technology, Microheater Array
Powder Sintering (MAPS). The proposed technology may be used for high-volume
production with a wide range of engineering materials at a cost competitive with
traditional manufacturing. This may have a transformative impact on the
manufacturing industry by facilitating the transition to fully digital
manufacturing, enabling mass customization, and transforming how products are
made and consumed. While the proposed MAPS technology potentially may impact
many different industries (e.g., printed electronics, 3D printing) due to its
significant advantages in energy consumption, equipment cost, manufacturing
time, and process control, the initial focus is on the potential of MAPS for
rapid prototyping and small volume production of plastic parts. Compared to
other existing solutions in the market (e.g., selective laser sintering), MAPS
may better serve the market needs in several areas including feedback control of
the printing process for better part quality, higher printing speed, and lower
cost of equipment and ownership. This may reduce the barrier of adopting
additive manufacturing and accelerate the transition to digital manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
Microheater Array Powder Sintering (MAPS) technology for additive manufacturing.
The proposed technology uses a microheater array to digitally deliver a focused
heat pattern and selectively sinter powder particles by placing the microheater
array in close proximity to the powder surface. Compared to selective laser
sintering (SLS) that uses a laser to fuse powder particles with point-wise
scanning, MAPS uses an microheater array that may include thousands of
microheater elements for line-wise or layer-wise printing. These printing
processes enable significantly higher printing speeds. In contrast to high-cost
lasers, a microheater array is an array of tiny thin-film resistors that may be
fabricated at relatively low-cost using MEMS fabrication techniques. In
addition, MAPS has much lower power consumption. Compared to a laser that
typically requires 10s or 100s of watts of power for SLS, each microheater
typically consumes 100s of milliwatts of power to achieve similar results.
Moreover, MAPS enables easy feedback control. In contrast to a laser that
delivers energy in an open-loop fashion without knowing the temperature, a
microheater is also a temperature sensor, which allows for precise temperature
control and enables feedback process control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.