* 2119340
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: LARGE: Principles and Infrastructure of Extreme Scale Edge Learning for Computational Screening and Surveillance for Health Care
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Song Han, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

This project investigates a completely new cross-disciplinary concept of
“Computational Screening and Surveillance (CSS)” that utilizes edge learning to
detect early indicators of diseases, and monitor health changes in both
individuals and populations. CSS analyzes and interprets continuous and
heterogeneous physical and physiologic sensing-data streams of human subjects to
produce real-time information, knowledge, and insights about their health
status. The project’s novelty is a data-driven paradigm that revolutionizes the
understanding, prediction, intervention, treatment, and management of
acute/infectious, chronic physical and psychological diseases. The project’s
impacts are enormous social and economic benefits to individuals, organizations,
and the healthcare system: early detection, preemptive intervention and
management can lead to greatly improved quality of care, and huge savings for
multiple diseases each costing hundreds of billions of dollars every
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators design, develop and evaluate
principles and solutions for CSS enabled by extreme-scale edge learning spanning
four dimensions: data modalities, health conditions and data patterns,
Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) algorithms and models, and
individuals/populations. The design is guided by four principles: exploit scale
and heterogeneity, design for uncertainty, privacy as a first-class citizen, and
faults and attacks as a norm. The investigators will 1) design AI/ML algorithms
for learning data patterns and correlations for diverse health conditions in
both individuals and populations at extreme scales; 2) quantify theoretical
bounds on the tradeoffs between security, privacy protection, and learning
accuracy in order to protect against various attacks on data and models at both
the edge and cloud; 3) develop programming abstractions for automated
exploration of competing AI/ML methods under uncertainty, and system mechanisms
to protect stream processing integrity against sensitive data disclosure and
faulty/malicious analytics; and 4) devise neural architectures and accelerators
for computation efficiency at the constrained edge, data efficiency using
limited training sets, and human efficiency utilizing
AutoML.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.