* 2119959
* MCA:  Post-Nuclear Granules Traffic mRNAs through Helicases and Initiation Factors to Set Their Translational Fates
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Brett Keiper, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2025
* USD 315,760.00

This project investigates how animal cells specialize to give rise to gametes
(eggs and sperm). This Mid-Career Award will enable the PI, who is an expert in
biochemistry, to gain expertise in molecular genetics and microscopy by working
with a collaborator at a different institution. The project will also train
students in classical RNA-protein biochemistry approaches as part of summer lab
courses co-hosted by the PI and
collaborator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional regulation of genes during
development is insufficient to account for the observed temporal and spatial
patterns in proteins required for differentiation and development. Instead, many
mRNAs critical for development are also regulated at the level of translation
initiation. Translation initiation is controlled by initiation factors such as
eukaryotic initiation factor 4 (eIF4). In previous work, the PIâ€™s lab studied
how unique forms of the eIF4 protein selectively translate mRNA during the
development of Caenorhabditis elegans, a simple nematode. The hypothesis for
this proposal is that isoforms of eIF4E known as IFE-1 and IFE-3 selectively
recruit dormant mRNAs to ribosomes for efficient protein synthesis. The first
goal of this project is to use resolved polysome RNA Seq, a technology developed
in the PIs lab, to identify all RNAs that rely on IFE-1 or IFE-3 for efficient
translation. The second uses CRISPR/Cas9 technology to fluorescently tag each
IFE to determine its localization in vivo, and allow characterization of its
storage and retrieval complexes by proteomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.