* 2119930
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Engineering PLUS (Partnerships Launching Underrepresented Students)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Michael Silevitch, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,475,000.00

The broader impact of this NSF INCLUDES Alliance project is nationwide growth in
the number of underrepresented minorities and women obtaining undergraduate and
graduate engineering degrees. Specifically, the project aims to achieve a
national target of 100,000/30,000 (BS/MS-PhD) degrees for underrepresented
minorities and women by 2026 and establish a future growth rate that can
substantially close the gap. Engineering depends on team collaboration, and
research shows that diverse groups are typically more effective than homogeneous
teams when complex problem solving is a critical goal. The U.S. must therefore
educate a diverse engineering workforce to encompass the complex technological
challenges faced by society. This NSF INCLUDES project directly addresses this
critical challenge. This Alliance will have a broad reach, expanding to 150
higher education institutions in five major regions of the country. The work of
the Alliance is designed to learn what is most effective at broadening
participation in engineering education, particularly at the critical transition
points for students. Its work will enable wider adoption of best practices
through the training of change agents that can work effectively both regionally
and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has the overarching
goal to achieve transformative, systemic and sustainable change that will
dramatically increase the number of underrepresented minorities and women
obtaining undergraduate and graduate engineering degrees. The Alliance will
leverage the wealth of best practices for broadening participation in
engineering that has emerged from research over the last several decades to
provide the collaborative infrastructure needed to support sustainability and
scale-up of successful strategies. The intellectual merit of the Alliance
mission is tied to the research which is aimed at answering the question: How
does regional scaling occur across the Alliance? Three levels of investigation
will be pursued; Q1) What role does evidence play in scaling the most promising
engagement activities across a given region and the Alliance overall? Q2) How do
the social interactions and the resultant networks affect scaling? and Q3) What
are the historic and operative frameworks of how gender, race and ethnicity,
pathway opportunities and goal attainment are addressed? The research results
will create new knowledge and help others work toward achieving inclusive
participation in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance
award is funded by:&lt;br/&gt;- NSF Inclusion across the Nation of Communities
of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF
INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in
discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity, inclusion and broadening
participation in STEM at scale.&lt;br/&gt;- Broadening Participation in
Engineering (BPE).&lt;br/&gt;- Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.