* 2119853
* GP-GO: The Appalachian SUCCESS Program: Strengthening students classified as Underrepresented in STEM by inspiring Confidence, Curriculum and Enriching Sensing Skillsets
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Fox, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,807.00

This project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goal
is to establish the Appalachian SUCCESS program, test effectiveness of the
learning ecosystem model guiding the program’s development, and sustain an
improved mentoring plan that is carried forward after the grant ends for
students from Appalachian distressed communities in eastern Kentucky and West
Virginia. PIs seek to inspire graduate student confidence through family
engagement and service learning and increase graduate student access to
geoscience training in the areas of karst and hyporheic science, develop student
skills in the area of sensor technology, and increase research opportunities for
students which can open doors to future research and career pathways. The
program focuses on first year graduate students, and in some cases
undergraduates in transition, at the University of Kentucky, Marshall University
and Eastern Kentucky University, which are Carnegie R1, R2 and M1 universities,
respectively. The students will be immersed in a 10-month-long program, and
components of the learning ecosystem model aim to: build the students’
confidence through working with the tri-university cohort of students learning
about sensor technology in geoscience; engage the students’ family and community
in their curriculum so the two-way transfer of information both builds the
graduate students confidence and allows them to see the potentially
transformative impact of their work on family members and K-12 learning; help
the students learn critical thinking that can be used in graduate school; help
them explore and define their own geoscience interests and/or specializations to
work towards a career plan; prepare them for future work in collaborative team
and interdisciplinary scientific settings; and conduct independent research
projects using advanced sensor instrumentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Appalachian SUCCESS Program aims to promote NSF’s mission by increasing the
number of students pursuing graduate degrees through the design and testing of a
novel approach that engages students in authentic, career-relevant experiences
in geoscience. In order to broaden participation in the geosciences, the program
engages students from Appalachia who are historically under-represented in
science, technology, engineering and mathematics. Students from this Appalachian
region often face obstacles associated with the economic distress of the
counties they live in, relatively low access to education resources in their
rural environments, and lack of college mentoring resources because they are
first-generation students. The SUCCESS curriculum is designed to help overcome
these obstacles via a series of non-technical and technical learning components.
Along with family and faculty, graduate student participants will meet
throughout the program to discuss the career trajectories, engage in service
learning by working with middle-school or high-school teachers to develop K-12
science curriculum and teach the content to students from their Appalachian
hometowns, attend industry and government sector field trips where they learn
about careers in the geosciences and work together across the partnering
institutions to conduct research by integrating new sensor technology for the
geosciences. Faculty mentors and graduate students will carry out workshops to
develop technical and soft skills that culminate with research presentations at
a regional science conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.