* 2119878
* GP-UP: Increasing representation and success of African Americans in the geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brent Thoma, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 314,421.00

This project is jointly funded by GEO GOLDEN and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Careers in the
geosciences are expected to grow by 50% above the average job growth rate in the
US over the next 10 years, with some subfields experiencing more than double the
average growth rate. At the same time undergraduate enrollment within these
fields has remained relatively flat or even slightly decreased in recent years,
leading to a shortage of trained geoscientists. Furthermore, while recent
efforts to increase diversity within STEM have been met with success in some
fields, diversity within the geosciences has lagged behind, with geosciences
having the lowest levels of inclusion among groups traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields; and, among these groups, African Americans
remain among the least represented making up less than 1.5% of geoscience
doctorates awarded in 2018 (National Center for Science and Engineering
Statistics, Survey of Earned Doctorates). This project aims to increase
recruitment, improve long-term student success and persistence, and enhance
post-graduate placement of African American students, through increased exposure
to potential geoscience careers, multidisciplinary research experiences, skill-
building workshops, networking, and faculty-mediated career planning at Jackson
State University (JSU), the nationâ€™s 10th largest Historically Black
College/University.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a pathway
focused on Marine Science, Environmental Science, and Earth Systems Science
undergraduate degree programs. It aims to increase enrollment, retention, and
persistence of URM in the geosciences by: 1) increasing awareness of potential
geoscience careers through a robust seminar series, 2) enhancing preparedness
through faculty-mediated career planning and application assistance 3) expanding
acquisition of relevant experiences through independent research and skill-
building workshops. Even with focus on a targeted cohort, most of the activities
in this program will be open to all JSU students including: 1) a weekly seminar
series that will include invited speakers highlighting potential careers and
areas of research in the geosciences, 2) a series of workshops focused on
building general research skills (e.g., data analysis and visualization,
GIS/Remote Sensing, writing research papers) and the generation of professional
documents (e.g., curriculum vitae, resume, personal statement, research
statement, cover letter) relevant to career advancement, and 3) seminars focused
on identifying and applying for summer research opportunities or internships, as
well as post-graduate programs, in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.