* 2119281
* DMREF: GOALI: Tetrahedral Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* David Martin, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,799,971.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectricity is the ability
to reverse a spontaneous electrical polarization by the application of an
external electric field. This property is crucial to many modern electronic and
optical technologies, but there has been limited success directly integrating
ferroelectric materials with electronics based on conventional semiconductors
despite decades of efforts. Part of the challenge is that traditional
ferroelectrics exhibit very different crystal structures, bonding, and defect
densities from commercial semiconductors such as silicon. This project seeks to
resolve this problem by introducing a new class of ferroelectric materials with
a tetrahedral bonding structure common to commercial semiconductors. Introducing
a new function to tetrahedral semiconductors will represent a step change in the
capabilities of integrated electronic and optical devices. This project will
discover and develop new tetrahedral ferroelectrics and result in a new
mechanistic understanding of ferroelectricity. The project will emphasize
workforce development, through the education of students and post-docs trained
to accelerate materials discovery via modern approaches to integrated
computation and experiment. Technological advances will be accelerated through
close collaboration with an industrial partner, Broadcom, Inc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tetrahedral
ferroelectrics such as modified aluminum nitride (AlN) offer a unique
opportunity to extend our fundamental understanding of polarization
reorientation and to discover new families of materials with enabling non-linear
dielectric properties. The recent discovery of tetrahedral ferroelectrics has
highlighted gaps in the scientific understanding of ferroelectricity and of
polar semiconductors. The current project addresses three sets of fundamental
questions: (1) How is switchable polarization related to coercive field, a
paraelectric transition and/or stiffness? How is coercive field related to
structure? (2) What is (are) the switching mechanism(s) in tetrahedral
ferroelectrics? (3) How do local structure, individual and clustered point
defects, and synthesis affect switching and breakdown? These questions will be
addressed via integrated computation and experimentation, expanding the
understanding of the fundamentals of ferroelectricity and of polar
semiconductors alike. Enabling ferroelectricity in tetrahedral semiconductors
represents a potential step change in semiconductor device capability and offers
an attractive alternative to fighting defect accommodation in complex oxides.
This project will expand ferroelectric and semiconductor physics, through a
greater understanding of the mechanisms of polarization reorientation that
welcomes a family of heretofore unknown tetrahedra-based systems to the universe
of known ferroelectrics while simultaneously introducing a new intrinsic
capability to the toolbox of tetrahedral
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.