* 2119916
* EAGER: Exploratory research on the dynamics of convergence in interdisciplinary teams
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Michael O'Rourke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,973.00

The Toolbox Dialogue Initiative (TDI) team proposes to conduct research on
convergence which will help Growing Convergence Research (GCR) and other
convergence-focused programs crystallize unique features of different types of
convergence and provide more guidance to future awardees. TDI team will work
directly with GCR awardees through project-focused Toolbox workshops to help
them realize their convergence cultures. They will also make the online
resources curated by TDI available to all GCR awardees and more broadly to other
individuals and teams conducting convergence research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will include theoretical research designed to relate convergence to
integration and cross-disciplinarity, and empirical research to identify
different ways in which convergence is operationalized across funded projects.
This research will connect the convergence literature more closely with the
literature on integration and cross-disciplinarity, and it will also assist
those pursuing convergence research in GCR, other NSF programs, and beyond to be
more explicit in designing and delivering convergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.