* 2119686
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: GOALI: High-Affinity Supramolecular Peptide Materials for Selective Capture and Recovery of Proteins
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an integrated
experimental-computational approach that aims to develop a class of peptide-
based supramolecular materials as high-affinity precipitants for non-
chromatographic protein purification. The separation and purification of
therapeutic proteins from their biological resources are a significant
limitation for industrial manufacturing of biologics in terms of their
efficiency and cost-effectiveness. Despite the high media cost and limited
loading capacity, affinity chromatography remains the most widely used capture
method for large-scale industrial protein purification. The rapid growth of
upstream titers, due to advancements in mammalian cell culture and continuous
process development, has further challenged the efficiency of downstream
manufacturing. Affinity precipitation can potentially overcome the
chromatography limitations associated with column size and ligand
immobilization. In line with the goals of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI),
this project will design, synthesize, and develop self-assembling peptide
materials that can specifically bind, selectively capture, and effectively
separate proteins from their bio-based resources. In addition, this project will
foster new educational and outreach opportunities for students at all levels to
participate in STEM research and to experience different laboratory settings
that range across academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address the key fundamental
challenges in the development of peptide-based affinity precipitants for
downstream protein manufacturing. There are essentially three steps in the use
of affinity precipitants for protein purification. These are the: (1) selective
capture of proteins of interest; (2) binding-induced phase separation from
supernatant; and (3) recovery of proteins. The project includes three specific
aims, each covering a key step toward the successful development of peptide-
based supramolecular immunofibers for non-chromatographic protein purification.
The first thrust focuses on the design and synthesis of immunofibers for
selective capture of target monoclonal antibodies (mAbs). The second is intended
to understand, determine, and optimize the conditions for mAb binding-triggered
macroscopic phase separation. The third aim centers on the protein recovery
processes and the assessment of system applicability and scalability. Theory and
multiscale models will be developed to provide guiding principles for the
supramolecular design of immunofibers and the co-assembly strategies to optimize
the ligand presentation for maximal protein capture, and to help elucidate the
thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of immunofiber assembly and dissociation, as
well as the binding-triggered phase separation
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.