* 2119549
* Using Augmented Reality and Artificial Intelligence to Improve Teaching and Learning Spatial Transformations in STEM Disciplines
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Francis Quek, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 865,971.00

The mathematics that are used to describe spatial transformations can be very
difficult for undergraduate students. While moving something in the physical
world may be easy to understand, describing the same operation with math in the
digital world can be daunting. This project will develop new technology using
Augmented Reality (AR) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) to improve the teaching
and learning of these difficult concepts in STEM disciplines as well as creative
endeavors. The project will test the use of new AR/AI technology to enhance
studentsâ€™ learning of the mathematics behind spatial transformations. This will
improve the use of AR/AI-powered precise motion tracking of objects that can
collect high resolution in-situ motion and scene data to enhance learning
analytics. The project will identify the AR capabilities that can help students
conceive, connect, and compare mathematical representations of motion to
overcome the well-documented difficulties students face when learning spatial
transformations. Strengthening this skill will support their continued
development across many STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An AR/AI-powered
innovative learning environment will be developed and evaluated for its effects
on teaching and learning major rotation and orientation representations in the
Euclidean space. Different levels of abstraction, including Axis-Angle, Euler
Angles, Matrices, and Quaternions will be tested. In workshops participants will
play with and transform 3D-printed geometry models to evaluate the effectiveness
of the AR/AI technology. The project will assess student learning outcomes by
comparing math skills in pre- and post-workshop tests compared to students
working through the same tasks without the use of the AR/AI technology. The
project will contribute to advancing knowledge across disciplines of spatial and
mathematical pedagogies, by exploring: a) the role of novel AR interaction that
allows the interplay between physical and virtual manipulatives to engage
students in embodied learning; b) the capabilities of AR to make difficult
invisible concepts visible for supporting an intuitive and formal understanding
of spatial reasoning and mathematical formulation; c) the features of AR that
help students see relationships between spatial manipulations and mathematical
operations; and d) the potential impact of individual differences in spatial
transformations when using AR-assisted mathematical
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.