* 2119860
* GP-UP: Enhancing Recruitment and Retention of Underrepresented Minorities in Atmospheric Sciences at NCAT
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jing Zhang, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,782.00

The number of scholars of color in Atmospheric Sciences is relatively low, and
even worse, shows a decreasing trend, highlighting the strong need to attract,
retain, and graduate larger numbers of students of color majoring in the
Atmospheric Sciences. North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University
(N.C. A&amp;T) seeks to strengthen its undergraduate Atmospheric Science and
Meteorology (ASME) program to increase the recruitment, retention, and
graduation of students from historically excluded communities, particularly
African Americans, in the Atmospheric Sciences. This effort will contribute to
diversifying the STEM workforce and supporting a STEM-literate society. This
project seeks to address this workforce shortfall by infusing innovative
practices into N.C. A&amp;T’s ASME program, thus building a solid foundation for
the pathway that will diversify and further strengthen the future atmospheric
scientist and meteorologist workforce. The proposed activities will not only
ensure the project’s successful accomplishment but also have the following
intellectual merits: 1) enhanced general education in the Geosciences, which
will help students gain an increasing awareness of environmental sustainability
challenges within the context of the Geosciences’ interdisciplinary nature; 2)
exposure to research faculty expertise over a wide range of topics—atmosphere
chemistry, mountain meteorology, tropical meteorology, and polar meteorology; 3)
enhanced student awareness of academic and career opportunities through
professional development activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this
project’s overarching goal of Enhancing Recruitment and Retention of
Underrepresented Minorities in Atmospheric Sciences at N.C. A&amp;T, the PI team
will adopt the following practices: 1) Attracting – enhancing undergraduate
students’ general education in geosciences and conducting a K12 outreach
activity to attract students to the ASME program; 2) Bridging – establishing a
summer bridge program for students admitted to the ASME program to bridge any
knowledge or skills gaps, particularly in math, thereby preparing students for
the ASME curriculum; 3) CB learning – adopting Cohort-Based (CB) educational
practices as appropriate to enhance student learning and maximize student
retention; 4) RB training – utilizing Research-Based (RB) educational practices
to actively involve students in various research projects and enhance students’
skills in oral communication, technical writing, and research; and 5) Service
learning – engaging students in service learning through the Volunteer Weather
Observer Program to combine learning goals with community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.