* 2119968
* BII: Host-Virus Evolutionary Dynamics Institute (HVEDI)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Michelle Evans-White, University of Arkansas
* Cooperative Agreement
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2026
* USD 4,005,252.00

The NSF Biology Integration Institute project entitled Host-Virus Evolutionary
Dynamics Institute (HVEDI) will be established as a multi-institutional, multi-
investigator institute to study host-virus interactions across domains of life
(Bacteria, Archaea, Eukarya) with the goal of determining universal "rules of
life" to which all viruses adhere. Developing such rules of life will lead to
developing Laws of Virology that allow predictions for the emergence of virulent
or attenuated strains of a virus, species jump events, the propensity for
recombination events leading to novel virus strains, and changes in virus
transmission rates under changing environmental conditions. Beyond the science,
HVEDI is a collaborative of different university types, including research
intensive institutions (i.e., Carnegie Research 1 and 2 institutions),
predominantly undergraduate institutions (PUIs), Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), and Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs). Thus, a diverse
array of faculty and student scientists will be engaged in cutting-edge research
in virology and virus ecology toward achieving the objectives of the project.
Results from this work will significantly contribute to a better understanding
of how viruses may infect natural and novel hosts under select conditions.
Outreach and training initiatives will benefit high schools and community
colleges in Arkansas, Maine, and Puerto Rico and will build human resource
capacity in these and other NSF EPSCoR
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although host-virus interactions have been
studied for specific virus systems, few studies have sought to compare virus-
host dynamics across domains of life towards generating fundamental rules of
life to which all or large swaths of disparate virus systems adhere. Using three
non-lytic, low-virulence double-stranded (ds) DNA virus systems - representing
each domain of life (Bacteria, Archaea, and Eukarya) -host-virus interaction
properties will be modeled for each of these core virus systems (CVS).
Mathematically-characterizable patterns that hold for all three of the CVS will
be developed as models towards establishing rules of life (RoL) for host-virus
evolutionary dynamics. The RoL will then be tested for generalizability to other
virus systems (i.e., comparator systems), including lytic systems and those
comprised of RNA or single-strand DNA genomes. These comparator systems will be
used to validate RoL models towards developing a set of Laws of Virology. Three
levels of integration will be pursued. Level 1 integration efforts are focused
on integrating across biological scales (genetics, -omics, physiological,
ecological) towards modeling host-virus interaction dynamics for each
independent virus system. Level 2 integration is focused on modeling common
patterns found across the CVS and comparator virus systems towards developing
rules of life to which all or a large swath of viruses adhere. Level 3
integration is focused on applying the emerging rules of life for host-virus
interactions to mesocosm, directed evolution, and larger-scale (i.e.,
ecosystems/ecological) applications. Wet lab experimentation will be supported
by mathematical modeling and computer-based simulations of host-virus dynamics.
Results from this work will contribute to the broader effort of understanding
host switch, changes in harbor state, changes in virulence, and other related
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.