* 2119630
* Transformative Computational Models of Narrative to Support Teaching Indigenous Perspectives in K-12 Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Rogelio Cardona-Rivera, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,888.00

This project will contribute to the national need for sharing Indigenous
perspectives in US K-12 education. By providing accurate representations of
Indigenous narratives within social studies curricula, this project will address
misconceptions of Indigenous peoples and their communities. The project will
mitigate potential impacts of misrepresentations such as cultural identity
silencing, disconnection, and lower graduation rates for Indigenous students and
lack of cultural competence for non-Indigenous students. Often, Tribal Knowledge
Holders visit classrooms and share their histories and perspectives class by
class, which has the potential to overburden Indigenous communities. Technology
can support both teachers and Indigenous communities to develop sustainable
processes and practices to appropriately preserve and share Indigenous
knowledge, culture, and perspectives. To date, little work has examined the role
of Indigenous representation in the creation of narrative technologies designed
to mitigate the lack of Indigenous representation in the classroom. This project
will develop emerging narrative technologies from an Indigenous perspective to
support teachers and classroom learning. The broader impact of the work includes
benefits for tribal communities, K-12 educators, and policymakers, and other
community and education organizations that wish to expand representations of
diverse knowledge, cultures, education, and
computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work builds on existing efforts
to address pressing issues of bias embedded in emerging technologies and expand
current notions of how to design new forms of technology for more equitable
futures. The proposed project will deconstruct and culturally reformulate the
basis of emerging technologies: the underlying computational models, data,
algorithms, and interfaces. The overarching research question is: What does a
culturally sustaining/revitalizing computational model of Indigenous
narrative(s) look like? Building on an existing partnership with the
Northwestern Band of the Shoshone Nation and K-12 teachers, the project team
will use the social studies classroom as a design context to address issues of
representation of Indigenous knowledge and culture via computational models. The
proposed work seeks to empower Tribal members to (re)engage technologies that
have historically perpetuated disparities and caused significant harm to their
community to develop prototypes that represent their ways of being and knowing.
The prototypes will be Tribally-created design experiences that preserve
Indigenous history and effectively share it with students in fourth grade
classrooms. This project will offer empirical insights for effective strategies
and processes of how to engage Indigenous communities through a community-driven
design methodological approach. The project has the potential to reimagine not
only how models and algorithms are designed, but also who designs them. This
project will inform and advance diverse fields including computer science,
learning sciences, psychology, Indigenous education, teacher education, and
social studies education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.