* 2119754
* RII Track-2 FEC - Advanced Manufacturing of Renewable and Recyclable Polymers
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Bala Subramaniam, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

Millions of tons of plastic waste pollute the environment with adverse
ecological and health impacts. New technologies are urgently needed to
facilitate plastic recycling and enable the growth of a circular and sustainable
economy. Such a transition requires technological innovation and public policies
that enable the reuse of used polymers in new products, as well as renewable raw
materials such as grasses and crop leftovers. In this project, researchers from
the University of Kansas (KU), University of Delaware (UD), and Pittsburg State
University (PSU) will use their complementary expertise to develop the knowledge
to foster this transition. The team aims to develop novel catalysts and
processes to (a) transform biomass feedstocks into commercially relevant plastic
materials, and (b) deconstruct recycled plastics efficiently into precursors for
reuse. Simulations, data science, techno-economic analyses and life cycle
assessments will guide the research. Concurrently, public policies will be
formulated and evaluated to drive rural economic growth and the market
penetration of the new materials. Such activities will spawn an agro-based,
renewable materials manufacturing industry in Kansas, Delaware and beyond,
providing a major economic boost in these two EPSCoR jurisdictions. The program
will mentor junior faculty and establish a Postdoctoral Program for Faculty
Diversity to support women and underrepresented minorities in this career path.
Additionally, we will recruit and educate a diverse workforce equipped with the
skills needed to use advanced manufacturing concepts to drive our economy
towards sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will
develop novel synthesis routes for a broad slate of renewable polyesters and
polymer recycling strategies, signaling a new benign by design paradigm for the
advanced manufacturing of sustainable materials. The program will focus on three
renewable monomers: 4,4'-biphenyl-dicarboxylic acid, 5,5'-bifurandicarboxylic
acid, and sebacic acid. These were selected because they can be synthesized from
biomass-derived furfural. Since recycling will involve renewable and fossil-
based plastics for the foreseeable future, the project will evaluate and
optimize copolymers of these renewable monomers with the existing poly(ethylene
terephthalate) (PET) plastic. The convergent research expertise of our team of
investigators will enable integration of catalysis and kinetics fundamentals
with separations and process intensification strategies to develop scalable
manufacturing and recycling concepts. Novel catalytic materials including
biocatalysts, intensified spray and microwave reactors, and new fundamental
knowledge underlying the synthesis and recycling of polymers will emerge. A
framework for analyzing cradle-to-cradle process systems blended with
sustainability principles, economics and public policy considerations will be
developed. We will deploy and advance state-of-the-art data science methods and
multiscale modeling to expedite discovery and innovation of renewable and
recyclable biobased polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.