* 2119137
* Further Advancing the Northeast Combinatorics Network
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Julianna Tymoczko, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,693.00

The Northeast Combinatorics Network (NCN) will host several events including
Spring and Fall Discrete Math Day (DMD) conferences and a Summer Combo
conference as well as a Virtual Combinatorics Colloquium series in each year of
the three-year project. The Spring 2018 DMD will be hosted at UMass Amherst,
https://sites.google.com/view/umass-dms/dmdspring19, and universities in the
region are being given the opportunity to host the remaining five DMD meetings.
This project aims to further cultivate and enhance a network of students, post-
doctoral researchers, faculty and industry mathematicians spread across the
institutions in New England and New York working in the area of combinatorics
(discrete mathematics), which is a thriving and rapidly advancing mathematical
discipline. Motivated by applications to computer science, data science,
cybersecurity, bioinformatics and more, combinatorialists have developed
powerful new tools in recent years and have identified fundamental mathematical
problems that, if solved, will have far-reaching impact in these applied areas.
Connections to other areas of mathematics abound as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project puts particular emphasis on service to
students and faculty, particularly women and members of other groups
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The project's design particularly targets
students and faculty at small, more remote institutions, a cohort that has made
significant contributions to the field. With three one-day meetings per year as
anchor activities, the project envisions an intentional infrastructure that
facilitates ongoing interactions among researchers throughout the year. The PIs,
together with the rest of the NCN leadership (meeting hosts and Steering
Committee) will advance a set of activities that, while low in cost, provide key
resources to researchers in the region. These activities include: a central NCN
website to improve communication and collaboration, the Virtual Combinatorics
Colloquium series that allows remote viewing and interaction, a series of "New
Directions" presentations of accessible problem areas to foster undergraduate
research and also engage early career faculty, and an on-line discussion forum
that extends collaborative interactions that may start at any one of the regular
meetings. These activities, taken as a whole, will advance fundamental science,
foster connections to applied areas, and enhance outreach beyond the traditional
research university community. The NCN website is https://sites.google.com/view/
northeastcombinatoricsnetwork/home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.