* 2119926
* GP-UP: Authentic Cruise and Research Experiences for Underrepresented Students (ACREUS).
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Samuel Soule, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 12/31/2024
* USD 288,890.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large and growing segments of the
US population are not adequately represented in educational pathways that lead
to careers in the STEM workforce. This project seeks to recruit, prepare, and
promote retention of students from historically underrepresented groups into the
STEM career pipeline with a primary focus on Earth and ocean sciences. The
approach will include partnering with undergraduate and associate-degree
institutions to recruit diverse cohorts of student participants. The program
will provide a total of twenty-four students with professional development and
experiential training that will prepare them for participation in a range of
possible research cruises. Program activities will provide students with
opportunities for workplace skill-building via data collection, data analysis,
and visualizations for on-the-water and remote oceanographic research projects.
Professional development activities and post-program support will assist
students with identifying and pursuing educational opportunities or careers in
STEM and Earth/ocean science fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of
Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO/URI) will work with the
University of Massachusetts Boston, the Puerto Rico Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation, and the Community College of Rhode Island to recruit
students to participate in the professional development activities. The program
will expose diverse cohorts of early-career community college and undergraduate
students to a range of authentic oceanographic field experiences from shore
(telepresence and small-boat) at GSO/URI during a one-week summer program and at
sea as shipboard science party members of an oceanographic research cruise. The
activities will provide students with opportunities for workplace skill-building
via data collection, data analysis, and data visualization for on-the-water and
remote oceanographic research projects. Professional development activities and
post-program support will assist students with identifying and pursuing
educational opportunities or careers in STEM and Earth/ocean science fields. The
strategy is to immerse students in a broad spectrum of oceanographic research to
help them identify their primary areas of oceanographic interest and provide
fundamental content knowledge and transferable instrumentation and data analysis
skills that are important for workplace skill building. The strategy enables the
development of networks for the students both within their cohort and outwards
into the established oceanographic community of researchers and operators. The
model also includes maintaining communication with the participants after the
program to assist with navigating educational and career opportunities. This
program builds upon established models of providing real-world experiences to
aspiring ocean scientists, but also explores how best to apply at-sea
participation and science-party integration to recruit and retain students from
historically underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.