* 2119296
* GP-UP: Collaborative Research: Developing a diverse hydrology workforce through an undergraduate hydrological research experience in a coastal California watershed
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Hilary McMillan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 82,050.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will boost
recruitment and retention of Sophomore and transfer students in hydrology and
geoscience programs across three campuses of the California State University
(CSU). Our program will engage with and support these students in the summer
between their first and second year, or at the outset of their transfer, and
provide pathways for them to succeed in hydrology and the geosciences. The CSU
student body is ethnically, economically and academically diverse. Increasing
participation of CSU students in hydrology and water resources science is
critical to training a skilled workforce in this area, and therefore to securing
Californiaâ€™s water future. The project offers a dual experience - a year-long
learning community model where students work in small groups to complete
research projects and gain transferable and subject-based research skills,
supplemented by an immersive 10-day field experience at a hydrology research
facility. During the field experience, students will contribute to cutting-edge
research in coastal Californian watersheds, where rich habitat and summer
baseflows sustain federally-protected salmonid fish species. Students who
complete the program should have the motivation and skillset to pursue a
geoscience career, and have strong resumes to apply to jobs, Masters programs
and research internships in their home institutions or beyond as they reach
their senior year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will recruit cohorts of
students from San Diego State University, Sacramento State University, and
Humboldt State University, all of which are minority serving institutions. The
recruitment plan includes leveraging existing programs at each campus that
engage students from diverse backgrounds in STEM disciplines. Students will
participate in the experience in three stages: (1) Spring research preparation
seminar series and cross-CSU webinars, (2) Intensive 10-day summer field
experience with a cross-CSU cohort, and (3) Fall class for a sustained learning
experience and presentation of results at a regional conference. Student
research will be organized around three research themes: (1) Water held within
and moving through the critical zone, (2) Water quality and aquatic habitat, and
(3) Scaling up and human effects. Planned outcomes include development of
research and professional skills, increased identities as members of the
geoscience community, and increased student retention in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.