* 2119351
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Design of Superionic Conductors by Tuning Lattice Dynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Boris Kozinsky, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 457,194.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superionic conductors are solid
materials in which a subset of the atoms can flow as though they were in a
liquid. These materials could be used in energy technologies such as next-
generation rechargeable batteries, fuel-cells, and thermoelectric devices.
However, a fundamental understanding of the atomistic mechanisms underlying the
outstanding liquid-like behavior of superionic conductors remains elusive. In
the spirit of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), this project will develop
an integrated computational and experimental framework to provide insights into
the atomic-scale mechanisms controlling superionic behavior. The project will
provide new quantitative understanding of the role of atomic-level disorder and
crystal flexibility in the liquid-like behavior of atoms in superionic
materials. Advanced computational techniques, validated by state-of-the-art
experiments, will further enable predictive modeling, accelerating the current
search for new superionic materials. This research project will open new avenues
for the design and discovery of efficient materials for novel energy storage and
conversion technologies, and in turn, has the potential to help drive the growth
of the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superionic conductors are rare materials with part
crystalline-part liquid character in which ions can diffuse with high
mobilities. This project will rationalize atomistic processes of thermal and
mass transport in superionic conductors. This will provide the critical
understanding needed to accelerate the discovery and design of superionic
materials for improved energy conversion technologies. The research will
investigate three design hypotheses. These are that: (1) superionic conductivity
is controlled by the thermodynamic state of the mobile sublattice; (2) there is
an optimal lattice softness for fast ion conductivity; and (3) superionic
conductivity and low thermal conductivity are related by strong anharmonic
effects and dynamic sublattice disorder. In the spirit of the Materials Genome
Initiative, these hypotheses will be tested by combining state-of-the-art
computational modeling and experimental techniques to shed light on how the
unusual atomic dynamics of superionic conductors enable fast ionic diffusion and
control their thermal transport and thermodynamic properties. A targeted set of
superionic compounds will be studied in an investigative loop between theory and
experiment, combining neutron and x-ray scattering experiments, thermodynamic
and transport measurements, and computer simulations of atomic dynamics using
first-principles and machine-learning methods. Additionally, this project will
advance the interdisciplinary training of the early-career researchers
associated with the project to afford for MGI-based workforce development.
Moreover, the project will develop summer workshops, a summer exchange program
between the research groups at different universities, and educational online
short courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.