* 2119967
* GP-GO: Integrating Spatial Literacy into Geoscience: Bridging the gap between education and workforce in the U.S.
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Anita Simic Milas, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 314,987.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By focusing on recruitment and
retention of students from historically excluded communities, the educational-
research program SPatial LITeracy - SPLITGeoscience provides an effective method
of increasing diversity in geoscience, while strengthening obligations to
society and broadening intellectual values in STEM research. Through a
combination of workshops, hands-on training, field experience, and internship
placement, the program emphasizes partnerships between academia, industry, and
multicultural organizations to connect undergraduate and graduate students to
future employers and to the scientific community at large. The program
integrates geoscience and geospatial literacy with the socioeconomic needs of
local communities across the United States, and thus, contributes to
understanding geoscience-related challenges across the nation. The geospatial
component of the program supports the urgent demand of the U.S. government and
industry to prepare the next generation of skilled geoscientists to handle
serious problems, such as the effects and mitigation of natural disasters, that
are crucial to national welfare and security. This interactive approach attracts
students and sparks their research curiosity and critical
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPLITGeoscience program is a three-year
program proposed by Bowling Green State University in collaboration with Central
State University, the University of Louisiana at Lafayette, Idaho State
University, and AmericaView, a consortium of more than 40 universities. The
project leverages innovative hands-on learning and field experience using the
most sophisticated satellite- and drone-based technologies, plus internship
opportunities, to satisfy two goals: 1) encourage and strengthen the geoscience
professional development of students from historically excluded communities and
facilitate their school-to-work transition using effective recruitment and
retention strategies; and 2) elevate the status of career-related pathways of
these students by becoming well-rounded and ready-for-job-market professionals.
The program consists of two major components: 1) a series of intensive on-site
hands-on learning events allowing insights into real-world geoscience problems
using the most recent geospatial techniques learned from experts; and 2) a work
placement program for university students established with industry,
universities, and government. The ability to process and analyze spatial data to
confront pressing geoscience and environmental issues is becoming the
fundamental form of literacy for experts in geoscience, which is a fast-growing
interest of government, academia, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.