* 2119433
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: GOALI: Discovering Materials for CO2 Capture in the Presence of Water via Integrated Experiment, Modeling, and Theory
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* William Morris, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,382,303.00

The concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has risen rapidly over the
past century, creating significant concerns about global warming and ocean
acidification. Carbon capture and sequestration is widely viewed as an essential
tool, along with other technologies such as wind and solar energy, for keeping
atmospheric CO2 levels from rising further. This project focuses on developing
new materials for selective adsorption of CO2 versus N2. A primary emphasis will
be the effect of water on CO2/N2 selectivity and CO2 capacity. The main goal of
the proposed work is to develop integrated simulation, theoretical, and
experimental methods for understanding the effect of water on CO2/N2 separations
in nanoporous materials and to use these tools to speed up the discovery of new
materials for CO2 capture. The development of new materials and technologies
that enable cost-effective carbon capture at high-volume point sources is viewed
by the International Energy Agency as an essential component of a many-pronged
approach to combatting climate change. The project will contribute to the
education of graduate and undergraduate students in a highly interdisciplinary
project. Web and video-based education and outreach activities will reach a
wider audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In line with the Materials Genome
Initiative, this project will contribute to the development of new strategies
for creating metal-organic framework (MOF) materials with programmable
structure, by precisely combining pre-assembled building blocks. The project
will focus on a few MOF platforms that can be systematically tuned by changing
the organic linkers and introducing extra-framework anions, extra-framework
cations, and restructured MOF nodes. These “platform” MOFs are chosen from
families of MOFs known to exhibit excellent stability. Optimization of MOF
synthesis will be accelerated by use of robotic synthesis tools coupled with
machine learning algorithms. Molecular simulation will be used to test new
proposed material variations and provide molecular-level insights into observed
behavior. The simulation models will be validated against adsorption data
collected in the project, including multicomponent adsorption measurements,
which are extremely scarce in the literature. All simulated and experimental
adsorption data will be placed in publicly accessible databases. For the most
promising materials, single-crystal X-ray studies of molecular siting and
arrangements in the pores will be performed using a new technique that does not
require synchrotron access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.