* 2119978
* Collaborative Research: GP-IN: Connected to Earth: Cross-Cultural Knowledge Exchange for Advancing Earth Science Learning
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Prajukti Bhattacharyya, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 173,236.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tomorrow’s society will need to
address issues of conserving and protecting natural resources like soil and
water, deal with the rising threat of climate change and associated issues, and
mitigate hazards like flooding, landslides, and coastal storms. No single
disciplinary approach can combat these issues alone. For this there needs to be
engagement with people from diverse cultural backgrounds, and incorporation of
indigenous perspectives and different ways of teaching, learning, and knowing in
the K-16 curriculum so future generations can address these challenges equitably
and sustainably. This project will bring together a community of K-12 teachers,
educators, geoscientists, undergraduate students from minoritized backgrounds,
and cultural knowledge keepers and resource managers from Hawaii and Bad River
and Red Cliff tribal communities in Wisconsin. With these partners, the PIs plan
to develop geosciences curriculum and lesson plans for K-16 classrooms tied to
places with scientific and cultural significance, and are relevant to learners’
interests, cultural backgrounds, lived experiences, and the needs of the local
communities. Students participating in this project will take ownership of their
own education, and will acquire the knowledge and skills necessary to address
tomorrow’s societal issues, and to fill workforce needs in Tribal, State, and
Federal resource management and conservation, sustainability, environmental
consulting, science communication, and science education, among other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a cross-cultural geoscience
learning ecosystem providing experiential learning activities at sites with both
cultural and scientific significance in Hawaii and on Tribal lands in Wisconsin.
The investigators in collaboration with Tribal elders and knowledge keepers,
will lead professional development activities for pre- and in-service educators
to support them in developing curriculum aligned with NGSS Earth Sciences and
Science and Engineering Practices built upon local knowledge and Earth science
concepts and addressing real-world issues. This project will identify effective
practices for as well as barriers to developing and implementing place-based,
socially and culturally relevant STEM curriculum. Specifically the project will:
1) recruit, empower, and retain students from diverse backgrounds, especially
Native American/Native Hawaiian students, in the environmental and geosciences;
2) foster a sense of place and “connection to Earth” for students living in
places far from those where their cultures are rooted, and for “low-context”
students, whose cultures may not be deeply associated with place; 3) support
teachers to develop reusable and sustainable relevant, place-based curriculum
aligned with Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS); and 4) develop sense of
place remotely using virtual learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.