* 2119423
* DMREF: Machine Learning Accelerated Design and Discovery of Rare-earth Phosphates as Next Generation Environmental Barrier Coatings
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Suvranu De, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,800,000.00

Environmental barrier coatings (EBCs) are key components that can greatly
enhance the performance/longevity of structural materials such as ceramic-matrix
composites against active oxidation in high speed hot gas streams and corrosion
in reactive engine environments. Multi-generation EBCs have evolved, mainly
based on silicate-based systems, but they suffer from the volatility of silicon
due to water vapor attack and corrosion of molten glass attack. Innovative
design and discovery of EBCs with transformative performance are needed to meet
even harsher environments of high temperature, high thermal flux and severe
oxidation and corrosion for future aerospace and space systems. This Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) project will explore
an innovative concept of using multiple component rare-earth phosphates as
advanced EBCs, and develop a science-based paradigm guided by machine learning
(ML) for accelerated materials design and discovery. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be trained as the next-generation workforce in this
data-driven materials research. K-12 students and underrepresented groups will
be engaged through multiple outreach activities such as the Engineering Summer
Exploration program at Rensselaer and the New Visions: Math, Engineering,
Technology &amp; Science program. Materials data and computational tools
developed will be contributed to the MPContribs Portal for public access on the
Materials Project platform to facilitate data-driven material design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Material design and discovery for advanced environmental
barrier coatings (EBCs) have been greatly hindered by our limited understanding
of how composition and microstructure affect materials properties and
performance. This project will accelerate fundamental understanding of the
influence of composition and microstructure on the phase stability and
properties of multicomponent rare-earth phosphates, and use this understanding
to optimize performance of next generation EBCs for ceramic matrix composites
(CMCs) in reactive engine environments. A multipronged data-driven machine
learning (ML) approach will be developed to inform materials design and guide
materials performance evaluation to discover new rare-earth phosphates that have
unique attributes of EBCs for CMCs, compared to current state-of-the-art
disilicates without the issue of silicon evaporation. An element-based ML will
be trained on high throughput density functional theory calculations and will be
used to guide the design and optimization of configurationally-disordered rare-
earth phosphates with key characteristics of EBCs. A microstructure-based ML
will be trained on high-throughput finite element method calculations and will
be used to predict the optimal microstructure and performance of EBCs against
molten glass corrosion at elevated temperatures. The integration of multiscale
computations, machine learning, and experimental demonstration and validation
will provide a pathway for success in accelerating the design and discovery of
rare-earth phosphates as next generation EBCs for
CMCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSFâ€™s Mathematical
and Physical Sciences (MPS) Division of Materials Research (DMR) Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) program, and the
Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.