* 2119555
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Quasi-Direct Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Feliciano Giustino, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 774,759.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;The rapid identification of materials and
structures with properties tailored to specific applications is a fundamental
aspect of the Materials Genome Initiative. A basic prerequisite for the success
of the Initiative is the ability to predict the targeted properties starting
from basic information about the atomic composition and configurations in the
material. For devices such as solar cells, detectors, light-emitting diodes, and
lasers, the key design consideration is the fraction of the incident light
energy absorbed at any particular wavelength. This DMREF project focuses on a
particular class of materials, dubbed “quasi-direct” semiconductors, for which a
satisfactory theory of light absorption does not exist. The project will develop
the theoretical tools needed for the calculation of optical absorption in quasi-
direct semiconductors and validate the new theoretical methods by carrying out
optical experiments in structures optimized for the accurate measurement of the
absorption coefficient. More than 200 quasi-direct semiconductors have already
been identified in the Materials Project database, and this project will make it
possible to incorporate such materials as optical components of future devices.
All codes released will be open source to maximize societal impact, and the
semiconductor industry will also benefit from the highly trained STEM workforce
delivered by the project. A strong educational focus will be placed on
undergraduate students by partnering with the Arizona State University (ASU)
Sundial Project, which recruits and mentors students who traditionally have
limited access to STEM careers. At the University of Texas at Austin (UT
Austin), undergraduates will be directly involved in the development of the new
codes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;In quasi-direct
semiconductors, the energy threshold for vibration-assisted light absorption
(the so-called indirect gap) is only slightly below the energy threshold for
direct light absorption (the direct gap). Because of this proximity, the
quantum-mechanical second-order perturbation theory expressions for vibrational-
assisted absorption diverge as the photon energy approaches the direct gap,
leading to unphysical predictions. The proposed solutions include the
development of many-body quasi-degenerate perturbation theory and the use of a
non-perturbative special displacement method by the team at UT Austin. The
experimental validation requires special samples and materials, since the
absorption coefficient must be determined with high accuracy over a spectral
range where it changes by orders of magnitude. The needed samples will be
fabricated at ASU using custom Chemical Vapor Deposition methods, and the
optical measurements will also be performed by the ASU
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.