* 2119998
* Collaborative Proposal GEOPAths:IN Recruiting through location-based Curriculum and Field and Laboratory Research Experience for High School Students, Teachers and Undergraduates
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Henry Sun, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 9,770.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements to STEM K-12
education and increasing the number and diversity of young people headed into
STEM careers have been identified as national priorities. This project seeks to
address aspects of both of these priorities in the context of Geoscience
education and workforce diversity. The project will encourage high school
students including many from historically excluded groups, to become involved in
the geosciences or other STEM disciplines by 1) engaging them in lesson plans
developed by participating teachers to explain the local landscape and natural
environment in which they live, 2) offering them opportunities to participate in
geoscience research projects at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas and 3) by
building personal connections between students and faculty at UNLV. To
facilitate interactions with high school students PIs will build long term
relationships with high school earth science teachers by hosting summer
workshops in which teachers will be provided with information about the local
geology and natural environment and assist them in creating lesson plans for
their classrooms. The activities will build up to a culminating experience where
the teachers and high school students have an opportunity to claim their own
identity as budding geoscientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
encourage high school students including many from historically excluded groups
to become involved in the geosciences or other STEM disciplines. The program
will strengthen the relationship between the University of Nevada (UNLV) and the
local community, including the local school district. Project objectives will be
accomplished through a comprehensive program that will include: 1) building a
professional earth science learning community to facilitate collaboration
between local high school teachers and UNLV faculty/students; 2) generating high
school earth science curriculum materials based on the local geologic resources
that will provide STEM education opportunities while also introducing potential
career paths in the earth sciences; 3) creating a service learning course that
will pair undergraduate ‘geoscience ambassadors’ with high school classes that
are utilizing the newly developed curriculum materials; and 4) engaging highly
motivated high school students, high school teachers, and UNLV undergraduate
students in high profile, locally relevant scientific research questions in a
way that leverages cutting edge analytical equipment in the UNLV Geoscience
Department. The workshop curriculum content and materials will be designed in
consultation with curriculum experts so that they mesh well with the teachers’
needs and address concepts outlined in the Nevada Academic Content Standards for
Science. Resultant outcomes will bear benefits to teacher and student
participants, faculty and the community as the project demonstrates how to build
the geoscience workforce at the local level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.