* 2119857
* GP-UP: Strengthening the Geoscience Workforce by Scaffolding Community Outreach and Research Experiences (SCORE) through WaterCorps
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael O'Driscoll, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,379.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WaterCorps program will build
an experiential learning pathway that emphasizes workforce development in the
geosciences. Students will engage in a professional learning community that
provides a parallel environment to real-world, project-based work settings, such
as the environmental consulting industry. The unique structure of the program
enables students to gain geoscience-related technical skills while also
developing soft skills needed for success in industry (e.g., project management
and client engagement). Students in the WaterCorps program will support a
regional needs gap in Eastern North Carolina for activities ranging from
environmental site investigations to education and outreach activities for a
wide range of community partners. A well-trained geoscience workforce is
critical to tackle the important water quality and quantity issues faced by this
economically disadvantaged region. WaterCorps students will develop their skills
using a problem-based learning approach that will make them well suited to
joining the environmental geoscience workforce in eastern North Carolina. The
structure of the project is also designed, however, to introduce students to
business processes and build professional identity, thereby creating a pathway
to experiential learning for those who might not otherwise take part in a
cocurricular experiential learning experience, such as traditional research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WaterCorps program is based on theories of interest
and identity development. As opposed to undergraduate research experiences,
which are known to be highly successful in moving students towards graduate
school and research careers, this project's main goal focuses on building
professional identity and preparing students for the workforce, particularly
areas related to environmental/coastal geosciences and environmental consulting.
The WaterCorps organization will build student teams consisting of a project
manager, staff scientists, interns, and general participants to address real-
world problems posed by community partners in a consulting-style context.
External project partners range from State government agencies to non-
governmental organizations and local community groups addressing a wide range of
water-related problems. Students will obtain technical geoscience experience and
build soft skills that are needed in the workforce (e.g., project management,
client communication, time management and task prioritization, and personnel
skills).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.