* 2119888
* GP-GO: Iowa Environmental Internship Pathways Program
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Bradley Cramer, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,478.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geoscience, Environmental Science,
and Environmental Engineering, collectively referred to as GEO-STEM herein, lie
at the interface of science and society. Many of the grand challenges of the
21st century, including access to clean air and water, biodiversity, and the
impacts of global change, rely on the skills of the GEO-STEM workforce.
Unfortunately the United States is facing a critical shortfall in trained
personnel to enter the GEO-STEM workforce, and what students are entering are
often underprepared with the skills required to meet these challenges.
Additionally, whereas the negative impacts of GEO-STEM industries and topics
(resource extraction, access to clean air and water, etc.) fall
disproportionately on communities of color, most individuals from these
communities have been historically excluded from GEO-STEM fields. This is not
only detrimental to the future of remediation of these negative impacts, but
also limits the ability to unlock the talent available in this important and
growing sector of the U.S. workforce. This project will develop a GEO-STEM
Learning Ecosystem (GLE) in the State of Iowa that will increase student
preparedness to enter graduate school and the GEO-STEM workforce, and will do so
while increasing the number and diversity of GEO-STEM students at the University
of Iowa. These goals will be accomplished through a series of extra-curricular
and outside-of-the-classroom learning, internship, and professional development
opportunities provided by educational, government, and industrial
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pressing societal issues such as access to clean
air and water, soil health, preservation of biodiversity, and the impacts of
global change are all fundamentally GEO-STEM concerns, and to address these
issues as a nation we must be able to produce a highly skilled GEO-STEM
workforce ready to meet these challenges. Recruitment, retention, training, and
mentoring students through critical transitions in their educational pathways
are important components to address the overwhelming need for increasing the
number of students entering the workforce. The PIs propose a series of
collaborations, partnerships, and opportunities for a new GEO-STEM Learning
Ecosystem (GLE) in the State of Iowa focused on the critical transition from
university graduation to the workforce. The development of a GLE in Iowa will
provide the education-government-industry partnerships that are required to
generate the authentic, real-world, work-based learning that is so critical to
training the next generation of GEO-STEM students. The project will create an
environmental internship program that will be sustained past the lifetime of the
grant that will provide students with important experiential learning
opportunities outside of the classroom and outside of academia that will better
prepare them for eventual transition to the GEO-STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.