* 2119825
* Collaborative Research: IMAGINE FG: Linking the genetic basis of spatial cognition to natural selection in a food-caching bird
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Scott Taylor, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,521,608.00

Understanding the evolution of cognition and whether natural selection can shape
cognitive abilities, is a major goal of the study of animal behavior and
evolutionary biology. Cognition allows animals to adjust to changing conditions,
and it is well known to be affected by both environmental and developmental
conditions. At the same time, there is considerable variation in cognitive
abilities both between and within species and causes of such variation remain
unclear. It is generally assumed that variation in cognitive abilities can be
shaped directly by natural selection and recently, we provided evidence that
individual variation in spatial cognitive abilities involved in the recovery of
food caches in food-caching mountain chickadees is under direct selection.
Mountain chickadees are small birds that rely on their memory to hide and find
thousands of food items and depend on their food caches for overwinter survival.
The central goal of the research is to understand how natural selection shapes
learning and memory ability and to uncover the genetic basis of variation in
learning and memory ability. To share the importance of our research with a
broad audience, we will use a multifaceted broader impacts strategy focused on
student training, community engagement, and education with an overall focus on
broadening participation of underrepresented groups through a commitment to
equity, inclusion, and diversity. We will engage the general public through
public lectures at two field stations and both general public and students from
local schools at Natural History Museums in Nevada and in Colorado. The project
will provide training to two postdoctoral fellows as well as to numerous
graduate and undergraduate students, who will be recruited through established
programs that support students traditionally underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has four aims. The first is to
understand the genetic basis of specialized spatial memory in food-caching
mountain chickadees. The second is to measure heritability of specialized
spatial memory. The third is to understand how natural selection shapes genetic
variation in genomic regions that underlie specialized spatial memory. The
fourth is to determine if the genetic basis of spatial memory is geographically
consistent by comparing populations from different mountain ranges. To meet
these aims, the research will sample mountain chickadees from populations in two
different mountain ranges. Among other data types, the work will combine whole
genome sequence data, sequence capture data, and spatial cognition data to
develop a deep understanding of the mechanisms by which natural selection shapes
variation in spatial cognition. This work is jointly funded by the Behavioral
Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Evolutionary Processes Cluster in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.