* 2119809
* RII Track-2 FEC: Developing a Circular Bio-Based Framework For Architecture, Engineering and Construction Through Additive Manufacturing
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Brian Via, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,990,754.00

Nonrenewable resources underpin our country’s critical infrastructure and as a
result, many of our renewable resources are underutilized or wasted. The current
housing economy operates on a model that damages the environment rather than a
circular one that coexists with it. For example, buildings emit more than one-
third of greenhouse gases globally and lumber mills producing housing
construction materials currently convert only 40% of wood volume to lumber,
leaving the remainder to be disposed of. This Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaboration (RII Track-2 FEC) award will
allow University of Idaho and Auburn University project teams to create a
foundational framework to utilize renewable and waste feedstocks to make and
utilize 100% bio-based materials for the Advanced Housing Manufacturing Industry
of the Future. This project’s research activities and those developing the
future workforce for this industry will be performed by a diverse
interjurisdictional and interdisciplinary team, laying the foundation for
transformational change in one of the country’s largest industries, housing
construction. It will provide outreach to high school chemistry students and
educate college undergraduate and graduate students, as well as mentor
postdoctoral scholars and early-career faculty members. Two NSF EPSCoR states,
Idaho and Alabama, will experience economic enhancements from this project’s
technology developments and industry partnerships that capitalize on their
strong timber industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to develop the science, technology, and educational frameworks required to
enable an Advanced Housing Manufacturing Industry of the Future through the
necessary intersection of unique interdisciplinary collaborations. Specifically,
project teams at the University of Idaho and Auburn University will: 1)
fractionate and characterize (via spectroscopy) bio-oils, chemically transform
the oils into resins, and incorporate nanofibrillated cellulose to improve their
properties; 2) develop additive manufacturing technology that is compatible with
thermosetting type wood/bio-resin composites, incorporate reinforcing agents,
such as biochar and long natural fibers, evaluate the properties of the
composites via rheometry, thermal analysis, and spectroscopy, and 3-D print
prototype building wall panels for evaluation; 3) evaluate, simulate, and
predict composite material performance through ASTM tests, and incorporate fire
and durability test data into neural network models to optimize material
performance; and 4) promote housing construction market transformation toward
more resilient building paradigms by developing resilience assessment tools for
the architecture, engineering and construction industry and municipalities, and
to develop curricular and pedagogical strategies for educating these
stakeholders. These and other project activities will educate approximately 100
high school, 40 undergraduate, and nine graduate students, as well as train
three postdoctoral scholars, and mentor six early-career faculty members. This
project also utilizes a mentor-network approach to achieve a superior mentoring
experience for the and foster broader collaborations among the team’s
researchers. The scientific knowledge gained from this project will allow for
better use of timber waste materials in two EPSCoR states, Idaho and Alabama,
thereby increasing housing affordability and sustainability, ultimately
contributing to the mitigation of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.