* 2119688
* RII Track-2 FEC: Tri-state Research Institute of Manufacturing for Managing CO2 (TRIMMing CO2)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Xiao-Dong Zhou, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

During the past century, our civilization’s technological advances have been
driven by the conversion of carbon-rich fossil fuels into electricity, heat,
polymers, fertilizers, and other carbon-based products that are the foundation
of modern society. It is now clear that, to avoid catastrophic climate change,
we must dramatically and rapidly reduce global emissions of CO2, and
additionally remove billions of tons of CO2 from the earth’s atmosphere and
oceans by mid-century. The mission of the Tri-state Research Institute of
Manufacturing for Managing CO2 (TRIMMing CO2) project is to address the
challenge of carbon capture and utilization. The team will develop innovative
manufacturing processes and fundamental understanding to advance carbon capture
and utilization. The work is enabled by a closely collaborative, well
integrated, and highly interdisciplinary network of researchers at the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette, New Mexico State University, the
University of New Mexico and West Virginia University, as well as the National
Energy Technology Laboratory and Idaho National Laboratory. This TRIMMing CO2
project will provide inter-jurisdictional synergistic activities for students,
postdocs, and faculty, including exchange of students and faculty, internship at
the national labs and industry, and co-advising students while broadening
participation in research, with a focus on the engagement of groups currently
underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The expertise of
the TRIMMing CO2 team spans the areas of electrochemistry, materials design and
characterization, manufacturing, theoretical chemistry, spectroscopy, multi-
scale modeling, and machine learning. The planned research activity entails the
development of three cutting-edge technologies that will: (i) capture CO2 while
producing electricity, (ii) utilize CO2 while storing electric energy, and (iii)
convert CO2 to high-value chemicals. The first technical thrust involves the
development of molten carbonate fuel cell (MCFC) technology which concentrates
CO¬2 while producing electricity. Our research focuses on the use of
3-dimensional electrodes which can improve MCFC performance and stability. The
second thrust is the development of a unique energy storage system that utilizes
CO2. The third thrust focuses on the conversion of CO2 to high-value chemicals,
for instance C2H4 and ethanol. The fourth thrust will assess the quality and
economics of component and chemical manufacturing through a “MAP” program: (i)
Modeling of manufacturing and chemical processes, (ii) Artificial intelligence
for microstructural image analysis, and (iii) Process integration and techno-
economic analysis. The MAP program will provide opportunities for teaming with
industry partners on the advisory board for process scale-up. These four thrusts
closely integrate technical expertise from four universities and two national
labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.