* 2119551
* RII Track-2 FEC: Critical Resource Availability for the Future of the Renewable Energy Industry: Critical Minerals and Ground Water Resources in Iowa and Kansas
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Bradley Cramer, University of Iowa
* Cooperative Agreement
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,996,950.00

Wind energy and ethanol production are two of the largest growth industries in
Iowa and Kansas, and both states have become national leaders in renewable
energy over the past two decades. Iowa is the clear national leader in biofuel
production and the two states are #3 and #4 in total wind energy production.
Unfortunately, both industries face significant resource challenges. Wind energy
is threatened by limited national supplies of critical minerals, particularly
the Rare Earth Elements (REEs), and ethanol production faces limitations imposed
by access to sufficient groundwater supplies required for the conversion of corn
into biofuel. The two limitations, REEs and groundwater, represent two of the
largest challenges facing the future of the renewable energy industry in the
United States. This joint project funded by the National Science Foundation
EPSCOR program and carried out in partnership between the University of Iowa,
Iowa Geological Survey, University of Kansas and the Kansas Geological Survey
will utilize this multisector collaboration between universities and state
governmental agencies to produce data and resources that support private sector
growth by providing the technical capacity and information required for
sustainable growth and development of the renewable energy sector in both
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancements and growth within the renewable
energy industry are a priority objective of United States energy research and
policy. Wind, solar, hydro-electric, geothermal, biofuels, and energy storage in
batteries, are all major components of the future U.S. renewable energy
portfolio, yet all face significant resource challenges to their development and
deployment. Among these, wind, solar, and battery storage are threatened by
limited national supplies of critical elements, particularly the Rare Earth
Elements (REEs: e.g., neodymium, dysprosium, terbium, praseodymium, indium,
gallium, and tellurium). Ethanol, the primary biofuel in the U.S., utilizes
cheap and abundant corn as the primary feedstock. However, ethanol production
also faces critical limitations imposed by access to sufficient water supplies
(typically groundwater) required for bioconversion. These two limitations, REEs
and groundwater, represent two of the largest challenges facing the future of
the renewable energy industry in the United States. Iowa and Kansas have quietly
become national leaders in renewable energy over the past two decades,
particularly with respect to wind energy and ethanol production. The two states
are #3 and #4 in total wind energy production for 2019 and are now #1 and #2 in
wind power electric generation as a share of state total. Iowa is by far the
national leader in ethanol production and Kansas is now a top ten producer as
well. This joint proposal funded by the National Science Foundation EPSCOR
program and carried out in partnership between the University of Iowa, Iowa
Geological Survey, University of Kansas and the Kansas Geological Survey will
utilize this multisector collaboration between universities and state
governmental agencies to expand the technical research capabilities of both
jurisdictions as well as provide fundamental research necessary to continue
sustainable growth in the renewable energy sector in both
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.