* 2119975
* Building Infrastructure for Longitudinal Speech Data Collection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2025
* Suzanne Wagner, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 01/31/2025
* USD 265,830.00

Recordings of natural speech are crucial for research on a wide-range of topics
in the language sciences. Audio diaries can form an important source for data,
especially for research at the interface of language and society. Audio
recording allows diarists to express themselves in ordinary and casual ways,
giving language researchers a clearer view of everyday language in the past and
the present. More generally, diaries have long been important tools in human
history for recording events and experiences, providing information that can
contribute to the understanding of cultural heritage. This project builds on a
pilot study that began in April 2020, capturing people's day-to-day experience
of the COVID pandemic and beyond. Diarists use a custom mobile app to record
their spoken diary entry. Mobile apps democratize data collection by making it
easy for anyone to contribute as a citizen scientist. App code is made public,
for other scientists to adapt for their own use. Anonymized audio and
transcripts are made available to the public and other researchers in perpetuity
via a public library repository. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the
improvement and expansion of the remote audio diaries infrastructure to optimize
participant recruitment and retention through the development of improved app
technology and long-term community partnerships with youth organizations. These
self-recorded audio diaries provide several benefits for linguistic research.
First, researchers can obtain data from participants across a wide geographic
area, enabling a large-scale analysis of ongoing language changes. Second,
repeated entries from the same speakers enable researchers to track individual
participation in community-level sound change in real time. Third, leveraging
the genre of diary entries results in important personal social insights from
speakers, enriching the understanding of the relationship between linguistic and
social processes. The data collected enable researchers to test existing
hypotheses about preteen sociolinguistic calibration, by comparing variability
of ongoing sound changes in child, preteen, and teenage speakers' language
production. Existing hypotheses regarding post-adolescent participation in
ongoing sound change can also be tested. The success of this infrastructure will
facilitate continuous collection of data beyond the requested funding
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.