* 2119918
* RCN-UBE: A National Malate Dehydrogenase Protein-Centric Molecular Life Sciences Couse-based Undergraduate Research Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ellis Bell, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,868.00

This project will serve the national interest by facilitating adoptions of a
protein-centric course-based undergraduate research by faculty at an array of
types of institutions, dramatically increasing the number of students from
diverse backgrounds that will experience the benefits of research integrated
into their undergraduate education. The U.S. economy in STEM is growing but the
workforce for these demanding fields is not keeping pace. In a time when demand
for STEM-educated workers is growing, an alarming number of students leave
before completing their degrees, and this pattern is especially true for women,
first generation students and students of color. One of the ways to retain
students in STEM is by engaging them in research. Because the number of
traditional undergraduate faculty-mentored research opportunities are limited,
it is critical to develop ways to integrate research into the curriculum to
broaden access to all students. This project will develop a national network of
faculty who study and teach about the same protein. The network will develop and
refine a course-based undergraduate research course so that a wide range of
students learn about and contribute to our understanding of the protein.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of research into the teaching environment
using course-based undergraduate research experiences (CURE) has significant
positive impact on motivation and persistence of STEM students similar to that
seen from traditional undergraduate research experiences. Sustained support and
availability of these experiences is critical and best conducted within a
network of faculty each working in a common research tread/topic. Missing in
STEM is a protein-centric CURE network for a robust and sustainable experience
developing biochemistry and molecular biology research skills. This project will
grow a network of collaborating life-scientists to integrate biochemistry, cell
biology and other disciplines in a protein-centric CURE. To accomplish this
goal, the project will: 1) Develop a dynamic training and mentoring program to
attract a diverse array of faculty and facilitate their adoption of CUREs using
the malate dehydrogenase (MDH) enzyme; 2) Create a regional infrastructure of
Hubs to maximize the community benefits that contributed to the success of the
MDH CURE community and will contribute to the long-term sustainability of the
network; and 3) Develop electronic and physical resources and partnerships to
further lower the energy barriers for the MDH CURE adoption and maximize the
impact these aims. The project will implement its strategic partnerships with
other NSF Funded networks, organizations, and companies to optimize these
efforts. When completed a sustained collaborative network of faculty engaging a
wide range and number of students in protein CUREs will be in place. This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.