* 2119174
* Integrating Artificial Intelligence with Smart Engineering and English Language Arts in Upper Elementary Education
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 866,273.00

This project will develop upper elementary school students’ abilities to work
with Artificial intelligence (AI) in future careers. AI will be a critical tool
for influencing and increasing productivity in the future of work. As such, it
is increasingly important to introduce K-12 students to basic AI knowledge and
skills, build familiarity with AI technologies, and train students to be
competitive in the workforce. Through this project, a team of robotics and
education researchers at Tufts University in Massachusetts and Maryville
University in St. Louis, MO will work with over 50 teachers in St. Louis County
to develop a research-informed educational ecosystem bringing AI concepts to
upper elementary school students. This ecosystem will include a novel, low-cost,
AI-enabled hardware toolset, including components such as sensors, actuators,
and a microcontroller, for students to build smart systems, as well as support
for teacher professional development. Through after-school and summer programs,
the project will engage over 1000 St. Louis County students in constructing
functional AI-enabled solutions to problems presented in fictional stories that
the students read in English language arts and summer reading programs. The goal
of the approach is to encourage transdisciplinary learning at the intersection
of AI, engineering, and literacy. The education program testing will include 12
teachers and 500 students from the upper elementary target audience, with other
participants in pilot testing across the K-12 grade band. The project aims to
generate a new model for introducing vital AI concepts to elementary students
that reduces barriers to integrating computational thinking into school
curricula and provides tangible, trainable representations of AI for students to
explore.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will investigate three primary
research questions: 1) How does the introduction of tangible artificial
intelligence elements lead to changes in upper elementary students’
understanding of artificial intelligence concepts and attitudes towards
artificial intelligence? 2) How do different levels of complexity and variety of
tangible artificial intelligence learning tools impact students' engagement and
the diversity of their solutions and designs? 3) What are the potential benefits
and challenges of introducing tangible artificial intelligence elements in
integrated engineering and literacy activities? The project team will apply a
design-based research (DBR) approach to jointly generate interdisciplinary
education and learning sciences theory alongside iteratively designing and
developing the toolset, professional development, and activities. The research
will include interviews and surveys with AI professionals to develop and
validate grade-appropriate measures of students’ understanding of AI concepts
and attitudes. The team will evaluate the research questions with a mixed-
methods analytic approach, triangulating qualitative data from teacher
interviews, lesson and professional development observations, student-made
artifact analysis, and artifact-based student interviews with quantitative data
from teacher and student surveys. The project’s contribution will shift the
artificial intelligence education paradigm towards a convergent curriculum and
away from the status quo of coding and computing requiring separate instruction.
The project findings will help inform the field about challenges specific to AI
education in upper elementary grades. The deliverables from this project will
include the AI Animated Inventions (AI2) hardware toolset, a teacher
professional development model, a gallery of example activities and student
work, and measures of the program’s effectiveness, as well as the usability and
utility of the tangible artificial intelligence elements for learning AI
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.