* 2119545
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Inverse Design of Architected Materials with Prescribed Behaviors via Graph Based Networks and Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Yun Jing, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 376,317.00

A material's force-displacement response, modal response, and wave transmission
and absorption response to dynamic loadings, all can be construed as its
characteristic fingerprints. The behaviors of materials under dynamic loads that
are applied within a fraction of a second remain poorly understood due to the
complex, nonlinear interplay between material microstructure, geometry, and
applied load. The complexity increases manifold for architected materials, in
which topological considerations are paramount to achieve specific responses or
functions. Consequently, methodical design of architected materials with optimal
dynamic fingerprints is a challenge that has not been adequately addressed. By
seamlessly integrating advances in graph network theory, machine learning,
numerical simulations, and high-speed additive manufacturing approaches, this
Designing Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award will
accelerate the understanding, inverse design, and fabrication of architected
materials with tailorable dynamic fingerprints. The outcome will be materials
with inversely designed three-dimensional micro-architectures fabricated via
desktop additive manufacturing with prescribed behaviors, such as impact
shielding and wave transmission. Applications include energy and shock
absorption, acoustic wave filtering, stretchable electronics, and other
multifunctional material systems. The project will also train graduate and
undergraduate students in the new paradigm of autonomous inverse design and
additive manufacturing based on desired behaviors. Moreover, demonstration
modules, design games, and additive printing activities will be used for
outreach to K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend graph-
based generative machine learning modeling techniques to identify the underlying
motifs within architected materials to understand their dynamic behaviors as
well as provide an inverse design framework for optimized functional responses.
The first step is to develop a graph space model to represent an arbitrary
architected material composed of an arbitrarily complex 3D micro-architecture,
by size, scale, hierarchy, lattice topology, and material attributes. The next
step involves obtaining high-fidelity experimental data and higher-order
simulation data with large amounts of lower-order experimental data to
accelerate the training and discovery process. A forward graph-based machine
learning model will be trained on the combined data for functional response
prediction. Lastly, the graph neural network with reinforcement learning will be
used to generate graphs with the desired properties based on the forward
predictive model. This extensive and experimentally validated framework will be
used to discover fundamental knowledge pertaining to structural and dynamic
characteristics, which will then be leveraged to inversely design materials with
prescribed dynamic fingerprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the
Directorate for Engineering (ENG) and the Division of Information and
Intelligent Systems (IIS) in the Directorate for Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.