* 2119753
* RII Track-2 FEC: BioWRAP (Bioplastics With Regenerative Agricultural Properties): Spray-on bioplastics with growth synchronous decomposition and water, nutrient, and agrochemical m
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Vaishali Sharda, Kansas State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 2,999,814.00

Modern farmers face an ever-growing list of challenges. Many of these issues,
such as more severe weather, will require them to change how they farm. Creating
a protective layer over soil when growing field crops could help farmers better
manage many issues at once. Covering soil with sheet plastic prevents weed
growth, erosion, and moisture loss. But, using large amounts plastic creates
waste, is not eco-friendly, and too costly for field crops. New locally sourced
types of bioplastics that fully break down into to safe by-products can be made.
These new materials could provide farmers with a green way to control weeds,
fertilize crops, protect soil and water resources, and work with nature to
better manage their fields. This National Science Foundation Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-2 Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (NSF RII
Track-2 FEC) award will be a new partnership called BioWRAP between Kansas State
University, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology, and University of
Nebraska. This project will be focused on advancing farm use of bioplastics.
Teams will do this by linking natural and man-made systems, stopping harmful
weed-crop-till cycles, and helping build green rural industries. The team will
use lab and field trials, novel analytics and products, and the links between
people, farms, industries, and natural systems to help change how we grow field
crops for the better. Our goal is to create an all-in-one system that can better
manage weeds, nutrients, soils, and water resources. The project will provide
support for five early career faculty and three post-docs. It will also provide
learning resources to students of all ages and people on farms and in rural
areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-2
Focused EPSCoR Collaborations (RII Track-2 FEC) award will be a new partnership
focused on a project called BioWRAP (Bioplastics with Regenerative Agricultural
Properties) between Kansas State University, South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology, and University of Nebraska. The overarching goal of this project is
to reduce the use of conventional plastics, herbicides, and their associated
environmental impacts in agricultural production. This goal will be accomplished
through the following integrated thrust areas: (i) create a set of bio-based
polymers that can be used in agricultural production; (ii) measure the
agricultural effectiveness and associated environmental impacts of the
technology; and (iii) estimate the potential social and economic impacts on
communities and the agricultural economy of the proposed technology along with
establishing a consortium for sustained collaborations among university partners
in Kansas, South Dakota, and Nebraska in the field of spray-on biopolymer based
films for agricultural production. The research will include: engineering
biopolymers included functionalized PHA-based biopolymers, protein based
sprayable biopolymers, and hybrid polymer systems; studying the impact of this
technology on strengthening of agroecosystems by evaluation of biopolymer with
respect to weed suppression and crop production efficiency, nutrient cycling,
soil moisture retention and life cycle impacts along with environmental
accounting; and assessing the broader impacts of the new BioWRAP technology
using socio-economic analysis of product adoption and rural sustainability along
with valuing ecosystem services provided by BioWRAP, ecosystem service market
design and participation and its impact on socio-economics of participating
EPSCoR states as well as overall sustainable data provision of the project. The
research activities designed for the project enable industry engagement and
potential career opportunities for students in industries. The program includes
mentoring of five junior faculty and three post docs by senior faculty in
advancing through their careers and guiding students at different stages of
education (graduate, undergraduate, and high and middle school) and engaging
with rural communities through field days, surveys, interviews, and educational
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.