* 2119912
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Multidimensional Nominal Response Models in Adaptive Testing
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Catherine Mintz, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 11,994.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This doctoral dissertation research project will
investigate the use of multidimensional tests in computerized adaptive testing.
Multidimensional tests are used across many disciplines to make critical
decisions on issues such as psychological health, educational ability, and
vocational suitability. Some of these tests are administered as Computerized
Adaptive Tests (CATs), a mode of testing that adapts the test in real time based
on the examinee's item responses. Generally, CATs are designed to work with item
responses that are scored as 0 or 1, based on whether the examinee has chosen
the correct response option or an incorrect response option. However, this
dichotomous scoring scheme disregards information contained in incorrect
response options, which can be modeled as nominal response data. Research on
single-subject CATs has demonstrated that when its components are designed to
work with nominal response data, the tests were shorter and more accurate than
those designed for dichotomous responses. This project will examine the value of
multidimensional adaptive tests that utilize item response options as nominal
response data. Psychometric software will be developed and made publicly
available. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is
provided to enable a promising student to establish a strong, independent
research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will advance the use
of multidimensional tests in computerized adaptive testing by incorporating item
response options into the modeling, item selection, and estimation processes
that constitute the adaptive test. The project will compare the accuracy,
efficiency, and security of this approach to existing procedures. Adaptive test
components and results will be simulated for Multidimensional Adaptive Tests
(MATs) and Cognitive Diagnostic-Computerized Adaptive Tests (CD-CATs). Both MATs
and CD-CATs can be used for either summative or formative assessment purposes.
However, they differ in their theoretical assumptions and thus must be
investigated separately. To compare the incorporation of item response options
in multidimensional adaptive testing to current dichotomous scoring procedures,
item banks and item selection methods will be manipulated. Common item selection
methods for dichotomous response data will be generalized for use with nominal
response data to ensure comparability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.