* 2119501
* Supporting collaborative reflection by K-12 teachers with analytics from intelligent tutoring software
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vincent Aleven, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 850,000.00

One way K-12 teachers engage in lifelong professional learning is by reflecting
on their own practices, for example by reviewing video recordings from their
class sessions. Past research shows that reflection has powerful effects on
teachers’ classroom practice. A separate line of past research shows that
students learn very well with AI-based intelligent tutoring software (ITS), for
example, in middle-school and high-school mathematics, and that teachers'
support contributes to this effect. It is likely that teachers could help
students more effectively if they were to periodically reflect on their
classroom practices with regard to this type of software. Yet effective
reflection is hampered by the fact that it is nearly impossible for teachers to
notice and remember all that happens during any given classroom period. A well-
designed tool that presents analytics extracted from class sessions could be a
great help. The current research therefore investigates how to design an
analytics tool that can support K-12 teachers in reflecting collaboratively with
trusted colleagues on their classroom practices around students’ work with
intelligent tutoring systems (ITS). The project will build an innovative tool
that allows computers to automatically collect and analyze multiple sources of
data (i.e., multimodal analytics). The tool will prompt reflection and inform
discussion among teachers, for example about their students’ learning progress
or challenges, and about their own, possibly implicit, biases towards certain
students or groups of students. Through reflection with data, teachers can
identify ways to improve their teaching practices, student learning, and equity
in their classrooms. The main goal of the project is to design and create such a
tool, test whether it supports effective collaborative reflection among
teachers, and whether it leads to improved classroom practices. The project will
contribute to the broader goal of making analytics useful for teachers. It has
the potential to improve a highly effective form of K-12 classroom instruction,
namely, learning with ITS, an increasingly common learning environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design, create, and pilot-test a new
analytics tool for supporting teachers in jointly reflecting on their classroom
practices around ITS. The tool will leverage multimodal analytics; it will
extract and show trends in students’ learning and teachers’ practices and
illustrate them with strategically selected examples from its own data store,
recorded during ITS sessions. The tool will take advantage of (1) location data,
collected with sensors placed in classrooms, to reveal patterns in teachers’
movement in the classroom, (2) physiological data, collected with physiological
wristbands worn by teachers, to reveal ways in which their stress level affects
students, (3) log data detailing students’ interactions with the tutoring
system, analyzed to detect progress, struggles, knowledge growth, and learning
behaviors, and (4) video data that capture important detail about classroom
interactions. The reflection tool will be designed with middle-school teachers.
Teachers will be involved in the research start-to-finish to make sure the tool
matches their preferences and needs. The design will be guided by a proven model
of teacher reflection, adapted for multimodal analytics from sessions with an
ITS. The tool will be implemented within CTAT+Tutorshop, a widely-used platform
for ITS research and development. Many of the needed analytics already exist
within CTAT+Tutorshop, but new ones will be developed as well. Over time, the
tool will be continuously improved and pilot tested. At the end, teachers will
test a classroom-ready prototype with their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.