* 2119365
* Thermally functional and reversible thermal conductivity switching in nanoporous molecular frameworks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ashutosh Giri, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 358,391.00

The energy consumption of the United States primarily relies on nonrenewable
resources such as coal and petroleum that lead to large quantities of toxic
emissions. Also, most of the energy consumption is wasted as heat. This
combination of toxic environmental emissions and high energy inefficiencies
demands better thermal engineering strategies capable of efficiently utilizing
the wasted heat as reusable energy, thus lowering the consumption of the ever-
depleting nonrenewable resources in the process. One innovative strategy, which
goes beyond the traditional approach of utilizing passive thermal components to
cool electronic devices is to actively control heat flow in electronics through
thermal switches. This project will build on recent advances in 2D polymers to
design new materials with superior thermal switching properties. Through this
project, collaboration with local high schools will be initiated to develop
educational modules for K-12 teachers and students providing opportunities for
them to get exposure to nanotechnology through extracurricular activities in the
Providence school system, which is the largest urban district in Rhode
Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposed research
program is to develop a bottom-up design criterion for a dynamic thermal switch
based on molecular framework materials, possessing the ability to actively
manipulate thermal gradients with high switching ratios and fast response times.
The project team will perform systematic studies of structure-property
relationship on 2D covalent organic frameworks, an emerging class of crystalline
and porous polymeric materials, by implementing both theoretical and
experimental approaches. All measurements will be performed using advancements
in pump-probe optical spectroscopy techniques and these experiments will be
corroborated with first-principles calculations and molecular dynamics
simulations to access the atomistic and mode-level dynamical processes involving
different types of energy carriers in these novel materials. This project will
advance the fundamental understanding of energy transport mechanisms in
molecular framework materials, 2D porous thin films and across hybrid interfaces
occurring under structural phase transitions and electronic structure changes
resulting from externally applied stimuli. This will open doors for the
realization of new paradigms in heat, mass and charge transport properties that
are facilitated by the 1D pore channels with high surface areas in 2D
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.