* 2119547
* Collaborative Research: GEOPAths IN: DIG CAMP - Data in Geosciences: Collaboration and Mentoring Program—Teaming Latinx High School and College Students for Data Use in Geoscienc
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Susanna Honig, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 194,760.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric, climate, ocean, earth
and environmental sciences (geosciences) are among the least diverse fields in
science, technology, engineering and math (STEM), with Latinx scientists being
significantly underrepresented. A lack of diversity in STEM fields means
decreased ability to identify and solve critical issues facing society such as
climate change, which disproportionately affects the populations that are least
represented in STEM. Data literacy is gaining increasing relevance and
importance to scientists and the general public as we aim to make informed
decisions to solve locally and globally relevant problems. DIG CAMP (Data in
Geosciences: Collaboration and Mentoring Program—Teaming Latinx High School and
College Students for Data Use in Geosciences) offers a camp-based model to
support engagement with geosciences, as well as data literacy. During this
project and through its sustainability plan, DIG CAMP provides opportunities for
Latinx high school students to engage with authentic and locally relevant
geosciences research and data; gain geosciences content knowledge; build their
data literacy, critical thinking, problem solving, and collaboration skills;
strengthen their identities to do science; and increase the likelihood that they
will pursue academic or workplace careers in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DIG CAMP - Data in Geosciences: Collaboration
and Mentoring Program—Teaming Latinx High School and College Students for Data
Use in Geosciences will broaden participation in the geosciences among
communities of color by developing a research-based model for overcoming long
standing barriers and biases within the field. The goals of this project are to:
(1) design and implement a complementary suite of informal learning experiences
to actively recruit Latinx high school students into the geosciences by
increasing their engagement, capacity building, and opportunities for continuity
in the discipline; (2) provide Latinx undergraduate geosciences majors with
meaningful outreach and mentoring opportunities that engage them with
communities, and increase their retention in geosciences fields of study and
careers; and, (3) support high school students and their undergraduate mentors
to build science and data literacy skills and engage with locally relevant
geosciences research data to increase their efficacy and success in college and
the geosciences workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.