* 2119973
* Collaborative Research: BENEATH THE FOUNTAINS: Shallow conduit processes and diversity in basaltic fissure eruptions.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Arianna Soldati, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 214,324.00

Mildly explosive eruptions—the most frequent manifestations of subaerial
explosive volcanism on Earth—broadly group into two styles: Strombolian and
Hawaiian. The former is characterized by sequences of intermittent discrete
explosions and the latter by sustained pyroclastic fountaining. Explosive
activity during the 2018 fissure eruption of Kīlauea volcano (Hawaiʻi) provided
an exceptional opportunity to record a wide range of Strombolian and Hawaiian
behavior (Figure 1), thanks to the accessibility of the volcano and the wealth
of data types collected throughout the event. This study address which processes
in the plumbing system beneath the volcano ‘drove’ the great diversity in style
and intensity of the 2018 explosive activity compared to previous, more
consistent, fissure eruptions at Kīlauea and elsewhere? Kīlauea is an
exceptionally active volcano and its eruptions pose constant challenges for
management agencies because the eruption sites are highly accessible and there
is a need to balance the strong popular interest in viewing the eruptive
activity against public safety (as seen in 2018). This balance requires
critically on sophisticated knowledge of the volcano’s current and immediately
future behavior. There is both a public desire for better knowledge of the
volcano’s behavior and a need for improved forecasting of the likely course and
footprint of all future eruptions. The observatory partner, USGS, has a
federally mandated role to advise response agencies in Hawaii and will transfer
knowledge from the NSF-funded study to the bodies charged with risk management.
This work involves exchange of material and ideas between institutions in the
USA, and the United Kingdom to the benefit of young researchers and students.
The results will be widely disseminated via meetings and workshops, courses
offered by the FEMA-funded National Disaster Preparedness Training Center, the
Internet and scientific publications and a planned virtual field trip to
Kilauea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to link existing high-
resolution observations of explosive basaltic fissure eruptions to the processes
in the very shallow conduit that cause and shape them, focusing on the 2018
Kīlauea eruption as a case study. It will combine existing data derived from
high temporal and spatial resolution videos with: (1) field measurements of five
representative pyroclastic footprints, and laboratory characterization of the
ejecta, (2) high-precision measurements of two-phase magma rheology, and (3)
models tied to newly completed laboratory analog experiments to simulate
outgassing patterns. This approach is expected to help identify patterns and
precursors that accompany transitions in eruptive style, supporting risk
management for communities on the flank of this very active volcano. This study
will fundamentally improve our understanding of the dynamics of Hawaiian and
Strombolian eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.