* 2119533
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Sustainable Systems Enabling Food Security in Extreme Environments and Food Deserts employing a Convergence of Food, Energy, Water and Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Deidra Hodges, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 08/31/2021
* USD 93,546.00

The increasing demand for water, food, and energy resources in the face of a
changing climate and continued population growth make these vital resources
increasingly scarce. Food deserts are areas with limited access to nutritious
and affordable food. The U.S. Department of Agriculture reported in 2010 that
23.5 million people in the U.S. live in food deserts. The United Nations
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) #2 Zero Hunger is to “end hunger, achieve
food security, improve nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture”. The
workshop will bring together diverse entities and groups to identify strategies
and deliverables that are ready for acceleration to maintain the food supply
chain in response to rapidly changing environmental stressors such as limited
water and energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop aims to advance a
technical framework for the acceleration of use-inspired convergence research in
this area of national importance by bringing together practitioners from public
and private institutions including Minority Serving Institutions of higher
education, industrial and academic research organizations, and other
stakeholders. An ecosystem approach to re-envision our science and technology
research approach to sustainable food supply is the main focus of the workshop
and seeks to identify a path to sustainable systems that enable food security in
extreme environments and food deserts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.