* 2119990
* GP-IN: Engaging High School STEM Educators and Special Education Teachers in Innovative Geoscience Teaching, Learning, and Research Environments
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Katayoun Mobasher, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 445,678.00

The objective of this project will be to increase exposure to geoscience
literacy and education by providing high school educators with educational
geoscience content, training, and research. This project will subsequently
expose thousands of high school students to geoscience content and its
applications in the real world, including students from historically excluded
groups, students with disabilities, English learners, and first generation
students. The PIs will develop Integrative Project-Based Learning Content to
facilitate STEM and Special Education teachers’ knowledge and application of
acquired geoscience skills, as well as students’ exposure to geoscience content
and its career opportunities in high school. Teachers and students will
contribute to a geological database and virtual field guide of Georgia, which
will be shared with other geoscientists in Georgia, facilitating a virtual
dialogue. The geodatabase and virtual field guide has the potential to be
expanded with additional information, and can be used as a model for
geodatabases and virtual field guides in other states and regions. By providing
education in specific geological research technologies and facilitating field
and lab research, students will acquire the knowledge, experience, and
motivation to transition to geoscience programs when they enter college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to increase exposure of
geoscience educational and career opportunities to at least 1,200 high school
students, including students from historically excluded groups such as English
learners, first generation students, and students with disabilities. By
integrating geoscience content and techniques into already existing required
high school science courses, the proposed work will bridge the gap between
middle school, where students are initially exposed to Earth Science content,
and college. Proposed activities will foster workforce development, close
interaction with mentors, creation of a seamless educational next step for high
school level students, assessment of the impact of collective efforts on student
learning, sharing and collaboration, and sustainability of products and
services. The instructional content produced from this project can be used as a
model for other institutions to engage students from diverse backgrounds in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.