* 2119465
* Collaborative Research: GP-UP: Developing STEM Identity by Engaging URM Undergraduate Students in Research on Air Pollution in Chicago Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ping Jing, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 215,820.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geoscience learning community
will help students from historically excluded communities build their STEM
identity through authentic research experience, mentoring, and introduction to
geosciences careers. Students will learn about air pollution, gain experience
with instrumentation, practice computer programing and data analysis, and
communicate scientific results by participating in real research with prosocial
impact. This project addresses three GEOPAths Program goals: (1) increase the
number and diversity of students in geosciences; 2) prepare students for
geoscience careers; and 3) contribute to the evidence base for effective student
engagement, learning, and retention in STEM. The data collected through this
project will be of sufficient quality to contribute to community discussions
about how best to reduce air pollution and better protect public health,
particularly within vulnerable communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to employ several established evidence-based strategies for the success of
students from historically excluded communities. A focus on student success in
STEM will include authentic collaborative undergraduate research experiences,
sustained mentorship, and engagement in research with a direct link to community
benefit. By combining authentic prosocial research and mentoring, the PIs aim to
build a sense of belonging, self-efficacy, and STEM identity in two cohorts of
students and help with their successful transitions to STEM programs related to
the earth sciences. This project specifically proposes to create geoscience
learning community that engages undergraduate students from historically
excluded communities in research to measure and attribute air pollution in two
Chicago neighborhoods that differ in socioeconomic status, demographics, and
proximity to industrial facilities. The PIs will recruit a cohort of
undergraduate participants at Loyola to join a research-intensive learning
community each of Year 1 and Year 2 of the project. Student participants will
work closely with scientists and the community-based organizations to design and
carry out research that addresses community concerns about air pollution. The
Project's aims are to 1) provide an applied, socially relevant research
experience for student participants; 2) understand how particulate pollution in
Chicago varies over space and time; and 3) provide air quality data for
community use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.