* 2119117
* Collaborative Research: Predictive Intelligence for Pandemic Prevention, Theme 4: Social and Behavioral Obstacles and Supports
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Juliet Iwelunmor, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2023
* USD 29,724.00

Although pandemics have threatened human civilization since ancient times, how
to predict and prevent them remains a pressing challenge, calling for innovative
insights and practices. Pandemics emerge through incidental ‘perfect storms’:
molecular changes in pathogens, gradual trends in climate, subtle shifts in
ecological interactions among potential hosts, and individual behavioral
decisions by people, all colluding to make up the difference between an
interesting but rare new variant of a known disease and an existential worldwide
crisis. Being able to predict the emergence of pandemic threats, therefore,
requires a fully integrated, multidisciplinary approach, able to consider the
complexity of these realms across scales of interaction to predict and, ideally,
prevent. This workshop is one of four bringing experts from scholarly
communities in the social and behavioral sciences, biology, engineering, and
computer science together to discuss how to integrate the approaches taken by
each community into a more effective, unified science of pandemic prediction.
The focus of this workshop is on developing understanding of how human
attitudes, social behavior, and the drivers underlying both shape patterns of
infectious-disease transmission and efforts at control and eradication. This
fundamental understanding in turn will facilitate pandemic prevention and
control decisions that leave us better prepared when confronted with future
pandemic threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is structured to focus on
four topical areas of crucial importance, dealing with cultural transmission,
information and communication, equity, and sustainability. The white paper that
comes from this workshop will provide important guidance for incorporating
insights into the social and behavioral sciences into predictive intelligence
and pandemic prevention. It will inform future research investments,
institutional capacity-building, and other policy priorities aimed at keeping
the US and the world safe from inevitable future
pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.