* 2119575
* DMREF: Computational Discovery of Polymeric Membranes for Dehydration of Polar Solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Shihong Lin, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,655,906.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane-based separations have
revolutionized some industries (e.g., seawater desalination) and have the
potential to drive numerous applications towards more energy efficient and
sustainable processes. In chemical separations, which are typically highly
energy intensive and account for greater than 5% of the annual primary energy
consumption in the U.S., membrane-based approaches have significant potential to
reduce both energy utilization and capital cost. However, membranes for the
separation of mixed solvents, while practically important, are technically
challenging as differentiating between the transport of small molecules that
have subtle differences in properties is required. The rational design of the
next generation of membranes for such separations is a significant challenge,
given the vast chemical and design space, but could be realized by Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI)-inspired screening. That is, the MGI-style of this
effort could alter the current, long-standing membrane development paradigm. In
this work, functionality- and performance-driven screening, with close coupling
between simulations and experiment, will result in the design and fabrication of
high-performance membranes tailored for targeted separations. Specifically, the
dehydration of polar solvents by pervaporation will be targeted as an
overarching initial target. This is because the discovery and deployment of
effective new materials will eliminate the need for high-cost and high-energy
separations and enable effective solvent reuse for sustainable
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
effort will develop an integrated, MGI-inspired computational and experimental
screening platform with the goal of accelerating the rational design of
membranes for the dehydration of polar solvents. This will be achieved through
the combination of extensive molecular simulations using the Molecular
Simulation and Design Framework (MoSDeF); machine learning using DeepForge;
syntheses based around the combination of ring-opening metathesis polymerization
chemistry combined with spin coating; experimental characterization; and in
operando evaluation in a pervaporation process. This molecule-to-process
approach will enable the synthesis of a wide array of polymer membrane
compositions from a common central scaffold. Moreover, there will be an integral
synergy between molecular-level screening simulations and experiment to
molecularly design and identify new membranes that are tailored to specific
dehydration separations. The goals of this project are the identification,
synthesis, characterization, and testing of new candidate polymers for polar
organic solvent-water membrane separations, development of a robust library of
polymer membrane properties, development of machine learning models that relate
chemistry to measured properties of membrane films, and the release of a
generally applicable set of software tools that will enable rapid screening and
machine learning studies on soft matter systems. Additionally, this effort, with
its integration of computational modeling, machine learning, material synthesis,
characterization, and performance evaluation for targeted separations, will
serve as an excellent educational platform for participating graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers to experience the full suite of interconnected
components described in the MGI vision. By developing competency in the three
foundational pillars of experiment, computation, and data science, the project
will develop a workforce aligned with the MGI model. Also, multiple integrated
educational activities at the undergraduate and K-12 levels will highlight the
potential of computational materials science and the need for close coupling
with experiment and data science, inspiring the next generation of the MGI
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.