* 2119881
* GP-IN: Broadening pathways to an undergraduate degree in geosciences: Collaboration between Johns Hopkins University and the Baltimore City Ingenuity Project
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Katalin Szlavecz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 315,070.00

This project will create a new pathway to engage and retain a diverse group of
Baltimore City high school students in the geosciences through a collaboration
between the Johns Hopkins University (JHU) Department of Earth and Planetary
Sciences (EPS) and The Ingenuity Project (IP), a Baltimore City non-profit that
has developed an academic program to prepare and launch the next generation of
diverse Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math leaders. The project will
enhance the geoscience learning of high school students through place-based
learning geoscience activities and research projects, including measuring and
monitoring the environmental conditions in Baltimore City. Specifically,
students will participate in active research projects aimed at quantifying heat,
air, water, and soil pollution across Baltimore and will learn about the
intersection of environmental monitoring and social justice initiatives.
Together, this will establish a learning ecosystem in which there are increased
opportunities for underrepresented minority high school students to engage in
geoscience activities and in which the geosciences are viewed as an exciting and
relevant field of study with viable career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to (1) increase the number of high school students
engaging in activities and research within JHU EPS, (2) increase the engagement
of JHU EPS in Baltimore environmental initiatives, including working with and
educating local high school students on these issues, (3) engage students in
hands-on placed-based learning research opportunities that demonstrate the
interdisciplinary nature of geoscience research, and (4) expose students to the
intersection between environmental and social justice issues in Baltimore City.
These goals will be achieved through a three-pronged approach with multiple
entry points for engaging students to participate in geosciences research: 1) an
end-of-summer Geosciences Camp, 2) EPS faculty and graduate student
presentations in IP classrooms, and 3) IP Research Practicum in JHU EPS labs.
These activities will increase the knowledge of Baltimore City high school
students on geoscience problems and research, itâ€™s societal relevance, and
career pathways in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.