* 2119837
* Quantitative Exploration of Molecular Machine Mechanisms
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Daniel Zuckerman, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2025
* USD 885,852.00

The project will investigate the nanoscale ‘molecular machines’ that perform key
tasks of biological cells, from importing nutrients to regulating compartment pH
levels to synthesizing biomolecules; moreover, a number of educational efforts
will accompany the research. Molecular machines have received intensive
scientific scrutiny because of their importance in cell biology, but their
complex functions have been difficult to characterize in a quantitative way.
This project will use cutting-edge computational and data-analysis methods to
make key strides toward quantification. The computational analysis will also be
used to design further experiments to refine knowledge of these critical
systems. Educational efforts that will supplement the research include
developing an online quantitative biophysics course, developing several other
online educational resources, and conducting an outreach program with high
school students from economically disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In further detail, the research project will
pursue what can be termed a systems biology approach to molecular machines,
attempting to investigate a large set of mechanistic possibilities using
advanced computations. It is already well-established that machines may perform
more than one function, and we hypothesize that the underlying sequences of
microscopic processes will prove to be heterogeneous when analyzed
quantitatively. A Bayesian inference (BI) pipeline will be developed to infer
quantitative models from experimental data, and the research will attempt to
improve upon BI for the important class of problems with ~10 parameters. The
main systems to be studied are alternating-access transporters, which use ion
gradients to power small-molecule transport, and rotary ATPases, which perform
the key final step in activating ATP molecules and also use ATP-derived free
energy to pump ions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.