* 2119816
* Collaborative Research:PPoSS:Planning: Streamware - A Scalable Framework for Accelerating Streaming Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Viktor Prasanna, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2022
* USD 124,553.00

In grand-challenge scientific applications, the enormous amount of data produced
by the sensing and instrumentation infrastructure often loses its value after a
small window of time. Thus, to obtain actionable intelligence from the data,
streaming analytics, i.e., the ability to analyze in-motion data, is
increasingly becoming critical. Moreover, modern computing systems are highly
heterogeneous, consisting of processors, accelerators, and large high-bandwidth
external memories. To develop scalable streaming analytics applications,
challenges across the full system stack -- from application to target platform
-- need to be addressed. In this regard, this planning project is identifying a
comprehensive set of research challenges, goals, key innovations and timelines
in algorithms and applications, systems software, hardware-software co-design,
and computer architecture. This project is bringing together a community of
application developers and users, computer scientists, and data scientists,
whose interests lie in building streaming data science applications targeting a
wide variety of scalable systems. This project is demonstrating preliminary
results on how it will achieve significant cross-stack performance improvements
using Privacy Preserving Streaming Graph Learning for Secure Smart Grids as the
driving application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern data-science applications are
characterized as being highly decentralized, distributed and requiring
composition and orchestration between localized analytics on thousands or
millions of edge platforms and massive centralized analytics in cloud/data
centers, as well as requiring real-time analytics on streaming data. To enable
scalable performance of grand-challenge streaming data-science applications, a
framework that allows developers to seamlessly build these applications
targeting a wide variety of scalable systems is needed. This planning project is
conducting preliminary research towards a large proposal for developing an
opensource framework, StreamWare, that will enable users to develop streaming
data-science applications. This project is establishing a community of
application developers and users, computer scientists, and data scientists who
would serve as early adopters and developers of the StreamWare framework. In
consultation with domain experts, a list of key data-science kernels for
StreamWare is being generated, and their existing state-of-the-art algorithms
and hardware IPs are being evaluated to identify performance limitations and
opportunities for improvement. This project is also articulating the
requirements of novel abstractions that can represent and operate on streaming
data on heterogeneous platforms. This project uses Privacy Preserving Streaming
Graph Learning for Secure Smart Grids as a motivating application to show
preliminary evidence of end-to-end scalability using a novel notion of symbiotic
scalability that captures the impact of StreamWare's cross-layer optimizations.
The expected outcomes of this planning project include a proposal for the
research activities to be carried out in the large grant, publications on the
results of the survey activities and future research directions for enabling
streaming data science, and curricula for future graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.