* 2119237
* RII Track-2 FEC: Advancing Manufacturing and Biotechnology through an On-Demand Sensor Platform: Investments in the Development of Engineering Principles and the Future Workforce
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2026
* Jeffrey Halpern, University of New Hampshire
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 02/28/2026
* USD 2,999,003.00

The proposed research represents a comprehensive advancement in biosensor
design, biotechnology, and engineering and prepares AL, ME, NH, and WY to take
full advantage of the anticipated growth of Biotechnology and Advanced
Manufacturing industries. Today, biomanufacturing industries are limited by a
lack of effective tools for monitoring key proteins which provide information on
product quality in real time. Current protein sensors are limited to
spectroscopic measurements (which are non-specific and require expensive
equipment) or off-line, laboratory-based approaches. To address the need for on-
demand biosensors to continuously monitor proteins in biomanufacturing
processes, we have assembled a geographically diverse team from the University
of New Hampshire, Auburn University, the University of New England, the
University of Wyoming, and the University of Maine. This research will be
coupled with a multi-tiered workforce development plan integrated throughout the
project that includes training for a new biotechnology workforce in AL, ME, NH,
and WY. The workforce development includes individual components for early-
career faculty, postdoctoral scholars, graduate and undergraduate students, K-12
students, and the broader communities in the jurisdictions, all tied together
through an annual academic-industry symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research represents a comprehensive advancement in biosensor design,
biotechnology, and engineering and prepares AL, ME, NH, and WY to take full
advantage of the anticipated growth of Biotechnology and Advanced Manufacturing
industries. Today, biomanufacturing industries are limited by a lack of
effective tools for monitoring key proteins which provide information on product
quality in real time. The project will develop engineering principles to guide
on-demand biosensor design towards Industry 4.0 applications. Four distinct yet
collaborative research projects will produce a full assortment of sensor
components to achieve the continuous, in-line process monitoring that is
essential for economically viable quality-by-design biomanufacturing. Project 1
focuses on the development and validation of computational methods to design
protein recognition elements (REs) with targeted hotspot interactions. Project 2
will produce engineering principles for creating analyte-responsive polymers
that amplify the signal of analyte binding to REs at process conditions. Project
3 will develop innovative Scanning ElectroChemical Cell Microscopy techniques to
reproducibly nanopattern surfaces to control sensor form factors and array
construction. Finally, Project 4 will measure the electrochemical transduction
of surface events of analyte-responsive polymers and test designed sensors for
measuring IL-6 and insulin in-line and continuously. Combined, the four projects
will be integrated into a single sensor device capable of measuring changes in
protein levels, specifically IL-6 and insulin, continuously and in real time for
industrial applications. This research represents a close collaboration with
researchers from a geographically diverse team from the University of New
Hampshire, Auburn University, the University of New England, the University of
Wyoming, and the University of Maine, and will be coupled with a multi-tiered
workforce development plan integrated throughout the project that includes
training for a new biotechnology workforce in AL, ME, NH, and
WY.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.