* 2119672
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Accelerated Design of Redox-Active Polymers for Metal-Free Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jodie Lutkenhaus, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 831,521.00

Growth in electrified transportation and grid-scale energy storage has been
accompanied by increased demand for lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries. This has
caused an increase in world-wide demand of strategic metals such as cobalt and
lithium, for which the US does not have deep reserves. To address this
challenge, this project envisions metal-free, recyclable, organic batteries
based upon redox-active, radical-containing polymers using a multi-disciplinary
data-centric approach. The project also bears impact on other potential
application areas opening the door to metal-free electronics, memory storage,
and spintronics. This project will provide educational training opportunities in
synthetic chemistry, polymer science, electrochemistry, and computational
chemistry and physics specific to organic batteries. Education and outreach
activities will be jointly developed and deployed at The University Chicago’s No
Small Matter Molecular Engineering Fair, Texas A&amp;M University’s Physics
&amp; Engineering Festival, and other venues. Workforce development is planned
through participant mentoring and workshops targeted to industrial, academic,
and government researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radical-containing polymers are
promising as redox-active materials, but their current performance remains
inferior to current Li-ion battery materials. This project will address the
specific challenges of improving the electrochemical performance of the radical-
containing polymers as both cathodes and anodes. Specifically, the new knowledge
to be gained regarding the cathode and anode include: (1) which chemical
modifications adjust the redox potential of the redox active group; (2) which
co-monomer patterns promote charge transport; and (3) and which electrolyte
promotes electrochemical stability of the polymer. This project brings together
researchers from Texas A&amp;M University and The University of Chicago, who
will integrate their expertise in machine-learning screening and optimization,
computational materials chemistry, high-throughput synthesis, and
characterization. In alignment with the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), this
project will culminate in the production and dissemination of a searchable
polymer property database on redox-active polymers, polymer-specific inverse
design machine learning tools, multiscale models for the redox kinetics, and a
proof-of-concept all-organic battery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.