* 2119938
* Process Data for Modern Educational Assessment and Learning
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jingchen Liu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/31/2025
* USD 375,000.00

This research project will use process data to develop tools for educational
assessment and adaptive design for testing and learning. With the increasing use
of computer-based testing, a variety of behavioral data have been collected.
This project will focus on developing methods to conduct accurate assessments
and deliver effective personalized learning materials/interventions. These
methods will be based on process data collected in log files of computer-based
tests. Specific topics to be addressed include the analysis of process data via
statistical learning methods, development of process-data-based assessments, and
adaptive learning through process data. The results of this research will
provide a deeper understanding of students' behaviors and cognitive processes in
an environment increasingly defined by technology-based interaction and
communication. Guidelines to improve item quality will be provided, with a focus
on more innovative item types such as those in scenario-based and simulation-
based environments. The results of this research will benefit instruction and
intervention programs designed to help students in academic environments. In
addition, open-source software will be developed, and graduate students will be
involved in the conduct of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent large-scale
computer-based assessments have developed a number of interactive problem-
solving items. This research project will develop tools for the analysis of
these new items. The investigators will concentrate on several aspects that are
very challenging in modern computer-based assessment and online learning.
Specifically, they will focus on the following topics: 1) understanding
students' cognitive processes by means of statistical learning techniques,
extracting information from process data; 2) improving current assessment tools
by means of process data; and 3) incorporating information in process data to
online adaptive/personalized learning. The analysis will combine techniques and
concepts from education research and statistical learning. The proposed models
will combine latent variable modeling and deep learning techniques for process
data analysis. The investigators will employ recent advances in modeling and
segmenting techniques for natural language processing. Adaptive learning will be
studied through a reinforcement learning framework. In addition, optimization
algorithms will be developed by means of recent advances in numerical methods.
This award is supported by the MMS Program and a consortium of Federal
statistical agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.