* 2119172
* DMREF: Engineering the On-The-Fly Control of 3-D Printed Block Bottlebrush Assemblies via Dynamic Bonds and Materials Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eugenia Kharlampieva
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,799,420.00

Biology is capable of creating materials with truly complex properties; for
example, chameleons can change their color by stretching their skin in ways that
affect nanoscale structure, and muscle proteins can controllably break and
reform to act as ‘shock absorbers’ that dissipate energy. These biological
materials share a foundational principle, which is that molecular interactions
have evolved to precisely control both the nanoscale structure and dynamics that
govern function. Synthetic soft materials, however, rarely reach this level of
sophistication due to the challenge of controlling both molecular arrangement
and motions simultaneously. This Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) project seeks to bridge this gap by ‘dialing-in’
material properties on-the-fly by using processing to exert spatial and temporal
control over molecular interactions. This will be achieved by using processing
flows in 3-D printing to control molecular assemblies, along with
breaking/reforming of chemical bonds to relax or arrest the material structure.
Automated printing and characterization will facilitate materials discovery
through machine learning protocols and will inform molecular design principles.
This interdisciplinary effort will bring together academic researchers and
scientists from the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) who have combined
expertise regarding making and characterizing materials, automating synthesis
and processing, and using molecular simulation and machine learning. The effort
will harness nanoscale structure and dynamics to create materials that emulate
the complicated functions seen in biology. These new materials and processing
capabilities will benefit society and the U.S. by on-the-fly printing new items
with potential applications in camouflage, metamaterials, radiative cooling,
energy conversion and storage devices, and displays. The research will also
involve the training of students with broad expertise spanning chemistry,
engineering, and physics, via both student mentorship and educational outreach
to students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine the stresses in out-of-
equilibrium 3D printing processes, along with dynamic (e.g. reversible or
triggerable) bond chemistries and tunable molecular architecture, to establish
an automated manufacturing/materials discovery protocol. A class of branched
macromolecules known as bottlebrush block copolymers can form nanoscale
assemblies, which can be distorted under an applied stress and are sensitive to
branch length and density. These materials are especially useful because they
can be decorated with chemical functional groups that affect properties via
inter-bottlebrush interactions. In line with the Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI), the project will establish a methodology to discover materials in this
rich design space, using computer-driven design and physically-guided machine
learning as a complement to automated synthesis, characterization, and
processing design. The goal will be to use structural color as a proxy for
printed materials with tunable ‘on-the-fly’ nanoscale structure, with dynamic
bonding incorporated to freeze-in or temporally modulate these optical
properties, and ultimately to incorporate stimuli-responsive functionality into
these soft materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.