* 2119935
* Collaborative Research: Experimentally Evaluating the Relationship between Cation Ordering and Oxygen and Clumped Isotope Fractionation in Dolomite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sierra Petersen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 75,243.00

Magnesium-bearing carbonate minerals, such as calcite and dolomite, are
ubiquitous in marine settings and represent an extremely valuable, deep-time
record of Earth's past. Subsurface reservoirs comprised of these minerals can
also host vast resources that are key to the economic activity and vitality of
the country. To effectively and efficiently develop these economic resources,
and to use these minerals as viable paleoenvironmental records, it is vital to
understand their geologic history. To do this geoscientists often use
geochemical proxies to constrain past environmental conditions. This fundamental
research uses laboratory experiments to constrain how oxygen isotope
compositions, an important geochemical proxy in dolomite and calcite, are
impacted by an often overlooked mineralogical parameter called cation ordering.
The results of this study will allow geoscientists to both improve their
understanding of the natural environments in which dolomite forms on Earth's
surface and potentially increase the fidelity of dolomite and other carbonate
minerals as a geochemical archive of Earth history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of dolomite as a paleoenvironmental and diagenetic proxy is inhibited by
uncertainty in published oxygen isotope water-mineral fractionation values. It
is hypothesized here that much of this uncertainty can be attributed to water-
mineral fractionation differences between different types of Ca-Mg-carbonate
minerals (e.g., very high-Mg calcite, poorly-ordered dolomite and well-ordered
dolomite) that have been collectively called ‘dolomite’ in the literature. This
hypothesis is rooted in empirical data from the rock record and the laboratory
that indicate that these various Ca-Mg-carbonate minerals form in sequence
during dolomitization by different crystal growth mechanisms, which leads to
vastly different Mg-Ca compositions, Mg-Ca cation ordering, crystalline
microstructures, and potentially oxygen isotopic compositions. To test this
hypothesis, well-controlled, high-temperature dolomitization experiments will be
used where fluid and mineral δ18O will be measured through the sequential
mineral transitions from very high-Mg calcite to poorly-ordered dolomite to
well-ordered dolomite. How isotopic fractionation varies between these Ca-Mg-
carbonate minerals, and the degree to which δ18O values are inherited from each
precursor phase, will be assessed. The clumped isotopic composition of each
dolomite phase will be measured and used to investigate whether cation ordering
affects the clumped isotope acid digestion fractionation factor, another value
for which published estimates differ greatly. This research aims to understand
the relationship between cation ordering and δ18O in dolomite through well-
constrained laboratory experiments. The isotopic framework developed in this
project will enable more precise application of dolomite δ18O and 47
measurements in a wide variety of studies. These results will have the potential
to enhance the use of stable and clumped isotope proxies in sedimentological
studies of natural dolomites, and will allow for better interpretations of the
diagenetic conditions of dolomitization. The results may also permit the use of
shallow marine dolomites as more robust paleoclimate
archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.