* 2119818
* Identifying and Extracting Meaningful Indicators of Children's Moment-to-Moment Programming Processes in Scratch
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kilchan Choi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 09/30/2024
* USD 850,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest in STEM and computational
thinking by developing and validating indicators of students' programming
processes. The proposed exploratory research will develop a data logging module
for Scratch to collect students' moment-to-moment programming behavior. The
project team will develop data processing rules or algorithms to derive
indicators of programming processes (e.g., debugging). The project will advance
the understanding of what programming processes students use, how these
processes unfold over time, and how these processes relate to measures of
programming and computational thinking. The data logging module and algorithms
will be distributed to the Scratch community to allow the study of programming
processes at scale. The research will also produce a systematic and replicable
methodology to accelerate the development of algorithms and widespread
dissemination of the tools, techniques, and methods used to study programming
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will observe novice fifth grade and
undergraduate students learning to program in Scratch. Students' process data
will be used to derive indicators of programming processes. The indicators will
be compared between age groups, within each age group over time, and to existing
external measures of programming concepts and skills. This research will
generate insights about what, how, and potentially why students perform the way
they do. The capability to derive indicators of programming processes will
complement existing methods of scoring static Scratch code. Algorithm
development will focus on theoretically-driven, rule-based indicators of
programming processes that are directly interpretable and on methods that
systematize and accelerate the algorithm development process. The algorithm
development methodology will apply to other block-based environments and
applications involving process data such as games, simulations, and innovative
item types in educational assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.