* 2119236
* Collaborative Research: PPoSS: Planning: Extreme-scale Sparse Data Analytics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Mahmut Kandemir, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2022
* USD 75,000.00

The graph data structure is used for storing and manipulating relational data.
Tensors are a higher-order generalization of the two-dimensional matrix
representation. Both graphs and tensors are used in exploratory and automated
data analysis. Applications areas include cybersecurity, complex system
analysis, and personalized healthcare. There exist a myriad of known algorithms
for typical data analysis tasks in these areas. For instance, the problem of
community identification in graphs, referring to automatically identifying well-
connected groups of vertices in graphs, has dozens of algorithms. Analogous to
the singular value decomposition in matrices, several tensor factorizations
exist with diverse use-cases. Both graph algorithms and tensor factorizations
use computer storage formats inspired by matrix computations. This project
focuses on data analysis use-cases that result in large-scale graphs and
tensors, necessitating parallel and distributed processing. The project's
novelties are in identifying and developing unifying parallel algorithm design
principles that span multiple graph computations and tensor factorizations. In
the planning stage, several focused research tasks will explore eight unifying
themes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop the foundations for an
end-to-end streaming data analytics system with performance comparable to highly
tuned static graph analysis benchmarks on current high-end workstations and
supercomputers. The investigators' multi-disciplinary expertise span high-
performance computing, theory and algorithms, computer architecture, and
programming languages and compilers. The cross-cutting research aims include
generalizable principles to orchestrate intra- and inter-node communication,
multiple approaches for exploiting hierarchical parallelism, locality-enhancing
strategies, and automatic performance tuning. The software artifacts from the
planning stage could form the basis for new data analytic benchmarks. The
investigators will incorporate research findings into the courses they teach.
Engaging experts from the national laboratories and the industry in the planning
stage will help solidify future large-scale efforts. The investigators will
leverage and contribute to existing institutional programs that broaden
participation in computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.