* 2119953
* GP-IN: Promoting and Sustaining geoscience and related disciplines with PSU EnvironMentors for underserved and underrepresented minority NY, NJ, and PA Communities (GEOENV)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gregory Jenkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,908.00

Diversity in STEM continues to be a critical issue in postsecondary and
workforce realms. In the disciplines of Earth, Oceanic, and Atmospheric
Sciences, the problem is amplified with very limited success for attracting,
retaining, and graduating students from historically underrepresented groups at
the undergraduate and graduate levels. Several factors inhibit STEM engagement
for these individuals including content exposure, mentoring, experiential
learning, and math and science preparation. To counteract the impact of these
limiting factors, a focused geoscience component, designated GEOENV, will be
added to the Penn State EnvironMentors program, which provides high school
students a research experience throughout the academic year through group
mentorship from faculty, postdocs, graduate, and undergraduate students. GEOENV
will provide additional opportunities for STEM engagement for high school
students, with the aim of steering students toward college/university Geoscience
majors/disciplines and careers/jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GEOENV will recruit
16 freshman, sophomore, and junior year high school students per year from 4
locations located in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania, representing varied
demographic and socioeconomic status. Initiating recruitment prior to declaring
majors or accepting enrollment at a university/college is a strategic time to
introduce participants to geoscience content and related activities. High school
student participants are assigned to a research team and develop a research
project as part of the EnvironMentors program and focus on a geoscience
discipline in the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences at Penn State
University. From yearlong work on a research project, high school student
participants present a research poster and papers as final products. GEOENV will
also include seminars with cross-cutting themes during the academic year to
increase exposure of participants to geoscience disciplines. High school
teachers will also participate to deepen their knowledge of education of STEM
education and research activities in geoscience
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.