* 2119654
* RII Track 2 FEC: Enabling Factory to Factory (F2F) Networking for Future Manufacturing
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Amit Sheth, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,885,189.00

Cyber infrastructure and artificial intelligence (AI) are core components of
smart manufacturing in South Carolina (SC), West Virginia (WV), and the United
States. To drive radical transformation of industry, factories must securely
expand beyond their physical boundaries. These Future Factories (FF) consume and
create interdisciplinary knowledge along with the ability to forge innovative
technological transformations. This project introduces a novel future cyber-
manufacturing paradigm – the Factory-to-Factory (F2F) network framework. Geared
towards automation, F2F networks require interoperability of stakeholders and
efficient understanding systems for data, information, and knowledge. This
collaboration between academia – led by the University of South Carolina and
West Virginia University - and industry will produce advanced smart
manufacturing technologies and an educated upskilled workforce in SC and WV.
Furthermore, it will create a blueprint model for future manufacturing
technologies that can be integrated with a F2F network to increase small-scale
and industrial manufacturing capabilities across the US. To expand our workforce
infrastructure, we will establish a lifelong learning pipeline for smart
manufacturing ranging from K-12 education, higher education, to professional
development support for scholars and industrial professionals. Particularly, we
will create online learning resources and STEM-oriented smart manufacturing
summer programs for K-12 students and provide internships for college and
graduate students through our industrial partners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will adapt, enhance, and integrate informational technologies (IT) and
operational technologies (OT) such as real-time secured sensing, high
performance computing, wireless communications, and AI, to support process
optimization among distributed smart manufacturing systems for F2F. Convergence
and true progress can only be achieved by fusing expert knowledge of
manufacturing processes with newly emerged hardware and software technologies.
The project focuses on manufacturing knowledge stemming from: (1) autonomous
feature extraction and recognition from product ‘manufacturing DNAs’ as a novel
manufacturing knowledge representation among distributed systems, (2)
architecture of interactive cyber spaces that combines cross-platform simulation
results within product lifecycles, (3) data-driven control theories during
process monitoring leading to rapid autonomous decision-making in replacement of
manual input/output modules, and (4) robust business models and operations
research (information service-oriented) concerning autonomous Key Performance
Indicator (KPI) decomposition among distributed sub-systems and rapid feedback
control loops. This will build a foundation for real-time production information
sharing and control platforms and facilitate manufacturing knowledge generation
and utilization among networked systems to address manufacturing management
challenges. Furthermore, it enables human interventions and interoperations in
the development and decision-making process of these highly collaborative
networked smart manufacturing systems. This project will showcase several novel
cyber manufacturing implementations and establish a roadmap towards a universal
digital F2F standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.