* 2119157
* Collaborative Research: DMREF: Transforming Photonics and Electronics with Digital Alloy Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Evgeniy Narimanov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,627.00

Non-technical Description: Materials have been defining human life from the
stone age to the current information age. In particular, research in the fields
of semiconductor science and electromagnetism underpins the explosive growth of
computing, communications, and imaging that affect almost every aspect of modern
human life. In this project, the interdisciplinary team of scientists working in
the fields of physics, materials science, electromagnetism, scientific
computing, and engineering will develop a new material platform that can
potentially enable new sources, detectors, and processors of mid-infrared light.
The team will utilize the ability to grow crystalline materials one atomic layer
at a time to controllably combine dissimilar atoms together, with a goal of
simultaneously engineering both electronic and optical properties of the
resulting “digital alloys” to dramatically enhance the interaction between slow-
but-compact electrons and fast-but-extended photons. The project will promote
the development of next-generation leaders of the technical workforce, both
through direct training of students and creation of “bite-sized” videos
explaining the inner workings of materials science research. A collaboration
between the team and AFRL researchers will explore applications of the developed
materials in practical devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: The
interdisciplinary team of researchers from four institutions working in the
fields of materials science, physics, electromagnetism, scientific computing,
and engineering will develop a new materials platform for strongly enhancing
light-matter interaction in the important mid-infrared frequency range. The
ultimate goal of the project is to develop a class of materials whose electronic
and optical response can be designed in a cohesive manner; in particular,
simultaneously stretching out electronic wavefunctions and confining optical
fields will address the fundamental length-scale mismatch between nano-
electronics and diffraction-limited light. In the course of the project, the
team will aim to develop new approach to design strongly nonlinear optical and
optoelectronic materials. The theory side of the project will combine the
expertise from analytical solid-state-physics, computational electromagnetism,
and first-principles materials science. The experimental part of the research
will utilize epitaxial growth of digital alloys, spectroscopy, and a variety of
optical and electronic characterization techniques. The research will provide
unmatched opportunities for the interdisciplinary training of graduate and
undergraduate students, as well as a host of other outreach and educational
activities aiming to improve the science pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.