* 2119850
* Collaborative Research: GP-UP: A near surface geophysics field experience to improve the recruitment and retention of under-represented minority students in the geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Gates, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 294,716.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate geoscience education
in the United States lags behind other Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields when it comes to racial and ethnic diversity. This
deficit is particularly notable for students who come from communities that have
been historically excluded in STEM fields and translates to a larger gap in the
workforce and at the graduate level. Notably, there has been no improvement in
the racial and ethnic diversity of students earning doctoral degrees in the
geosciences over the past 40 years. Research has shown that diversity has
demonstrated benefits for scientific advancement, including that diverse
perspectives provide unique approaches to problem solving; these perspectives
are necessary to meet the challenges and to solve the complex problems of the
geosciences. To address this gap, the PIs have designed a field program:
“Geophysics of the Near-Surface: an Outdoor Motivational Experience for
Students” This project aims to inspire students to major in the geoscience and
help these students develop some of the workplace skills necessary to succeed in
geoscience careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will provide an engaging
outdoor field experience for the student participants that will influence their
choice of major, provide mentorship opportunities for upper-level
undergraduates, create positive and lasting student-student and student-faculty
mentor relationships, provide meaningful research experiences for the students,
and create a strong cohort of students across multiple institutions. The goals
of the program are: (1) Recruit a diverse cohort of undergraduate students; (2)
Support student learning in critical zone science and geophysics; (3) Increase
students’ science communication, problem solving, teamwork, and leadership
skills; (4) Enhance psychosocial factors that are linked to retention in STEM
fields; (5) Increase participation in geoscience research; (6) Increase positive
attitudes towards geoscience careers and research; (7) Increase mentors’
leadership and professional skills. By attaining these goals, the PIs propose to
build a geoscience learning community of students across the participating
institutions and within the broader scientific community and will increase
recruitment and retention of these students in geoscience degrees and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.