* 2119820
* RESEARCH-PGR - Adapting Crops to a Harsh Environment: Interplay between Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi, Drought Stress and Plasticity of Plant Architecture
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Julia Bailey-Serres, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,125,499.00

Unpredictable climate and persistent droughts have an adverse impact on crop
yield. Intimate association of plant root systems with fungi called arbuscular
mycorrhizae that naturally grow in soil can allow crops to combat drought
stress. The relationship between these fungi and the host root is mutually
beneficial, with the fungus delivering minerals and water to the plant, and the
plant feeding the fungus with sugars and lipids. These exchanges happen within
specific cells of the root and result in overall promotion of plant growth. Very
little is known about how plant root cells host fungi without harm, and how this
influences plant growth. Two very different and important crops, tomato and
rice, will be compared to identify similarities in how they begin and control a
beneficial interaction with another organism. Regulatory factors that enhance
the fungal interaction to a benefit during drought will be modified by breeding.
This research will generate new knowledge and methods adapted to crops. It will
provide user-friendly web-accessible tools so that others may view the findings
in a root map. Graduate students and postdoctoral scholars will be trained as a
team in biological and data science. They will be guided in collaboration,
project organization and mentoring of others. An introductory training program
will be developed that integrates team-based data science education into
authentic science experiences for students. Outreach will expose 3rd graders
from diverse backgrounds to plant sciences. Educational material will be
publicly disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant production needs to increase
to meet the needs of the global population. However, climate change increases
the frequency and duration of water deficit that restricts plant growth and
yield. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungal (AMF) symbioses were critical to plant
migration to land and conserved pathways associated with this symbiosis have
been identified. It is proposed that association of plant root systems with
beneficial fungi, like AMF, can improve crop resilience to water deficit. The
establishment of AMF symbiosis and the mutual exchange of water and nutrients
between crop and symbiont happens within specific cells. In this proposal, two
crops that are phylogenetically distinct and critical to US agriculture, tomato
and rice, will be compared to identify cell-specific responses to AMF
colonization, water deficit and their interaction, and the conserved networks
that promote plant growth at cellular resolution. Technologies to capture
epigenome and translatome dynamics in the subset of cells responding to distinct
AMF elicitors or developing arbuscules and a high-resolution survey of AMF and
water deficit interactions from the organ to the cellular level will be
implemented. Cutting-edge single cell methodologies and interdisciplinary data
analyses will be developed and deployed to profile this inter-kingdom response.
Driver transcription factors will be modified using gene editing to facilitate
mitigation of the developmental impact of water deficit and increase
agricultural productivity. The project will generate user-friendly web-
accessible platforms to visualize multi-kingdom cellular â€˜omic data at spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.