* 2119963
* BII: Mechanisms of Cellular Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Michael Lynch, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,309,153.00

By integrating across disparate fields in the life, physical, and mathematical
sciences, this institute is designed to yield a mechanistic understanding of
evolutionary processes. The broad goal is to decipher the general rules by which
evolution proceeds at the cellular level, while simultaneously engaging in
research and educational activities to help build a formal field of evolutionary
cell biology. An immediate goal is to determine how aspects of cellular
evolution across the Tree of Life are governed by: internal cellular
constraints, the laws of biophysics and bioenergetics, and the genetic features
of populations. Specific projects include: a quantitative survey of how cells
apportion their energy budgets into a range of structures and functions; the
development of theory to understand the paths that are open vs. closed to
evolutionary modification in various lineages; comparative analyses of the
structures and functional capacities of the major molecular machines in cells;
and the use experimental laboratory populations of microbes to determine how
cells respond evolutionarily and developmentally to temperature and nutritional
challenges. By identifying key details at the cellular level, the institute will
greatly expand our understanding of mechanisms underlying evolutionary
processes, while also revealing rational strategies for engineering microbes
with novel beneficial functions and for eradicating harmful pathogens. A range
of activities, including student-exchange programs with collaborators, annual
workshops, development of educational materials, and establishment of an atlas
of cellular information will expand the reach of the institute to national and
international levels.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over its duration, the institute is
expected to connect with a wide range of integrative research and educational
foci, with a common goal of bringing a new dimension of evolutionary biology to
cell biology and vice versa. The research starts with several multifaceted
projects, the first using comparative genomics, spatial intracellular
proteomics, ultramicroscopy, and bioenergetic analyses to provide a broad
phylogenetic overview of cellular features and the relative costs of
constructing and operating them. The second project draws from empirical
observations to build quantitative theory for the mechanisms by which cell-
biological features evolve, in particular how the paths open to evolutionary
exploitation vary phylogenetically. This project also takes a structural-biology
approach to explore how major cellular complexes with essential and highly
conserved functions, e.g., ATP synthase and ribosomes, are nonetheless free to
diverge evolutionarily. The third project capitalizes and expands upon
established long-term evolution experiments with microbes to evaluate the
genomic changes that arise in response to selection on cell size and growth rate
over gradients of nutrient, temperature, and population-genetic conditions, and
seeks to understand why the phylogenetic scalings of growth rates and cell sizes
have opposite directionality in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. The integration of
these projects will reveal the Rules of Life at the cellular level and establish
mechanistic explanations for them from first principles. Involving work from
scientists from diverse backgrounds, the collaborative projects build outwardly
from the local to the national/international level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.