* 2119485
* RII Track-2 FEC: Advancing Research Towards Industries of the Future to Ensure Economic Growth for EPSCoR Jurisdictions - Advanced Wireless - Integration with Infrastructure System
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Dryver Huston, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,996,900.00

The focus of this research infrastructure project is Advanced Wireless
Integrated Systems for Infrastructure (AWISI) using Internet of things (IOT) and
microrobots. Engineered infrastructure, i.e., buildings, dams, bridges,
underground piping, etc. is often viewed as static, but actually is quite
dynamic. Changes occur at time scales ranging from milliseconds to decades.
Construction, maintenance, disaster resilience, emergency response and adaptive
control in response weather events and population growth are examples that
require dynamic and adaptive management approaches. Wireless methods eliminate
much of the capital cost of placing wires for communication, sensing and
control, and easily adapt as situations change. This project will engage in
fundamental research and research infrastructure development by focusing on
three main areas: 1. Advanced wireless research enabled by artificial
intelligence (AI), IOT and micro-robotics; 2. Infrastructure use cases covering
coastal structures, underground infrastructure, highway structures, rapid
prototype evaluation of new structures, and geotechnical formations. The goal is
to develop the use cases into Engineering Infrastructure Testbeds (EITs) that
support research and implementation of advanced wireless methods; and 3.
Workforce development and outreach that integrates stakeholders, students at
K-12 up through postdoc levels, and junior faculty in all aspects of the
research efforts. The project spans two different RII-eligible EPSCoR
jurisdictions, Vermont and Maine, and builds on expertise at three participating
institutions -- University of Vermont, University of Maine, and Vermont
Technical college. The project duration is four years with pilot projects in
areas that address a rapidly changing technical landscape and promote the
recruitment of diverse and early career faculty. It is anticipated that six
junior faculty, one postdoc, 16 graduate students, 7 undergraduates, and perhaps
over 100 K-12 students with a substantial fraction drawn from underrepresented
populations will participate in this project. There is potential for large
economic growth in the wireless, microfabrication and engineered infrastructure
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort takes advantage of recent
and ongoing rapid technology advancements in wireless communication for
telemetry, sensing, IOT devices with micro-robotic implementations, increasingly
sophisticated AI methods, and an integrated society highly dependent on
engineered infrastructure that it demands to be safe, ubiquitous, reliable, and
environmentally friendly. Wireless technologies to be researched include use of
AI to control wireless sensor networks and how to integrate them into the
emerging 5G/6G Open-Radio Access Network framework; integration of wireless with
IOT and microrobot devices to provide practical wide area coverage of engineered
infrastructure, including inaccessible regions; and specialized techniques for
communicating with underground and other inaccessible infrastructure.
Convergence of progress in these multiple domains, including economic and social
aspects, will enable information flow with the potential to transform the
construction, maintenance, and use of engineered infrastructure. These
developments will be implemented and evaluated in a set of EITs for coastal
structures, underground infrastructure, highway structures, rapid assessment of
prototype structures, and large geotechnical
formations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.