* 2119040
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Integrated Material Design and Processing--Application to Recycled Plastics
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* David Elbert, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,080,002.00

Materials manufacturing is subject to uncertainty in raw materials and processes
that can drastically alter the resulting properties. Defects can lead to costly
re-tuning of the process recipes and prevent production of certified products.
To address these challenges, this Designing Materials to Revolutionize and
Engineer our Future (DMREF) award will support the development of a data-centric
approach for integrated materials design and manufacturing, called Materials
Architected by Adaptive Processing (MAAP). In this approach, the same data and
data infrastructure applied for materials design will be harnessed for process
monitoring and control to ensure consistent production of materials with
targeted properties. As a specific example, the MAAP approach will be used to
design and produce polymer blends with superior properties from recycled
material. The award will also advance fundamental understanding of mixing and
flow-induced crystallization in multi-polymer melts and apply that understanding
to produce architected blends from recycled polymers. The ability to upcycle
plastic waste will improve sustainability and reduce the environmental impact of
plastics production. The project will contribute to the workforce development
by: 1) developing student projects that integrate data science, experimentation,
and computation; 2) providing research internships for high-school students
traditionally underrepresented in engineering; and 3) offering training for
practicing engineers, technicians, and managers in recycling, melt blending, and
quality control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop the
integrative MAAP approach to make the materials-by-design process more robust
and provide adaptive processing systems for consistent materials production.
This goal will be pursued in the context of superior polymer blends obtained
from recycled polyethylene and isotactic polypropylene. The approach involves
five key interrelated tasks. An event-driven, microservices data layer will
automate the contextualized data flow between the processing, characterization,
multiscale modeling, decision, and control tasks of the project. An instrumented
co-extrusion process with modular shape-multiplying elements will be designed
based on the modeling studies to investigate the controllability of the melt
streams and observability of the architected blends. Micro-scale modeling of
flow-induced crystallization (FIC) of the multi-polymer melt system will study
the effects of the domain interfaces and processing conditions on the
development of crystalline morphologies and provide material models of FIC for
meso-scale studies. Meso-scale models will investigate the stability of the melt
streams through the shape-multiplying elements and the formation of phase
domains during processing to determine how the measurable processing parameters
control the crystalline morphologies and domain architecture. Materials
characterization and micromechanical modeling will investigate the effect of the
crystalline and domain structures on the mechanical properties of the
architected blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the
Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation in the Directorate
for Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.