* 2119276
* DMREF/Collaborative Research: Switchable Underwater Adhesion through Dynamic Chemistry and Geometry
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Grace Gu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2025
* USD 432,573.00

Strong adherence to underwater or wet surfaces for applications like tissue
adhesion and underwater robotics is a significant challenge. This is especially
apparent when switchable adhesion is required which demands rapid attachment,
high adhesive capacity, and easy release. While organisms like the octopus and
mussel excel at underwater adhesion, synthetic adhesives lag far behind, which
is due to a fundamental knowledge gap in how chemical, geometric, and material
properties interact to control underwater switchable adhesion. This Designing
Materials to Revolutionize and Engineer our Future (DMREF) award aims to
incorporate mussel-inspired adhesive chemistry with octopus-inspired adhesive
structures to rapidly switch adhesion in dry and wet conditions. This will
accelerate and build the fundamental knowledge of how chemical, geometric, and
material properties control switchable adhesion to transform the design of
rapidly switchable adhesives for stiff and soft substrates in wet and dry
environments. This new knowledge will advance future economic and societal
innovations in critical applications from transient tissue adhesives for
prosthetic and wearable sensors to robot-assisted surgery, robotic gripping, and
pick-and-place manufacturing. In addition to training and mentoring strong
graduate students, the research team will develop bio-inspired adhesive gripping
activities to inspire K-12 students to pursue science and engineering careers.
This will be complemented by engaging future workforce leaders in adhesion
science and engineering through career development panels at national adhesion
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DMREF award supports research to combine
underwater-based dynamic adhesive chemistry with active adhesive geometry to
determine how adhesion can be switched underwater. The goal of this work is to
provide the fundamental understanding needed to design adhesives with tunable
adhesion strength, high adhesion switching ratios, and rapid switching times.
This will be achieved by integrating experiments, simulations, and machine
learning into a cooperative framework. This research will establish for the
first time a design methodology that amplifies the benefits of chemistry and
geometry into a single underwater switchable adhesive system. This design
methodology will provide opportunities to speed up the switching of dynamic
chemistry by releasing the interface with active materials and enhancing the
adhesion strength of geometric structures with dynamic adhesive chemistry. In
contrast to prior work which has studied how chemistry or geometry independently
influences adhesion, this work will uniquely determine how dynamic chemistry and
active materials combine to control adhesion, providing new paradigms in
adhesive design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.