* 2120039
* GP-IN: Inclusive Learning through Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences (ILEEPS)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Caroline Masiello, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 314,904.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Inclusive
Learning through Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences (ILEEPS) project is
to enhance understanding of how to introduce pre-college students to geoscience
content in an inclusive environment. Black, Hispanic, and Native American
populations continue to be underrepresented in the geoscience and environmental
science fields, and the geosciences are among those Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) disciplines with the lowest levels of
representation amongst these marginalized student groups. Through ILEEPS, in-
service public high school teachers will learn to use Culturally Sustaining
Pedagogy (CSP) for engagement with students in a geoscience context. This theory
fosters the development of student cultural identity as a means of both
supporting student academic success and encouraging students to critically
engage in the classroom. During the study, 11 teachers will learn and
incorporate CSP practices focusing on student connectedness, asset-building, and
reflection for use in their earth science classrooms. Earth science lessons will
be collaboratively developed with Rice University geoscience research faculty,
curriculum development experts, experts in culturally sustaining pedagogy, high
school earth science teachers from diverse Houston schools, and professionals
from societies including the National Association of Black Geoscientists (NABG).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the GP-IN: Inclusive Learning through Earth,
Environmental and Planetary Sciences (ILEEPS) project is to understand how
Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy (CSP) can enhance high school Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) teachers' cultural awareness and
create inclusive, equitable teaching environments that broaden the participation
of women, African Americans, Hispanics, and Native Americans in the geosciences.
This collaboration between the Rice Office of STEM Engagement (R-STEM), faculty
in the Rice Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, and
partners from the Houston Independent School District and GeoFORCE Texas, will
realize this overarching goal through three co-current objectives: 1)
identifying how teachers develop CSP within geoscience concepts; 2)
investigating how teachers' use of CSP affects students' sense of belonging, and
3) determining whether using CSP in the geosciences impacts teachers' culturally
responsive self-efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.