* 2120849
* Collaborative Research: Improving Engineering Students’ Ability to Model and Analyze Systems Using Free Body Diagrams
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Gillian Smith, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 255,883.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students’ ability to model and analyze systems with physical forces acting upon
them that students encounter in physics and mechanics courses. Free body
diagrams are an important modeling technique because they help students
understand and formulate physics and mechanics problems. Drawing free body
diagrams is a foundational skill for many engineers because it is typically the
first step in solving these types of problems. Students benefit by receiving
timely feedback on their diagrams so that they can improve their modeling
skills. This project will develop a mobile-based application that allows
students to practice formulating free body diagrams in an active learning
environment, using a set of problems with increasing levels of complexity. This
open access application can motivate students to practice in an informal
setting, help students master this modeling skill, and help students build self-
efficacy early in their engineering education. The project will analyze
students' use of the application and assess learning gains related to free body
diagrams. The project will advance engineering education practice by providing a
unique tool for students to learn how to construct free body diagrams as well as
providing an opportunity to study the effects of the active learning application
on student engagement, learning gains, and self-efficacy. The project will use
online repositories to disseminate the mobile application to the engineering
education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main goals of the project
are to: (1) develop a mobile-based application that incorporates both sound
pedagogy and motivation design to teach engineering students how to formulate
free body diagrams effectively, (2) support underrepresented students, in
particular women, in improving their free body diagram skills, and (3) increase
female students’ self- efficacy related to free body diagram skills and their
futures as engineers. Educational applications can be particularly useful in
providing the kinds of mastery experiences that build self-efficacy by (1)
providing an active learning environment in which students improve their skills
by solving problems of increasing complexity and (2) providing immediate
feedback. Participatory design will be employed with early undergraduate and
advanced engineering students, early career engineers, and engineering faculty
to design the digital learning environment, user tutorials for students, and
curricular guides for faculty. The project will address the following research
questions: (1) How do students engage with learning activities and immediate
feedback to master the ability to draw, label, and analyze free body diagrams?
(2) To what extent does providing a large quantity of scaffolded practice with
immediate feedback support the development of mastery of free body diagram
skills, particularly for female engineering students? (3) To what extent does
the intervention increase students’ self-efficacy, particularly for female
engineering students? The exploratory study will use a non-experimental mixed
methods design with 300-350 students to assess educational efficacy and to
establish the inclusivity of the tool for female engineers. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.