* 2120214
* MCA: Friction of Nanocrystals at Technologically Relevant Speeds: Filling the Gap of Knowledge in Nanotribology
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Masahiro Ishigami, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 332,552.00

This grant will enable the development of a sophisticated technique to determine
friction of individual nanocrystals at the speeds most relevant for industrial
applications such as gears and bearings. Since contacts between sliding surfaces
can be modeled as an ensemble of nanoscale contacts, the project is critical for
advancing friction reduction technologies. This project will advance the
national prosperity since friction and wear are estimated to cost up to 1.6
percent of the GDP per year, corresponding to over $300 billion for the United
States. This grant will also enable the development of a middle-school teacher
training program to prepare them to foster scientific inquiry, problem solving,
and appreciation for the complexity of empirical work, all critical for success
of students in college-level sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developed
technique will determine friction of individual nanocrystals between 1 mm/sec to
1 m/sec by integrating the quartz crystal microbalance with scanning tunneling
and atomic force microscopy. The friction of individual nanocrystals as a
function of contact area from 1 to 10,000 nm2 will be determined to establish
the fundamental physics of nanoscale friction at the speeds most relevant for
applications. Calculations performed by the collaborative partner will
strengthen the impact of these results. This project will validate friction
measurements using quartz crystal microbalances in general by directly
connecting the measured dissipation signals with nanoscale friction. As such,
this project will have a broad scientific impact to the advancement of the
nanomechanics of nanoscale tribology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.