* 2120031
* GP-IN: Families and University Together as a Unit for Research and Education (FUTURE): Connecting Hispanic Families to Geosciences Through Community Informal Learning Network
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2021,04/30/2025
* Juan Gonzalez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 04/30/2025
* USD 364,996.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong and diversified next
generation geoscience workforce will play a critical role in solving crucial
global threats (water, energy, natural hazards, and food) under climate stresses
in the coming decades. In the U.S., the geoscience workforce has the least
ethnic diversity compared to other STEM fields (e.g., ~3% Hispanics). National
Academies Press states that minority serving institutions are America's under-
utilized resource for strengthening the STEM workforce for the near future. The
University of Texas-Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV), as the nation’s second largest
Hispanic serving institution (with ~32,000 students and ~90% Hispanic), and its
location at the U.S.-Mexico border, make it an ideal hub for training the future
Hispanic Geoscience workforce. The FUTURE project integrates the Hispanic
culture into an informal Geoscience and STEM learning pathway through a family-
centered model to address the challenge of enhancing Hispanic participation in
STEM. A family-centered learning framework will help families understand one of
the most critical elements in their lives – “water supply/resources” and its
relationship to the geoscience/Earth environment. With the experience gained in
a previous GEOPATHS project, the project team aims to expand and scale up the
established platform and infrastructure of its existing program transforming the
traditional Geoscience Learning Ecosystems (GLEs) while nurturing the Hispanic
Geoscience workforce in a way that can be expanded to other minority serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FUTURE project will explore how the
family can be placed at the center of informal STEM learning and be the basis
for understanding a geoscience issue – how water “works;” i.e., the water cycle
with humans at the center, and the activities/link to Earth environment (i.e.,
mining and agriculture in Texas). The FUTURE project has four objectives: (1)
Establish an Informal Learning Network with a water and Earth-Environmental
Science theme at communities; (2) Change Hispanic families' (parents and
children) perspectives towards geosciences careers; (3) Recruit students into
geoscience through a developed network and (4) Provide a channel into geoscience
education and career paths for local junior/senior high school and 2-year
college students. The project offers activities focused on water, soil, rocks
and minerals, geoscience and their relationship to Rio Grande Valley’s history
and economics (oil/gas mining and agriculture). FUTURE’s innovative approach
will test how Informal Learning Networks between the local community and
educational institutions can transform GLE for individuals from groups that have
historically been underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.