* 2120732
* Evolution of temperature-mediated flowering in grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Jill Preston, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 12/31/2025
* USD 621,354.00

In temperate regions, global warming is already causing shortened winters that
are interrupted by extreme weather events, such as unseasonably warm
temperatures. Although warmer temperatures can often stimulate rapid growth, the
fact that many temperate plants use low temperatures as a cue to prepare for
flowering makes it difficult to predict the consequences of warming on their
reproductive yield. Luckily, studies of plant adaptations to past climate change
can be informative for predicting what will happen in the future. This proposal
aims to dissect the evolutionary history of flowering responses to high and low
temperatures in the economically important grass family, and to determine the
genes underlying these responses. Outcomes of the project will be a better
understanding of how and why temperature extremes affect flowering in grass
species adapted to different climates, and the discovery of novel flowering time
genes that can be targeted in crop breeding. The integration of teaching and
research, centered around temperature-regulated flowering in grasses, will also
provide rich opportunities to the next generation of scientists charged with
solving some of the world’s most pressing problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many
temperate crops, including the Pooideae grasses wheat and barley, the attainment
of floral competency occurs in response to extended periods of above freezing
cold (vernalization), thus allowing rapid flowering with the onset of spring.
Available evidence suggests a single origin of vernalization responsiveness in
the ancestor of the ~3,800 species containing Pooideae, with at least one
independent origin in the other large PACMAD grass clade. The flowering pathway
of both groups appears to relay the cold signal through the epigenetic
modification of genes within the FRUITFULL (FUL) clade of transcription factors,
whereby time-dependent modifications to chromatin result in a ‘memory’ of
winter. In some non-vernalization responsive cultivars of wheat, FUL
transcription can also be triggered by high temperatures, whereas in
vernalization responsive cultivars high temperatures cause devernalization and
delayed flowering. What is not well understood is if and how the ancestral grass
integrated temperature cues into its flowering pathway, whether independent
origins of vernalization and devernalization evolved through the recruitment of
similar genes and regulatory elements, and what the history of temperature-
regulated flowering evolution means for adaptability of grasses to future
weather events that are predicted to become increasingly erratic and extreme. To
address these questions, this project will combine growth experiments,
spatiotemporal comparative transcriptomics, and CRISPR-based functional analyses
to provide insight into adaptive constraints caused by cross-talk between the
low and high temperature pathways in distinct grass lineages, and to isolate
novel temperature-regulated flowering time genes and regulatory regions that can
potentially be used for cereal improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.