* 2120113
* Hydrologic closure relationships at different levels of hillslope model complexity
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Peter Troch, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 05/31/2024
* USD 507,877.00

Water and land management, for example to limit the discharge of pollutants into
water resources, relies on accurate model predictions of subsurface water flow
and solute transport at scales of hillslopes and catchments. Issues at these
scales arise from unknown heterogeneity of subsurface properties and simplified
representation of the flow and transport dynamics. Within hydrologic models
these simplifications require closure relationships (representing the aggregated
small-scale physics) that vary in time and space. Limited measurement
capabilities in the subsurface and difficult experimentation at the hillslope
scale and beyond hamper the search for these closure relationships, that are
needed for better water and land management policies. This project aims at
discovering the nature of these closure relationships and will make an important
step towards an improved understanding directly at the hillslope scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the closure relationships in a
hillslope scale experimental system and explore its generalizability to real-
world catchments. The hillslope scale study will take advantage of the
exceptional measurement capability of the Landscape Evolution Observatory (LEO)
hillslopes at Biosphere 2, The University of Arizona. Data collected from recent
experiments at the LEO hillslopes will be utilized to find and explain
temporally changing closure relationships for two different levels of model
complexity: (i) the system-scale closure relationships, e.g., transit time
distributions and the storage-discharge relationship, and (ii) the simplified
process-based representation of coupled unsaturated and saturated zone of the
hybrid-3D hillslope hydrological model (h3D). The project will gain novel
insights into the closure relationships, e.g., their temporal variability and
their connection to other hydrologic variables, by combining recent
methodological advances, namely (i) new data-based approaches to determine
transit time distributions and the storage-discharge relationship, (ii) data
assimilation, and (iii) machine learning methods. The transfer to real-world
cases will be tested on a well-equipped zero-order
basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.