* 2120378
* Gut Microbiome Effects on Brain and Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Gene Robinson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 798,563.00

Microbes living in their host’s gut perform diverse functions related to
nutrition, fighting disease, and behavior. In many cases, the gut microbiome
performs necessary functions for its host, such that disruptions in the
microbiome result in abnormalities. In other cases, the gut microbiome
contributes to variation between individuals, such that differences in
microbiomes between individuals drive differences in physiology and behavior.
However, it is not known whether gut microbiome function can change over the
host’s lifetime. Furthermore, while various studies support the role of gut
microbes in mediating host behavior, how they influence host behavior and the
factors that mediate this interaction are largely unknown. This project
addresses these important questions by studying how the gut microbiome
influences behavioral maturation in the honey bee, Apis mellifera, which
involves a transition in behavior from caring for larvae inside the hive and
performing other in-hive tasks, to foraging for nectar and pollen outside of the
hive. This maturation process underlies age-related division of labor, so
understanding the role of the gut microbiome in this process promises to
illuminate our understanding of honey bee colony function. The results of these
studies will also provide novel insights into the dynamics of host-microbe
interactions, animal behavior and symbiosis, and gut-brain communication. This
project will provide integrative training in behavior, genomics, and
microbiology to a diverse set of trainees at various career stages within the
home institution, and will serve as the foundation for unique outreach and
training activities for local K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how the gut microbiome contributes to the functioning of the gut-brain axis is
an emerging area of study in neuroscience, but the mechanisms supporting gut-
brain communication remain poorly understood. To address this problem, this
project will utilize state-of-the-art behavioral, genomic and genetic tools in
the honey bee and its microbiome to determine the role that gut microbes play in
honey bee behavioral maturation. Specifically, this project will: 1) Use a
combination of several honey bee colony-level manipulations, microbiome
sequencing, and behavioral tracking to test the hypothesis that the microbiome
influences behavioral maturation in the honey bee; 2) Perform single-microbe
inoculations with microbes robustly associated with behavioral maturation,
followed by metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses, in order to identify
specific microbial factors that influence behavioral maturation and associate
them with specific effects on host brain functioning and physiology; 3) Use a
recently developed honey bee microbiome genetic toolkit to produce genetically
modified microbes in order to functionally assess the role of specific microbial
factors in behavioral maturation. Achieving these objectives will provide
important new mechanistic insights into the gut-brain axis, and will determine
whether and how the microbiome contributes to changes in behavior over the
lifetime of an individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.