* 2120446
* Using Augmented Reality to Improve Spatial Visualization of 3D Physics Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Michele McColgan, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,715.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students'
understanding of key concepts in electricity and magnetism, which are important
in introductory physics courses. Research shows that when students are not able
to visualize three-dimensional (3D) or abstract concepts, their persistence in a
STEM field and their interest in a STEM major declines. Indeed, it is difficult
for students to imagine something they have never seen before. The project team
will address this issue by using Augmented Reality (AR) and associated
instructional modules. With AR visualizations of physics concepts, students are
able to hold a foam cube ("Merge Cube") in their hand, which acts as a
controller to rotate the representation of the concept to view it from different
perspectives through a smartphone or tablet, and thereby achieve a 3D
understanding. In previous work, the project team developed over 50 AR
visualizations for different physics concepts and designed a smartphone/tablet
app for use by students and instructors to locate and utilize appropriate
visualizations. In this project, they will develop and assess a suite of
instructional modules to accompany some of the previously developed AR
visualizations. This work will focus on concepts in magnetism, which, because of
its abstract nature, is one of the most difficult topics in introductory
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop, deploy, and
assess the effectiveness of research-based instructional modules involving AR in
an introductory physics course. The instructional modules will utilize
accessible, appealing, 3D manipulable visualizations with an AR Merge Cube to
teach electricity and magnetism more effectively. The design of the modules will
be based on existing evidence-based approaches (such as Modeling Instruction)
drawn from physics education research (PER). Specifically, the project team will
develop 12 instructional modules to accompany 12 previously developed AR
visualizations for concepts in magnetism; pilot-test the instructional modules
at Siena College and up to five other primarily undergraduate institutions;
evaluate the design of the smartphone/tablet app, the AR visualizations, and the
instructional modules; assess the effectiveness of the AR visualizations coupled
with the instructional modules for improving students' understanding of the
relevant concepts; and offer workshops to help other instructors use the new
educational resources. Each instructional module will include interactive
lecture demonstrations for instructors to use in class, thought-provoking
questions (similar to "Think-Pair-Share"), team-based learning activities, and
homework assignments. The investigators will explore education research
questions such as the following:&lt;br/&gt;(1) Does the use of the AR
visualizations and instructional modules improve students' conceptual knowledge
and spatial visualization of the 3D and abstract concepts in
magnetism?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Does the use of the AR visualizations and instructional
modules increase students' interest in science, improve their scientific
thinking, and increase their engagement in physics?&lt;br/&gt;(3) Does the use
of the AR visualizations and instructional modules increase the retention of
women and students from groups underrepresented in STEM?&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.