* 2120871
* Collaborative Research: Improving Student Learning in Organic Chemistry Using Chemical Reaction Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Steven Fleming, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 151,125.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving academic
performance and understanding for undergraduate college students in organic
chemistry. Understanding and learning from chemical structure representations is
an important part of learning chemistry concepts and how to apply them. For many
students, visualizing 3D structures of molecules to develop an understanding of
complex organic chemical reactions can be challenging. Previous work has shown
that 3D graphics for physical representations can have a positive impact on
student achievement. This project will develop and assess interactive
visualization software that will provide physically accurate 3D animations of
organic and organometallic reactions to improve student learning. It is expected
that students who use this application will be more engaged in learning, develop
a deeper understanding of chemical reactions, and improve their spatial
reasoning skills. The project will assess the impact of the application on
instructor motivation, students’ spatial reasoning skills, and students’
understanding of chemical reactions based on quantitative and qualitative data
from interviews, focus groups, tests, and quizzes. The application will be made
freely available to the public through online stores and information on the use
of the application will be disseminated to the chemical education community
thorough online videos, social media, and professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve student
learning of organic chemical reactions using an interactive animation
application that can be used by instructors in teaching organic chemistry as
well as students. The animations will be based on physically correct quantum-
mechanical calculations to produce molecular dynamics simulations that represent
reaction pathway trajectories. A smartphone application that displays the
animations will be developed in an iterative manner using instructor feedback,
student feedback, and literature data. Focus groups, surveys, and think-alouds
will be used to support the iterative development process. A thematic analysis
of the qualitative data will be performed using NVivo to obtain insights on
instructor and student perceptions of the application. To assess the
effectiveness of the application, student success on designed quizzes will be
compared for control and treatment groups of students. The quiz questions will
probe 3D elements of organic chemistry. To determine the impact of the
application on students’ spatial reasoning skills, the Purdue Visualization of
Rotation Test (PVRT) will be administered to students involved in the study at
the end of their organic chemistry course. Student performance on this test will
be compared for those who used the application versus those who did not use it.
Statistical analysis of this quantitative data will be used to determine
differences in student performance. Project results will be disseminated to the
chemical education community via publication and regular presentations at
scientific meetings. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.