* 2120418
* ERASE-PFAS: Collaborative Research: Nickel and Palladium Single-Atom Electrocatalysts for Selective Capture and Destruction of PFAS in Complex Water Matrices
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jaehong Kim, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,936.00

Per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of chemicals that
have been widely used for decades. As additives in numerous consumer products,
PFAS have many desirable properties, including exceptional chemical resistance.
However, this property makes them very difficult to remove from water using
current treatment processes. The chemical stability also makes PFAS persist in
the environment, causing significant concerns for human and ecological health.
One promising way to treat PFAS in water to benign end products is
electrochemical oxidation. Scientists and engineers have been exploring various
strategies to enhance performance, including employing nanotechnology enabled
catalysts. However, expensive metals are often required in this approach, and
selective destruction of PFAS in the water that contains various other organic
compounds has been challenging. The proposed research addresses these drawbacks
through the development of next-generation catalysts that can selectively bind
with and destroy PFAS even when the water contains many other compounds. This
goal will be pursued by manipulating palladium (Pd) and nickel (Ni) catalysts to
be atomically dispersed, a process known as ‘single-atom catalysis’ (SAC). SAC
is the theoretical limit of downsizing materials, and represents the state-of-
science advancement beyond nanotechnology. The outcomes of this research project
will include development of a laboratory-scale prototype SAC electrochemical
reactor tested with PFAS contaminated water. Results will be disseminated
through reports, scientific journals, conferences, and lectures. This project
will train graduate and undergraduate students at two universities to perform
interdisciplinary research under a highly collaborative environment. High school
students will be recruited via summer research internship and outreach courses,
increasing scientific literacy and developing the Nation’s STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of the proposed project is to
develop an innovative electrocatalytic process that can oxidatively destroy PFAS
in complex water matrices to benign end products. This project is one of the
first studies to explore SAC – the theoretical limit of material downsizing – as
the target electrocatalyst architecture to achieve highly selective and
efficient anodic destruction of PFAS. The focus of this research is on Pd and Ni
catalysts based on their proven performance for PFAS degradation at nano-scale.
The SAC configuration has numerous advantages over existing catalysis
technology. SAC allows tunable metal-ligand interactions and coordination
environments that are essential for i) selective binding of the metal catalytic
centers to functional groups of PFAS, and ii) direct electron transfer from PFAS
to the anode. In addition, extremely low consumption of raw materials and low-
cost synthesis procedures for SAC alleviate or possibly eliminate cost concerns
when using noble metals like Pd. Finally, SACs are likely much more stable than
metallic clusters, an important consideration for reactor implementation. The
research is based on the underlying hypothesis that SAC architecture eliminates
metal-metal interactions that are inherent in metallic, crystalline
nanoclusters, resulting in PFAS degradation kinetics enhanced to the maximum
extent possible. This hypothesis will be tested through characterization of the
synthesized materials using state-of-the-science EXASF, XANES, HAADF-STEM, and
in-situ FTIR techniques. Reaction products will be identified using advanced
chemical analytical techniques to correlate material property and PFAS
degradation pathways. The successful completion of this project will advance
understanding of SAC synthesis, SAC-driven electrocatalysis, and establish new
strategies for PFAS destruction. The collaborative team consisting of two
research groups at two institutions with complimentary specialties will provide
unique multidisciplinary, collaborative training opportunities to participating
graduate and undergraduate students. Summer courses focusing on fluorine
chemistry and electrochemistry will be developed for high school students and
teachers. The project team is committed to recruiting underrepresented students
for all outreach and training activities to diversify the Nation’s STEM
workforce and promote an inclusive culture for research and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.