* 2120917
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effect of intergroup competition on affiliation, oxytocin, and group cohesion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Marcela Benitez, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 25,117.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Though humans are remarkable in
terms of cooperation, there are other social mammals including some non-human
primates that regularly cooperate with non-kin and at the group-level. In some
species, individuals are highly collaborative within their group, while
relations are hostile between groups, suggesting that competition between groups
may shape the social nature of species. This doctoral dissertation research
advances knowledge about evolutionary and physiological drivers of cooperation
within groups in non-human primates and examines the importance of competition
as a potential driver of group cohesion. The project advances knowledge about
animal social behavior and provides comparative data for understanding how group
membership and intergroup conflict may have shaped patterns of cooperation in
humans. The project provides scientific training to students through mentorship
and field experience opportunities, and aids in conservation efforts by engaging
with conservation organizations and local communities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the non-invasive collection and analysis of
behavioral and hormonal data to investigate the theory of parochial altruism in
which conflict between groups is crucial for intensifying cooperation within
groups. The researchers examine whether intergroup conflict influences within-
group sociality in a highly intelligent and cooperative non-human primate
species that displays hostile between-group relations. The project examines the
evolutionary roots and biological underpinnings of parochial altruism by a)
determining whether intergroup conflict impacts within-group socio-positive
behaviors, b) investigating whether, as in humans and chimpanzees, oxytocin
underpins participation in cooperative group ventures such as territory defense,
and c) assessing at the group level whether there is a relationship between
measures of social cohesion and success in intergroup
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.