* 2120363
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: RFDataFactory: Principled Dataset Generation, Sharing and Maintenance Tools for the Wireless Community
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ashutosh Sabharwal, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 376,000.00

Applied machine learning (ML) research in wireless faces challenges due the
inability of domain experts to easily access existing well-curated, well-
structured, and open-access datasets. Furthermore, there is a lack of direct
access to a software framework that automates dataset creation and distribution
based on detailed user requirements. RFDataFactory is a collaborative project
that brings together investigators from Northeastern University and Rice
University to bridge this gap. RFDataFactory aims to make available categorized
datasets suitable for research related to ML in 5G and beyond networks, and
advance fundamental understanding and design tools for accessing, creating,
sharing and storing wireless datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RFDataFactory will
enable easy collection and preprocessing of physical layer to packet-level
datasets through high-level directives and application programming interfaces.
This will enable dataset generation for several NSF-funded experimentation
platforms, such as the Colosseum emulator and NSF Platforms for Advanced
Wireless Research. The project will significantly advance autonomous statistical
analysis of RF spectrum activity, which will reduce data storage needs.
Moreover, it will create pre-processing tools for removing device identifying
information and facilitate generating standards compliant metadata headers. The
project will also result in a search-able, centralized repository of both
project-supported and user-contributed datasets with the focus on re-usability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RFDataFactory will accelerate interdisciplinary research
at the intersection of machine learning and the wireless domain, as well as
bridging different communities and train a new generation of professionals for
wireless dataset creation and sharing. The project will seek to involve
underrepresented students in research and learning activities, support annual
dataset gathering challenges, update advanced course materials with hands-on
tutorials and laboratory sessions. Through targeted high-school outreach, the
project will increase awareness and excitement in the next generation of
researchers. The project will also generate value for other large-scale
infrastructure investments already made by the NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project url: http://rfdatafactory.net. All datasets, meta-
data files, software application programming interfaces, tutorial materials,
webinar recordings and other digital outcomes of this project will be maintained
for 3 years, accessible via the project website after the completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.