* 2120774
* GCR: Meta-Optical Angioscopes for Image-Guided Therapies in Previously Inaccessible Locations
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Eric Seibel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Angioscopes are ultrathin and flexible forward-viewing optical imaging devices
that guide clinical procedures in the cardiovascular system. Cardiovascular
disease, led by heart attack and stroke, are the leading cause of death in the
US and globally. Due to basic limitations of conventional optics, these
angioscopes are currently made with a bundle of over a thousand glass optical
fibers, a 50-year-old technology that provides resolution that is too low and a
stiffness that is too high for important potential applications. To reach
clinically significant targets in the brain and heart, the angioscope needs to
be more flexible and the rigid tip length must be reduced to only a few times
the width of a human hair. Such an incredibly agile angioscope in the hands of a
neurosurgeon could snake its way deep into the brain to remove blood clots,
which can help a stroke patient. Further, a cardiologist could use this device
to pass vessel-clogging plaque deposits and accurately apply a range of
therapies in coronary arteries in response to heart attacks. The potential to
reduce morbidity and mortality from stroke and heart attacks could benefit many
individuals. This research project at the interface between nanophotonics and
bioengineering aims to develop the technology that could enable such ultra-
miniature agile angioscopes by using emerging optical hardware and artificial
intelligence-enabled software image reconstruction. The project brings together
scientists and engineers from academia and startup companies with medical
professionals to solve this high-impact problem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrathin
and flexible forward-viewing endoscopes, also known as angioscopes, are of
critical importance for treating many cardiovascular diseases, including stroke
and heart attacks, both of which are among the leading causes of death in the
United States. Current medical instruments based on traditional refractive
optics are too bulky to be used deep in the brain and in diseased coronary
arteries. To reach locations of stroke in the brain, the rigid tip length in an
angioscope must be reduced to sub-millimeter length scale. Emerging
nanophotonics and metamaterial technology have the potential to achieve such
clinically significant miniaturization. Meta-optics provide many degrees of
freedom to design completely new types of optical elements. Multi-scale
electromagnetic simulation coupled with optimization techniques have already
enabled design of a meta-optic combining functionalities of multiple optical
elements. In conjunction with a computational backend, meta-optics that also
capture aberration-free images in full color should be possible. Combining
computational inverse methods based on machine learning, semiconductor
nanomanufacturing, and techniques from medical instrumentation, including
advanced saline flushing, this project aims to create a micro-imaging system
with 250-micron aperture and 100-micron rigid tip thickness, which will capture
full-color images in a 100-degree field of view with cellular resolution. Along
with academic researchers from basic science and engineering disciplines, this
project includes partners associated with startups commercializing meta-optics
and endoscopes as well as minimally invasive, interventional surgeons
specializing in cardiovascular diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.