* 2120665
* RCN-UBE: The River Field Studies Network: Connecting rivers, people, &amp; science through immersive field-based education
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Mathieu Brown, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2026
* USD 497,139.00

Rivers perform a broad set of functions essential to human societies and the
landscapes rivers flow through. The relationship between humans and rivers are
often impaired, which threatens both rivers and people. Restoring these
relationships will require a diverse workforce of interdisciplinary problem
solvers. Field studies are essential to creating this workforce because they
connect students to learning objectives, peers, instructors, and society through
immersive active learning in real world environments. They help overcome
achievement gaps, propel inclusion, catalyze career interest, and create
informed and engaged citizens. However, to achieve these benefits, field
instructors must overcome a unique and growing set of challenges. In addition to
knowledge of their STEM discipline, field studies instructors require a
sophisticated grasp of specialized pedagogy and assessment, fundraising,
negotiating institutional bureaucracy, issues of diversity, equity, and
inclusion, and multiple dimensions of risk management. Mastering these is more
than many self-taught instructors will be able to manage on their own. Without a
network for support and guidance, instructors will burn out, risk-averse
institutions will shy away, and field studies will continue to decline. The
River Field Studies Network is a response to the paired crises of rivers and
field studies. At this moment of critical vulnerability, we must restore and
expand the capacity to bring students and rivers into contact through active
learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The River Field Studies Network aims to advance
STEM education and support healthy rivers by connecting rivers, people, and
science through immersive field education. To accomplish this, the network will,
create a dual-track professional-development structure, including a network for
mentorship and curricular exchange as well as a more intensive field-based
certificate program; develop an online library of open-source lessons and other
content for instructors, featuring innovative modules designed to enable student
collaboration across institutions and regions; recruit intentionally to overcome
barriers to diversity of all kinds, and train participants in pedagogical
methods that foster inclusivity; tackle the pressing need for informed risk
management in field-based education through in-person instruction and expert
tutorial videos; reach out to a wider community by building the premier public-
facing website for river field studies and creating structures to facilitate
student exchange; and incorporate assessment at every level to evaluate and
continually refine our programming. These are the essential elements needed to
form a sustainable community of practice in river-based education that shares
expertise, imparts specialized skills, and cultivates the next generations of
leaders, ultimately closing the gaps in institutional capacity that currently
threaten the future of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure,
as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.