* 2120717
* AGS-PRF: Establishing Causality in the Angular Momentum Budget of the Atmosphere: Insights from the Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Aaron Match, Match, Aaron L
* Fellowship Award
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 11/30/2023
* USD 190,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quasi-Biennial Oscillation
(QBO) describes the alternating direction of the longitudinally averaged
equatorial wind in the middle-to-lower stratosphere at roughly every 27 months.
Over time, this alternating pattern descends toward the tropopause before
diminishing at the altitude range of 13-19 km. In this range, the QBO can
influence the tropospheric jet stream and tropical convection, thereby affecting
the global weather and climate. The diminished QBO wind can be attributed to the
atmospheric torque associated with the dissipation of atmospheric waves
propagating upward into the tropopause region. To date, the impact of the
atmospheric torque on the QBO and, eventually, on the tropospheric circulation
is not well understood. Current climate models cannot properly simulate the
observed descent of the QBO eastward wind across the tropopause, and this
failure may be due to the improper torque representation in
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to advance our understanding of
atmospheric torque and the global influence of the QBO. Mentored by a well-
established sponsor, the investigator will use observations and numerical models
of varying complexity to address this goal. The research tasks will focus on
testing theories on the torque-QBO relationship in observations and models,
assessing the influence of the QBO on the mid-latitude jet, and quantifying the
influence of torques on tropical convection. These efforts could help advance
future modeling capabilities by improving climate projections and subseasonal-
to-seasonal forecasts of regional precipitation and mid-latitude jet dynamics.
The investigator will also make public-engagement presentations to provide
insight into climate change related to the research
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.