* 2120091
* Collaborative: Smart Health in the AI and COVID Era
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2021
* Jerzy Rozenblit, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports the Smart Health in AI and the COVID Era: SCH Principal
Investigators Virtual Workshop on February 1-2,2021. The meeting will bring
together principal investigators of projects awarded by the Smart Health (SCH)
program with other researchers looking at smart health in the broader community.
The SCH program was set up to bridge gaps in fundamental science necessary to
transform health and biomedical research. Smart Health in AI and the COVID Era
Workshop is designed to address the next generation of challenges in advancing
health with foundational research from the computer science, engineering,
mathematics and the social, behavioral and economic disciplines. An objective of
the Workshop is to provide an opportunity for the principal investigators and
other smart health researchers to explore research progress in a diverse set of
projects and discuss important current issues, as well as future challenges
associated with research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The discussions
will be supported by keynotes, panels, project-related posters, rapid talks and
cross-discipline participant-generated workshops. It is anticipated that the
meeting will stimulate discussions, connections, and collaborations that will
facilitate progress in the area of Smart Health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop should have a significant impact on the participants and the future of
the Smart Health program. The focus of the workshop is on foundational research
that supports the growth of smart health within connected communities. The
workshop results are likely to include new research directions that will be
publicized to the research community through publications and a workshop
website. The results dissemination should inform and the developing Smart Health
research community in their transdisciplinary collaboration, educational
activities, and spur other innovative research directions. The broader impacts
of the workshop are to facilitate progress in the field and stimulate
conversations, connections, and collaborations that will lead toward better
informed and effective smart and connected health research and resulting
technologies for the broadest possible user populations. In order to address
current concerns in Smart Health research the meeting will include a cross-
discipline mini-workshops addressing current themes, such as advancing data
science, bridging new frontier in sensing hardware, data infrastructure and the
sue of technology to address health disparities. Additionally, there will be a
workshop attached to the Principal Investigator meeting that will support the
travel for ten students to attend the PI Workshop. This should also help grow
the field by providing mentorship and support for a new cadre of investigators
looking to do work in the Smart Health area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.