* 2120013
* GP-UP: Creating a diverse group of leaders: The Environmental Science Pathways Scholars Program E(SP)2 at Barnard College
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian Mailloux, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 311,707.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geosciences are the least
racially and ethnically diverse of all Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math fields (Bernard et al., 2018, NSF 2017). E(SP)2 is a unique program that
immerses students in various realms of Geoscience with class, field, lab, and
internship opportunities while providing significant support through faculty and
peer mentorship, Supplemental Instruction, and cohort comradery. Students enter
E(SP)2 upon admission to Barnard College or following their first year, creating
hybrid cohorts. Prior to their first year in E(SP)2, Scholars will participate
in a Summer Bridge program introducing them to the College resources and support
programs, faculty, and other students. During the first year, Scholars will hone
scientific habits of mind through a credit bearing Journal club and a funded
Spring Break field trip. Scholars will also participate in Supplemental
Instruction for keystone introductory courses in the Environmental Science
Major, providing deep collaborative learning. In their second year of E(SP)2,
Scholars enroll in a credit-bearing Science Communication and Outreach class
taught through an environmental justice (EJ) lens with service learning
components, co-taught by our community partner, BioBus. The centerpiece of
E(SP)2 will be two summers of funded independent research in a laboratory, with
the opportunity to pursue an EJ-related internship during their second summer.
E(SP)2 will also employ a unique, student-led evaluation process to enhance our
knowledge of the factors that contribute most to attracting and retaining
diverse students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Environmental Science Pathways
Scholar Program [E(SP)2] at Barnard College, an all women’s undergraduate
institution, will create a nurturing yet intellectually engaging Geoscience
community to promote the education and success of persons excluded from science
because of ethnicity or race (Science PEERs; Asai, 2020) and those who identify
as first generation or low-income college students. Based out of Barnard College
and building upon existing successful opportunity programs, E(SP)2 will provide
unique experiences representing the many Geoscience career paths by leveraging
partnerships with the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, NYC community
organizations, and Black Rock Forest in Cornwall, NY. E(SP)2 aims to achieve the
following goals: 1) Foster a more diverse student and alumnae community at
Barnard College, 2) Strengthen collaborations with NYC researchers and
Environmental Justice (EJ) organizations, 3) Advance cohorts of Barnard Science
PEERs through graduation with retention in the sciences beyond graduation, and
4) Promote justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion through curricular and co-
curricular experiences. Ultimately, E(SP)2 Scholars will build their confidence
and skills in scientific practice, thinking, and communication as valued members
of a scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.