* 2120516
* I-Corps:  An Intelligent Re-Design Recommender System for Additive and Hybrid Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2021
* Kemper Lewis, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of engineering software technology for additive manufacturing (AM).
The proposed technology may be used to help solve some of the significant
challenges by implementing a variety of intelligent assessments, re-design
strategies, and learning processes. It provides a way to evaluate
comprehensively the print-readiness of components and confidently identify which
components may reliably be manufactured using AM processes. Such evaluations may
significantly reduce mistakes and printing failures, avoid costly trial-and-
error exercises, and remove biases and inconsistencies that arise from manual
evaluation processes. In addition, the proposed technology assists designers and
manufacturers in rapidly converting problematic existing component geometries to
successful 3D-printable designs, avoiding the need to design new components for
AM fabrication from scratch. The proposed technology presents a value for
industries dealing with high-volume production by introducing intelligence and
automation into the required assessments to save significant energy,
computational, and financial resources.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of an engineering software
technology integrating multiple intelligent assessment and re-design recommender
systems for additive manufacturing (AM). While numerous industries are
increasingly implementing AM, AM is not a feasible manufacturing method for many
components, and improper implementation may cause resource waste and product
failure. The current technology presents a multi-variable algorithm for
feasibility evaluation that monitors the design-readiness of components from
several technical and economic perspectives before printing the part. Using
computational approaches, this system intelligently calculates feasibility
scores representing the precise feasibility status of various parts. The
proposed AM technology presents a fully automated correction system that
rectifies the geometries of problematic components, allowing for immediate AM
compatibility. The proposed re-design solutions also may provide successful
geometries for 3D-printing components with minimal user-iteration and for
different AM techniques. In addition, the proposed technology presents a design
recommender system that intelligently analyzes an extensive database of closely
related components for AM using machine learning techniques and provides
effective re-design recommendations for component clusters whose current
geometries are AM infeasible.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.