* 2120437
* CCRI: Planning: Infrastructure for Collaborative Autonomy Testing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Adam Porter, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Teams of autonomous ground robots and unmanned vehicles will be used in missions
such as search-and-rescue, mining, material handling, and protecting secure
facilities. Computer scientists and engineers are inventing and enhancing new
algorithms that these autonomous systems will use to collaborate with each
other. Better algorithms will improve team performance. Currently, testing such
algorithms requires extensive time and resources to setup and run simulation
models and other facilities that are needed for test and evaluation, validation
and verification. This project will lay the foundation for a modeling and
simulation infrastructure that will reduce barriers to research and development
of autonomous systems and will enable collaboration in this important research
area. This will accelerate the implementation of these systems that will have
numerous benefits to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will plan a
community research infrastructure. The planning process will include a broad-
based community of researchers from multiple institutions, including experts in
robotics systems, modeling and simulation, test &amp; evaluation, and software
engineering, and will engage them in multiple ways. The planning group will
develop use cases, design the infrastructure architecture, and identify key
partners. A broader group will provide input via a survey and a workshop at a
robotics conference. The ultimate deliverable of this planning project will be a
proposal to be submitted in January 2022. The infrastructure will include
hardware, software, APIs, user interfaces, libraries of models, a development
and testing environment, and documentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.