* 2120421
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning: A Visible Light Communication (VLC) Testbed for Next Generation Wireless Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Murat Yuksel, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 40,000.00

The use of optical frequencies for communication through the concept of visible
light communication (VLC) has garnered significant interest over the last
decade. This is attributed to the multitude of capabilities of VLC, including
high data rate wireless links, directional and thus potentially secure
transmissions, and operation in the unregulated optical spectrum (400--800 THz
band). VLC is a strongly emerging area and commercial adoption of the technology
is possible only if it can past-muster through extensive experimentation and
testing. As of now, there is no real VLC testbed available for conducting
coordinated remote VLC experiments at scale. As a step towards the advancement
of a VLC testbed design and development, this planning project brings together a
collaborative team across two US universities to execute a set of research and
planning activities that can set the precedent for a full-fledged testbed
development. The overarching goal of this planning phase of the testbed design
is to work out a baseline testbed architecture, survey the community's and
stakeholders' interest in design, development and usage of the testbed, and
evolve the design based on the community feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops a plan for designing a remotely accessible indoor VLC testbed
that will constitute a large array of VLC nodes in a rectangular grid pattern
under a static configuration and integrate a number of VLC nodes under a mobile
configuration. The scientific merits of the project includes (i) design and
implementation of various VLC hardware and software components for a VLC
transceiver integrable into a testbed environment, (ii) small-scale feasibility
trials of reproducible VLC research experiments, (iii) design and development of
a portable and modular VLC experimentation kit, (iv) informing the research
community and general public about the testbed and survey their interest, and
gather feedback about our design and implementation of the testbed, and (v)
analyses of the information and feedback from the community towards evolving the
VLC testbed architecture design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed planning,
development activities, and workshops and meetings will foster community
outreach and interest in the VLC research, and provide a learning platform for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.