* 2120720
* Transforming Foundational Mathematics with Interdisciplinary Co-requisite Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Zsuzsanna Szaniszlo, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,226.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a novel support
structure for students in algebra and trigonometry classes that aligns with
other STEM courses in their major area of study. As is true at many
institutions, an increasing number of students at Valparaiso University (Valpo)
benefit from additional efforts to build mathematics skills upon entering
college. However, traditional models that require students to take “remedial”
prerequisites delay students taking courses in their intended major. This often
causes students to leave STEM major pathways, take longer to attain their
degrees, or leave college altogether. Valpo students will be able to start
taking courses for their intended degree immediately upon entering college,
while at the same time taking corequisite skill-building mathematics courses.
The major activities of this project will focus on the structural reorganization
of the paired mathematics and partner discipline courses, along with the
professional development of faculty teaching these critical early courses. Over
fifty course offerings in more than ten different departments will be impacted.
This broad-scale approach will ensure that nearly all students get the
opportunity to pursue their college degree in a timely fashion while building
the mathematical skills necessary for success. Project research will examine how
this two-phase corequisite model impacts participating students’ academic
outcomes, self-efficacy, and sense of belonging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Phase
1, the project will launch and evaluate an interdisciplinary Math+Major
corequisite model that allows foundational mathematics, learned using the ALEKS
software system, to be taken concurrently with a quantitative course needed for
the student’s major. In Phase 2, students will be offered the opportunity to
replace the traditional one-semester Calculus I with a two-semester “Calculus
Plus” course. The new course will serve 20-30 STEM majors each year that would
benefit from intensive help with algebra and trigonometry in order to succeed in
calculus. The Calculus Plus course will incorporate discipline-specific
assignments to engage students with diverse STEM interests and will incorporate
active learning approaches and mastery-based grading. Mathematics and STEM
faculty will collaborate to design modules to engage students through direct
application of mathematical concepts to several majors. These changes are
expected to increase students’ ability to understand important mathematical
concepts and their relevance to other disciplines, pursue their desired majors,
and graduate on time. Valpo faculty will learn new methods and skills to engage
and support students, including groups underrepresented in STEM, by
participating in Faculty Learning Communities. The project will generate new
knowledge by comparing student success measures to prior approaches and through
a mixed-methods effort to explore how the Math+Major and Calculus Plus models
impact students’ self-efficacy and sense of belonging. Major data sources
include surveys and interviews of participating students and faculty. Valpo will
disseminate the project’s models, curricula, and outcomes through local
workshops and national conferences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.