* 2120141
* RCN-UBE: A Network for Facilitating Online Content for Experiential Learning of Tropical Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ann Russell, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2026
* USD 508,889.00

Life science students must be prepared for solving ‘wicked’ problems, i.e.,
complex ones without clear solutions. These problems require higher-level
thinking about the connections across scales and disciplines, and within a
global context. Tropical ecology provides opportunities for studying this kind
of complexity, from the interactions of organisms in highly diverse communities
to the web of social and economic considerations that guide the processes and
conservation of tropical species and ecosystems. Despite this, most core
undergraduate biology curricula retain a primarily temperate-zone lens and
limited exposure to the global diversity of ecosystems and cultures. At the same
time, there is a critical need for online open educational resources (OERs) that
incorporate real-world examples and are easy for both students and instructors
to access and use. This network brings together a diverse community of experts
with backgrounds in tropical biology research, active-learning pedagogy,
software development, and multimedia content creation. The network activities
will support faculty participants in the creation and adaptation of field- and
research-based OERs. These online modules will be hosted on a responsively
designed, open-source and open-access platform, Gala.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the Online Content for Experiential Learning of Tropical Systems
network are to: internationalize the undergraduate biology curriculum through
the creation of OERs in tropical ecology; enhance and innovate within platforms
such as Gala to facilitate the integration of quantitative elements within OERs;
and broaden participation within the biology community by engaging participants
from under-represented groups, HBCUs and community colleges. Activities will
include: initial workshops to create author guidelines and toolkits; 'Incubator'
workshops to develop new OERs; Faculty Mentoring Networks for adapting existing
OERs; and engagement with professional societies and other networks to expand
and sustain this new network. For each module, design and development of
interactive and quantitative elements will be undertaken in collaboration with
the developers of the Gala platform, the Midwest Big Data Hub, and Quantitative
Undergraduate Biology Education and Synthesis. As this new network’s agile
process for creating OERs is refined, it will provide a novel framework for OER
development that can help propel STEM education in fields beyond tropical
ecology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure as part of
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.