* 2120626
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Stem Research on Non-model Genomes Network
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Nicholas Miller, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2023
* USD 67,652.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing students'
opportunities to participate in scientific research. Participating in research
to answer a real-world problem is known to increase a student's persistence in
STEM. The science of genomics offers rich opportunities for undergraduate
research. Technological advances are helping to unlock the genomic sequences of
a growing number of organisms, including many that are critically important to
the economy, human health, and the natural environment. Genome sequence data is
accumulating so fast that the main bottleneck to understanding it is a large
scientifically educated workforce to analyze the data. This project will create
a network of genome scientists and educators to create opportunities for
undergraduate students to engage in scientific research. The emphasis of this
network will focus on the genome of the western corn rootworm. The project will
provide a matchmaking service to help genome scientists and educators with
complementary interests find each other and set up partnerships. The project
will provide resources and guidance to help ensure that the course-based
undergraduate research experiences produce both a good education experience for
the students and reliable data for the scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
incubator project will set up a network that brings together genome scientists
in need of help analyzing their data and instructors seeking research
opportunities for their undergraduate students. The project team will implement
a series of Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) as modules
within existing classes or as standalone classes. CUREs will be implemented at
multiple institutions with diverse populations. Student survey data and student
work will be analyzed by the leadership team to inform others in the network of
evidence-based best practices and to provide guidance for those creating new
CUREs. Student work that meets approved standards will be communicated back to
the scientific community. For example, manually curated gene models will be
submitted to NCBI to improve existing genome annotations. The modest
infrastructure requirements needed to implement genomics- based CUREs makes them
ideal for extending research opportunities to students at institutions with
limited capacity to offer lab-based research experiences. Efforts to grow the
network during the incubator phase will place a strong emphasis on recruiting
members at 2-year institutions, primarily undergraduate institutions and
minority serving institutions to maximize the societal benefits of the network.
This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences
(BIO), Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education
and Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.