* 2120014
* Collaborative Research: Disruption and Resilience in Healthcare Routines Following Adverse Events
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Julie Wolf, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 227,839.00

When routines are disrupted, people want to get back to normal. If the
disruption is minor, like a flat tire, recovery is easy. If the disruption is
major, recovery may be more difficult. For example, the shutdowns caused by the
COVID pandemic forced doctors, nurses, and other clinical staff to find new ways
to care for their patients. This research will use this example to study the
effects of disruptions on healthcare routines. The expectation is that routines
will “bounce back” from minor disruptions, but the effects of major disruptions
are more difficult to predict. After major disruptions, some routines may return
to normal, while others may not. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to discover basic mechanisms that influence stability and change in routines.
To understand what makes some routines stronger than others, the effects of the
COVID pandemic will be studied in four medical fields at the University of
Rochester Medical Center: dermatology, orthopedics, oncology, and cardiology.
Data from electronic health records will be used to study the effects of
shutdowns and other kinds of disruptions, such as changes in software and
billing codes. Tools from network science will be used to model routines as
patterns of action. These methods will allow comparisons to be made between
patterns of action before and after a disruption with great precision. The
extent to which the strength of a routine depends on the structure of the action
pattern itself will be examined. Data will be produced on outpatient clinical
routines during the COVID-19 pandemic along with a variety of materials to
communicate the findings with a broader audience. Ultimately, this research will
lead to a better understanding of how institutional routines can be made more
reliable and effective in the face of disasters large and
small.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.