* 2120673
* RCN-UBE: An Inclusive Community Transforming the Assessment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Learning in Undergraduate Programs
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Victoria Moore, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,668.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building an inclusive
community of educators committed to implementing best practices in the equitable
assessment of student learning in college-level biochemistry and molecular
biology courses and curricula. The last decade has seen an increasing awareness
of the need for, and value of, systematic assessment of student learning
outcomes. Assessment is used not only at the end of courses but throughout
lessons, modules, courses, and curricula. The data generated in assessment are
used by instructors, academic programs, and institutions for evaluating both
student learning outcomes and teaching effectiveness, as well as for identifying
areas of improvement. Furthermore, since assessment instruments are limited by
the perspectives of the people who develop and use them, it is essential to
bring a variety of perspectives into their design and interpretation. Despite
its importance, few molecular life science instructors receive formal training
in assessment. By delivering training in assessment, this project fills a gap,
strengthening the nation’s higher education programs in the molecular life
sciences. Moreover, by centering the project on issues of equity, the project
builds an inclusive community of practitioners that more accurately reflects the
demographics of the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many faculty understand
and agree with the importance of assessment, putting it into practice can be
challenging because of a lack of formal training, particularly in the molecular
life sciences. Therefore, discipline-specific tools and training for faculty in
biochemistry and molecular biology are necessary. To meet this need - and
drawing upon a highly successful preliminary workshop - this project offers a
series of assessment workshops over the course of five years. These workshops
are rooted in evidence-based strategies and universal exam design with the goal
of creating equitable assessment tools, processes, and practices. The workshop
series focuses on three types of assessment: summative, formative, and
alternative assessment, which uses non-examination instruments to measure the
acquisition and application of biochemistry and molecular biology knowledge
and/or skills. Surveys and participant interviews will be used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the workshops, and social network analysis will evaluate the
growth and diversification of the network. Participants will be given
opportunities to reflect on the ways in which training and support is given to
network participants, including the promotion of instructors from historically
marginalized populations into positions of leadership within the national
community of molecular life science educators. Discussions of the community’s
inclusivity will be guided by two members on our Steering Committee with
training on equity and inclusion in STEM. The network’s activities will serve as
a nexus for development of a larger community of biochemistry and molecular
biology scientist-educators dedicated to the assessment of student outcomes in
biochemistry and molecular biology. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.