* 2120318
* Computational and Statistical Approaches to Regression Problems in the Presence of Linkage Errors
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Brady T. West, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,999.00

This research project will develop computational tools for minimizing the impact
of mismatched records on subsequent data analysis. To adequately address a
research question of interest, multiple data sources often need to be combined.
Record linkage is the process of identifying matched records in multiple data
sources pertaining to the same entity. Advances in record linkage and
computation yield substantial opportunities for creating rich data products. At
the same time, high data volumes, data quality issues, and the need for data
anonymization and privacy increase the potential for mismatch error that can
considerably disrupt subsequent analysis and in turn lead to incorrect
conclusions. The tools to be developed in this project will help leverage the
potential inherent in linked data by improving the integrity of a significant
range of downstream statistical analyses. All technical developments resulting
from this project will be released as open-source software. Research results
will be applied to large-scale survey data analysis and data linkages of
interest to the Federal statistical agencies. The investigators will integrate
the results of this project into their educational activities and will offer
hands-on tutorials to train students, professionals, and scientists in the
analysis of linked data. The project also will provide research opportunities
and support for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
will build on techniques in high-dimensional statistics and optimization to
develop a suite of methods adjusting for and correcting mismatch error along
with uncertainty quantification. The investigators will tackle a variety of
problems whose solutions will require an appropriate balance of statistical,
algorithmic, and practical aspects pertaining to specific real data
applications. The statistical properties of the methods will be rigorously
studied theoretically, in simulation studies, and in various contemporary linked
data problems. Post-linkage analytic scenarios to be investigated include modern
semiparametric regression and common unsupervised multivariate analysis methods
that have scarcely been studied in the context of linked data analysis. Advances
in optimal transport theory will be leveraged to correct mismatch error and
hence improve data quality. This award is supported by the MMS Program and a
consortium of Federal statistical agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.