* 2120200
* BII: Emergent Mechanisms in Biology of Robustness, Integration &amp; Organization (EMBRIO)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Christopher Staiger, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Wilson Francisco
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,500,000.00

A fundamental requirement for life and survival is that biological systems are
robust, and that they maintain function despite external and internal
perturbations such as wounding or infection. Integration of signals from
multiple inputs (e.g., biochemical, mechanical) is essential to robustness, yet
the mechanisms underlying such integration are poorly understood. The Emergent
Mechanisms in Biology of Robustness, Integration, and Organization (EMBRIO)
Biology Integration Institute will address this knowledge gap by leveraging
state-of-the-art techniques for measuring cellular and tissue remodeling as well
as imaging and data processing. The Institute's research will determine how
living systems employ signaling molecules and intracellular second messengers
(e.g., calcium), from cellular to organismal levels, to integrate signals and
develop a coordinated, whole-system response to perturbations. An understanding
of these dynamics and the integrated networks leading to robustness is essential
for elucidating how organisms respond to attack and repair wounds. The Institute
will lead to a greater understanding of how to support trans-disciplinary and
cross-institutional communication and collaboration to advance science and
education. Integration of activities will generate innovative curriculum and
professional development tools that will be disseminated for broad use via
existing NSF program infrastructure. These tools will facilitate faculty and
trainee development of integrated knowledge and research approaches, like
computational modeling, which will prepare students to be competitive in the
STEM workforce and contribute to new discoveries in Integrative
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex biological networks are appreciated as
integral components of living systems; however, knowledge about system dynamics,
integration of diverse inputs, and mechanisms to coordinate responses across
broad scales of space and time is lacking. The EMBRIO Institute will
innovatively address this knowledge gap by determining how living systems
integrate “orthogonal” signals such as chemical and mechanical stimuli, and as a
result of this signal integration, develop responsive phenotypes for survival
and function. The overarching hypothesis is that multimodal signal integration
by second messengers, as a conserved Rule of Life, controls and synchronizes the
dynamics and organization of the cytoskeleton and cell signaling to restructure
cells and tissues in response to stimulation, damage, or attack. The Institute
addresses the hypothesis that, as a Rule of Life, this signal integration
persists across taxa, leading to emergent behavior shared by the biological
systems. The Institute will study responses to second messengers in biological
systems from different kingdoms and over a range of scales, by harnessing big
data (e.g., image data, AFM, simulation data) through AI and ML tools to process
and interpret the data and bridge simulations across systems. The Institute will
develop a unified technology to quantitatively delineate signal integration and
the intracellular changes targeted by these signals, and a simulation-based
fusion will be developed that takes the measurements and quantifications in one
system and directly predicts the responses in other systems. The innovative
approaches employed by the Institute are integrated into pedagogy through
cognitive apprenticeship to advance a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.