* 2120562
* Improving the suitability of the polar to subpolar planktic foraminifera N. pachyderma as a climate archive: New approaches to deduce 'near surface' temperatures
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Reinhard Kozdon, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 162,846.00

Part 1: Polar regions are particularly sensitive to rising temperatures and
increasing concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases. Currently, the
observed warming in the Arctic is almost twice that of the Northern Hemisphere
as a whole. A major concern is that further warming of this region could
potentially weaken the North Atlantic circulation, which will have a profound
influence on climate in Europe and North America. In order to gain a better
understanding of the mechanisms that control the rate and magnitude of future
climate change on the Northern Hemisphere, we need to acquire robust data from
past climate events from this region that can be compared to current
observations and help with future predictions. Much of our knowledge of the
Earth’s past climate is deduced from chemical analysis of fossil foraminifera
shells recovered from drill cores. Foraminifera, which are ubiquitous in the
World’s Oceans, are small organisms that form a sand-grain-sized calcium
carbonate (calcite) shell. At the end of their life cycle, the empty shell is
deposited on the seafloor where it can be preserved for tens of millions of
years. While the approach to reconstruct past climate events from fossil
foraminifera shells, which was developed in the 1950s and continuously improved
over many decades, works well in low- and mid-latitude oceans, deducing accurate
past temperatures from foraminifera shells from the Polar North Atlantic remains
challenging. Pilot data from fossil foraminifera shells (species
Neogloboquadrina pachyderma) from the Polar North Atlantic acquired for this
study reveal that the so-called ‘lamellar calcite’, which is the early
generation of shell calcite that forms in the upper water column and provides a
‘near-surface’ signal, is often partially or largely dissolved. Thus, the
remaining shell comprises mostly the later-formed outer ‘crust calcite’, which
records environmental conditions from much greater (typically colder) water
depths. As affected shells look unsuspicious – the loss of the lamellar calcite
is not visible from the outside when inspected by microscope – shells that have
lost their lamellar calcite have likely been selected for analysis in many prior
studies. We hypothesize that temperature reconstructions from shells with
dissolved lamellar calcite are biased towards colder temperatures. Fortunately,
shells with well-preserved lamellar calcite are typically co-occurring with
those featuring poor preservation in the same core samples and can thus be
selected for analysis. This study aims to carefully select shells with intact
lamellar calcite (preserved near-surface signal), and the ratio of
Magnesium/Calcium of the lamellar calcite as a chemical recorder of past
temperatures will be measured. This is a significant deviation from conventional
analytical approaches that average the composition of the whole shell with an
unknown proportion of lamellar calcite (warm near-surface signal) and crust
calcite (cold deep-water signal). The analytical approach, which will be
developed within the framework of this study, has the potential to significantly
improve the veracity of paleorecords from the Polar North Atlantic, which is
essential to gauge the response of this sensitive region to future greenhouse
gas forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Climate change in the
polar North Atlantic occurs at a much higher rate than most other areas of the
World’s Oceans. Therefore, accurate records of past climate variability from
this area are essential to improve forecasts of how this sensitive region will
react in future scenarios with enhanced greenhouse gas forcing. However, even
after decades of research, paleoclimate records from the polar North Atlantic
leave many questions unanswered and often do not align with results from model
simulations. &lt;br/&gt;The vast majority of sea surface temperature records,
reflecting past climate variability, are derived from fossil shells of planktic
foraminifera; minute, single-celled organisms which are ubiquitous in the
World’s Oceans. A characteristic feature of foraminifera is their sand-grain-
sized calcium carbonate (calcite) shell which is eventually deposited on the
seafloor where it can be preserved for tens of millions of years. Fossil shells
can be recovered from drill cores, and subsequent analyses of their chemical or
isotopic composition allows for the reconstruction of the water temperature (and
other parameters) that persisted while the shells were formed. This approach to
reconstruct paleotemperatures works very well outside the polar regions. One of
the main objectives of this study is to assess whether certain characteristics
of the foraminifera species Neogloboquadrina pachyderma, which is the only
abundant foraminifera in high latitude sediments, contribute to the challenges
to deduce robust paleorecords from the Polar North Atlantic. &lt;br/&gt;Pilot
data acquired for this study indicate that the so-called inner ‘lamellar
calcite’ of fossil N. pachyderma shells, which is the early generation of
calcite that forms in the upper water column (typically warmer temperatures), is
often largely dissolved, whereas the outer ‘crust calcite’, which forms in much
deeper waters and thus typically reflects colder temperatures, is still well
preserved. Interestingly, this loss of the lamellar calcite is not visible from
the outside when the shells are inspected by microscope. Thus, it is likely that
shells with dissolved lamellar calcite were selected for analysis in many prior
studies, which may have biased the calculated temperatures towards the cooler,
deeper waters where the remaining outer crust was formed. Fortunately, we have
found that shells with well-preserved lamellar calcite are typically co-
occurring with those featuring poor preservation.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this study is to develop new screening methods to carefully select N. pachyderma
shells featuring well-preserved lamellar calcite. Subsequently, the lamellar
calcite, which has formed near the sea surface, will be analyzed by laser-
ablation for its Magnesium/Calcium (Mg/Ca) ratio, which can be converted to the
water temperatures that persisted in the past when the foraminifera formed their
shells. This is a significant deviation from conventional approaches that use
the entire shell, whereby the information recorded in the lamellar calcite
(near-surface signal) is mixed with the composition of the crust calcite (deep
water signal). Thus, conventional analytical approaches may not capture the
entire temperature variation at or near the sea surface. The analytical
approach, which will be developed within the framework of this study, has the
potential to significantly improve the veracity of paleorecords from the Polar
North Atlantic, which is essential to gauge the response of this sensitive
region to future greenhouse gas forcing. This new technique will further be
tested on two sediment cores from the Polar North Atlantic, spanning the past
~26,000 years from the coldest temperatures of the last ice age to the modern,
much warmer climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.