* 2120943
* MCA: Career Advancement in Polar Cyberinfrastructure: Permafrost Feature Mapping and Change Detection using Geospatial Artificial Intelligence and Remote Sensing
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wenwen Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,841.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polar regions play a vital role in
Earth’s climate, ecosystems, and economy. Unfortunately, climate change is
driving dramatic changes in the Arctic ecosystem, endangering its natural
environment, infrastructure, and lives. Arctic permafrost, ground that remains
below 0°C for at least two consecutive summers, is at the center of this change.
Covering nearly 1/4 of the land in the northern hemisphere, thawing permafrost
is causing a significant local and regional impact in the Arctic. Severe impacts
include land subsidence resulting in costly damage to the built environment and
increased release of greenhouse gases which further exaggerates the greenhouse
effect and global warming. To improve our understanding of permafrost dynamics
and its linkages to other Arctic ecosystem components in the midst of rapid
Arctic change, it is critically important to have geospatial data readily
available that provide high-resolution mapping of permafrost features, their
geographical extent, distribution, and change. Although a coarse classification
of pan-Arctic permafrost has been developed, fine granularity, local to
regional-scale mapping of major permafrost features, is largely unavailable.
This data gap inevitably constrains us from gaining a holistic view of the
space-time dynamics of permafrost degradation across the Arctic. The goal of
this project is to bridge this existing data gap by developing new analytical
solutions to support intelligent and automated delineation of permafrost
features at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a partnership with colleagues at
Woodwell Climate Research Center, this project will explore novel ways to deepen
the integration of cutting-edge AI, geospatial analysis, and cyberinfrastructure
into Arctic permafrost research. Specifically, novel GeoAI (Geospatial
Artificial Intelligence) solutions will be developed to empower the ongoing
efforts of AI-based, high-resolution mapping of pan-Arctic permafrost thaw from
Big Imagery. By enabling location-aware and multi-source deep learning and the
integration of key spatial principles (i.e., spatial dependency and spatial
autocorrelation), the proposed GeoAI model will create polar data products with
high veracity and automation, thereby accelerating the scientific navigation of
the New Arctic. A joint initiative, “Women in Polar Cyberinfrastructure,” will
broaden the participation of women and underrepresented minorities in Arctic AI
research. It will also serve as an important avenue for openly sharing knowledge
and resources and provide mentorship to early-career scholars in Arctic science,
GeoAI, and cyberinfrastructure. All datasets and tools produced in this project
will be open-sourced and made available in the NSF Permafrost Discovery Gateway
to increase their reuse and inspire further
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.