* 2120063
* RCN-UBE: Broadening undergraduate participation in ecology and evolution research through CUREs using digitized natural history collections data
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Carly Jordan, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2025
* USD 499,811.00

Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) increase student access
to research opportunities, a key part of developing a well-trained and diverse
STEM workforce. The Biological Collections in Ecology and Evolution Network
(BCEENET) will support the development and implementation of ecology and
evolution CUREs using digitized natural history collections data. These CUREs
only require student access to a computer and the internet, increasing the
accessibility of undergraduate research for all students, regardless of
financial hardships, personal obligations, or physical abilities that may limit
their participation in traditional research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network members including educators, pedagogy
experts, and natural history collections professionals will collaborate on
supporting CURE implementation using digitized natural history collections data
at diverse institutions. Membership recruitment will include workshops focused
on minority serving institutions and two-year institutions as well as conference
presentations targeting the broader ecology and evolution education community
and the natural history collections community. New implementers will participate
in 4-day training workshops focused on CURE pedagogy and digitized natural
history collections research, and all implementers will be provided with ongoing
mentoring support. All network members will have continued opportunities for new
skills training and participation in educational resources development and
dissemination. Educational materials created through this project will be open
access to support broad dissemination and implementation of collections CUREs,
supporting research opportunities for diverse undergraduates at all
institutional types. Through regular networking events the network will forge
new and stronger ties between the natural history collections community and the
education community, supporting new research collaborations and expanded use of
underutilized collections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by
the Directorate for Biological Sciences as part of efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.