* 2120775
* Evaluating a Role-Playing Approach to Improve Transferable Professional Communication Skills of Chemical Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Brown, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,949.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing evidence-based
practices in technical communication instruction in laboratory courses that are
standard in chemical engineering curriculum. This will be done by incorporating
industry-based role-playing scenarios into the courses. Student tutors trained
specifically for technical writing will also be used in the courses. The impact
these interventions have on the students’ communication skills will be
evaluated. Comparisons to the expectations of practicing engineers in industry
will be made. By using role-playing scenarios relevant to the workplace, it is
anticipated that the students will be more engaged in the course, recognize the
value of communication to their future careers, and improve their communication
skills. The skills the undergraduates learn will be transferable to their future
careers as engineers in industry or researchers in graduate school.
Collaboration with communication experts through the institution’s Writing
Center will provide more effective teaching and evaluation of communication
skills. This project will benefit society by improving STEM education and
providing chemical engineering undergraduates technical communication skills to
be competitive in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professional skills
such as communication are highly valued in engineering practice and yet are a
challenge to incorporate effectively into the chemical engineering curriculum.
With this project, unit operation laboratory courses will be improved by
implementing evidence-based practices in technical communication instruction in
the curriculum. Three research questions will be explored: (i) how do
expectations of “good” technical communication differ between instructors and
practicing chemical engineers?; (ii) how do technical communications skills of
students improve with use of industrially relevant role-playing scenarios and
embedded trained tutors?; and (iii) what is the correlation between student
writing self-efficacy and technical communication skills? As part of the
research, rubrics will be developed and validated to assess technical
communication skills, and industry partners will assess student technical
writing and rubrics to reflect the needs of industry. Role-playing scenarios
relevant to industrial, research, and academic careers will be implemented, and
Writing Center tutors will provide technical writing support to students. In
order to make clear the relationship between writing self-efficacy and technical
communication skills before and after the intervention, surveys will be given to
the students and analyzed for correlations. The results of this project have the
potential to be applied in laboratory courses across many disciplines and levels
of undergraduate curriculum. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.