* 2120909
* PFI (MCA): Translation and education of high-throughput microbial strain engineering
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Xiaoxia Lin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2025
* USD 381,788.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Mid Career Advancement (PFI-MCA) project is two-fold: to dramatically advance
microbial engineering technologies for biofuel and biochemical production
towards maximal impact; and to develop next-generation engineers with
entrepreneurial mindsets and skills, through modernizing the undergraduate and
graduate curricula in chemical engineering. This project will develop
biotechnologies applicable to a wide range of microbial species and diverse
applications, potentially developing sustainable substitutes to petrochemicals.
The project will also develop entrepreneurial training for cohorts of
undergraduate and graduate students, particularly female and underrepresented
minority (URM) students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance
microbial engineering technologies for biofuel/biochemical production,
particularly high-throughput strain engineering and screening. This project
will: i) extend new approaches for microbial engineering from laboratory model
systems to a range of industrially relevant microbial organisms and
biomolecules; ii) identify and address bottlenecks in process scale-up; and iii)
develop and deliver new educational components and modules for incorporating
entrepreneurial training into undergraduate and graduate
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.