* 2120047
* GP-UP: Strengthening Pathways to Geoscience Degrees for Underrepresented Pre-College and Introductory Students Through Experiential Learning and Career-informed Research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* LeAnne Teruya, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 204,041.00

The geosciences remain the least racially diverse of all the sciences with only
a fraction of PhDs awarded to individuals from historically excluded racial and
ethnic groups compared to their representation in the United States population.
This project will recruit and support racially diverse student cohorts entering
undergraduate geoscience degree programs through peer and faculty mentoring,
career education, and impactful research and outreach opportunities structured
to prepare students for successful application to advanced degree programs (MS,
PhD) and geoscience careers. Student research topics will contribute to
improving understanding of our dynamic and ever-changing Earth. Faculty serving
as mentors to the diverse student cohorts will be trained in best practices to
create environments of inclusivity in the geosciences. Additionally, student
participants will work with local high school teachers to develop geoscience
lesson plans that feature local geology and climate to continue to inspire and
recruit the next generation of geoscience
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Experiential Pathways to SJSU
Geosciences Program will focus on recruiting diverse student groups from two
2-year colleges in the Bay Area (San Jose City College, De Anza College) to
enter geoscience programs at SJSU (Geology, Earth Systems Science, Meteorology
and Climate Science) with the following goals in mind:&lt;br/&gt;1. increase
high school, college, and university students' knowledge and personal/cultural
connections to geoscience and meteorology/climate science;&lt;br/&gt;2. recruit
diverse students, particularly those from historically excluded groups, to
participate in geosciences through “place- and problem-based” in-class
assignments, personal reflections, peer mentoring, and off-campus geoscience
experiences that focus on solving problems in geosciences and are focused on Bay
Area regional geology and climate issues;&lt;br/&gt;3. support students as they
enroll in or transfer to geology or meteorology and climate science degree
programs at SJSU and prepare them for geoscience careers through authentic
research and outreach opportunities;&lt;br/&gt;4. strategically expand and
develop low-cost strategies to sustain ongoing communication and collaboration
among high school teachers, community college faculty, geoscience faculty at
SJSU, geoscience alumni, Bay Area geoscience government and industry partners
and other community stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the program will strengthen
the science identities of student participants and emphasize the importance of
applying scientific concepts for societal benefit - especially in their own
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.