* 2120090
* EAGER: SAI: Water Supplier Decisions &amp; Institutional Change During Transitions
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Emily Kumpel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 308,457.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project examines the dynamics of
water supplier decision-making to determine which decisions are critical to
future adaptability and how tensions regarding the differential impacts of
alternative responses to stressors on water supplier objectives are resolved.
Water suppliers across the USA are facing unprecedented challenges arising from
a variety of stressors including, but not limited to, climate change, changing
demands for water, threats to water quality, and deferred maintenance. Responses
to these stressors occur through a variety of decisions, many of which include
involve tradeoffs between the multiple concurrent objectives of water suppliers
(e.g., reliability, cost effectiveness, environmental stewardship, etc.) and
which affect the scope of future adaptations available. Results from the
research contribute to understandings of the institutional dynamics influencing
the strength and effectiveness of water infrastructure, including how change
occurs within water supply systems and how changes can lead towards or away from
path dependency. Results support decision making and research by providing a
parsimonious model that can be used to steer water supplier actions, to guide
development of decision-support tools that more fully capture the decision-
making processes of water suppliers, and to guide computer modeling of water
supply systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project investigates
decision-making in mid-sized water systems in the USA that have experienced
disruptions, have declining populations, or both. Data for the project are
collected through interviews, focus groups, and secondary materials. These are
used to develop a framework of water supplier decision-making that can be used
to identify critical events or decisions within water supply planning and
operations that serve as inflection points, either setting the stage for
adaptation or leading to path dependencies that inhibit adaptation. The research
also uncovers the potentially competing institutional logics occurring at these
inflection points and identifies the ways in which individuals, norms, and
institutional processes within the water supplier interact to influence how
tensions are resolved, and thus the adaptations the system
moves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.