* 2120739
* MCA: Effects of unsteady wind and surface morphology on the plant transpiration
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sunny Jung, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Plants need to transport water and other substances between the roots and the
shoots. Most of the water transported through tiny conduits evaporates from the
leaves, which is called transpiration. The transpiration rate in plants is
greatly affected by two structures near the leaf surface: stomata (i.e., small
openings on the leaf surface) and a boundary layer (i.e., a thin air layer in
which the diffusion process is dominant). These two structures are quite
complicated and usually coupled with other physical and environmental factors.
The stomata are surrounded by various microscopic structures of epidermal cells,
and the boundary layer is strongly affected by wind. Therefore, the team will
investigate how the stomata and the boundary layer affect the exchange of gases
between leaves and the surrounding ambient air. Besides lab-based research
activities, this research will contribute to providing agricultural training and
individualized jobs to persons with impaired social and communication skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand abiotic effects
on transpiration rate in plants based on physically controlled experiments and
theoretical analysis. Physical experiments will control the air flow around
plants, which plays a crucial role in altering the relative humidity and the
boundary layer. When the air flows around a flexible leaf, the shape and size of
the boundary layer are not stationary around the plant, but rather dynamical in
space and time. Characterizing such dynamic changes in the boundary layer will
allow greater understanding of the transpiration rate under varying conditions.
Additionally, microstructures on the leaf surface affect the vapor concentration
around the plant as droplets condense or evaporate. Overall, such a varying
vapor flux near the stomata and variable boundary layer would affect the
physiological performance of plants. Therefore, the reciprocal effects between
the transpiration rate and external fluidic and surface properties should be
characterized to illuminate natural plant-environment
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.