* 2120747
* U.S. ATLAS Operations: Discovery and Measurement at the Energy Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* John Hobbs, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mark Coles
* 01/31/2027
* USD 20,500,000.00

Researchers in high energy physics seek to understand the fundamental nature of
matter and the basic forces through which it interacts. One way they do this is
by observing what happens when counter-rotating beams of protons collide. The
characteristics of the debris produced in the collisions can reveal the basic
physics of fundamental particles and the forces between them. Highly
sophisticated particle detectors and analysis methods are required to measure
these characteristics. NSF provides funding to U.S. researchers to conduct
research in experimental high energy physics using the ATLAS detector at the
Large Hadron Collider (LHC), the world’s premier laboratory for this research.
In addition to directly supporting research activities, NSF will provide, via
this award, funding to twenty-two U.S. universities to maintain the operation of
U.S.-supplied components of the ATLAS detector and its supporting software and
computing systems, develop new software tools, and install and commission
detector enhancements in preparation for more intense operation planned to
commence in 2027. This award will also promote science education and promote
diverse participation in research. The Large Hadron Collider is located at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) near Geneva
Switzerland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;U.S. participation in ATLAS will stimulate the
development of a scientific and technically educated workforce, advancing the
multidisciplinary application of technology, and the popularization and
dissemination of science to the general public. The award will support
activities that provide opportunities to develop and maintain complex detector
apparatus, custom analog and digital electronics and software systems for data
management, and to support data processing and technical analyses of detector
systems. Technical professionals are required to perform many of these tasks,
increasing the expertise of the U.S. work force. The operation of existing
detector components, design of upgrade components, and related research
activities create opportunities for interdisciplinary collaboration among
university physics personnel, university personnel in engineering departments,
and physics department technical personnel as physicists, electrical engineers,
mechanical engineers and computer scientists work with post-docs and students.
Similarly, physics personnel will work closely with computing professionals at
their home institutions and at national laboratories to support the various
software and computing activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical part: This
award supports the development and operation of the instrumentation and analysis
tools that are essential to studying debris from proton-proton collisions. These
tools are essential for answering basic, foundational questions, such as “What
is the origin of mass of the elementary particles?” The Higgs Boson discovery, a
physical manifestation of the mechanism that generates elementary particle
masses, led to the 2013 Physics Nobel Prize that was awarded to Peter Higgs and
Francois Englert. Is that the end of the story, or are there other, as-of-yet
undiscovered, contributions to this process? Other fundamental questions,
equally important, may have answers that depend, at least in part, on the
physics observed through the continued operation and analysis of data obtained
from the LHC. “What is the dark matter that accounts for 25% of the mass of the
universe? Can dark matter be produced and observed at the LHC? Can evidence of
extra dimensions predicted in some models be found at LHC energies? Are there
particles with exotic properties, unlike any forms of matter observed so far,
whose existence is predicted by some theories that extend the standard model of
elementary particles?” In each case, answering the question requires the
aggregation of large amounts of data from which to draw meaningful statistical
inferences. This award will enable researchers to double the amount of data
collected for analysis and investigations of these phenomena. It will enable
preparations that will lead to future collection of about ten times the
currently available data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.