* 2120619
* MCA: Developing transcriptomics as a tool to investigate toxic diatom responses to ocean heatwave and upwelling events
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Feixue Fu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 338,202.00

The diatom Pseudo-nitzschia forms large, toxic harmful algal blooms along the
U.S. West Coast, killing wildlife and harming valuable ocean fisheries.
Understanding the causes of these blooms and predicting their occurrence, both
now and under future changing climate conditions, is critical to coastal
environmental and economic health. Puzzlingly, these blooms seem to happen
during periods when coastal seawater upwelling results in cold, nutrient-rich,
low pH sea surface conditions, and also during times when heat wave events cause
warm, nutrient-poor, high pH conditions. These two extremes are forecast to get
even more intense with climate change. This project is experimentally testing
how Pseudo-nitzschia responds to upwelling and heat wave events using
measurements of cell growth, toxin production, and gene expression. Broader
impacts of this project include training the principal investigator in new gene
expression methods, graduate and undergraduate research training, high school
research mentoring experiences, and outreach and communications activities aimed
at the commercial fishing industry. Societal benefits include obtaining a better
understanding of the causes of damaging toxic algal blooms, and how they may
change in the future coastal ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The toxic diatom
Pseudo-nitzschia causes annual harmful blooms along the US West Coast, a region
where wind-driven upwelling brings rich nutrient supplies into the euphotic
zone. However, this region is also experiencing unprecedented episodic ocean
heatwave events linked to global warming. Thus, future climate trends in this
region suggest an exaggeration of current physio-chemical extremes between
colder, more nutrient-rich, low pH upwelling, and warmer, more nutrient-
depleted, higher pH heatwaves. Surprisingly, toxic Pseudo-nitzschia spp. can
bloom under both upwelling and heatwave conditions, despite opposite trends in
key environmental controls like nutrients, temperature, and carbonate chemistry.
This project is testing how this happens by first obtaining full response curves
for each of the individual factors, temperature, pCO2, phosphorus, nitrogen, and
silicon for two Pseudo-nitzschia isolates. Then, these variables are combined in
holistic upwelling and heatwave scenario incubation experiments, to compare how
growth and toxicity is affected in both cultures and natural blooms of Pseudo-
nitzschia. The PI is assessing toxic diatom responses in these experiments using
her existing expertise in algal physiology, as well as by expanding her
professional horizons to develop new skills in transcriptome bioinformatics in
partnership with Dr. Bethany Jenkins from the University of Rhode Island.
Experiments are conducted to test the physiological responses of Pseudo-
nitzschia to changes in nutrient concentrations, temperature and pCO2 during
simulated upwelling or heatwave occurrences, and measure expression of key
metabolic pathway genes such as toxin synthesis pathways. This project is
helping to understand and interpret the surprising niche flexibility of toxic
Pseudo-nitzschia in a changing ocean, and at the same time offers the PI a new
avenue forward for her future career development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.