* 2120291
* I-Corps: Delivery system for gene-based medicines
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a modular drug-delivery platform for the delivery of gene-based
therapeutic medicines. The next frontier in biotechnology is focused on gene-
based medicines to treat a broad spectrum of diseases, however, their success is
dependent on delivery methods to enhance their efficacy and safety. Current
technologies used to deliver these medicines raise concerns regarding
distribution/transportation due to thermostability or portability, high costs of
development in manufacturing, and safety. The successful translation of this
project may enable a new paradigm in non-viral gene delivery as well as broader
access to these therapeutics for a wider population through lower costs,
improved distribution, and enhanced safety and efficacy. The proposed technology
may provide gene therapy companies with a platform to deliver their therapeutics
on a global scale to advance 5personalized medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a drug delivery platform for DNA
and mRNA-based therapeutics utilizing a modified electroporation technology.
Electroporation is a technique for gene delivery that shocks cells with an
electric pulse, allowing therapeutics and other molecules to permeate cell
walls. The proposed microneedle-electroporation platform enables both gene and
pulse delivery showing comparable performance to research use electroporator
systems. The proposed technology delivers coated or injected therapeutics to
enhance gene expression &gt;400-fold with improved safety. Preliminary studies
in vivo have shown efficacy comparable to commercial benchmarks for safety,
including tests with a COVID-19 DNA vaccine. The proposed technology is designed
to be handheld and weighs less than 50g, operates without access to electricity,
is manufactured with existing infrastructure at a cost of less than $1, and may
be operated by minimally trained personnel or self-administered. Further
development is required for the identification of specific biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.