* 2120820
* Improving Students’ Creative Problem Solving Skills in Engineering using Visual Representation Methods
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Gon Namkoong, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 279,759.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, implementing,
and evaluating creative problem solving (CPS) activities that help engineering
students learn how to solve complex problems. While CPS is recognized as an
important skill for the engineering workforce, the lack of integrated CPS
instructional materials and strategies has become a significant barrier to
enriching students’ higher order thinking skills. This project will implement a
series of active learning modules in which students create visual
representations as part of a dynamic CPS strategy in an electronics circuits
course. The modules will involve spatial reasoning activities that engage
students in engineering problems by having students capture or transform the
problems into visual forms, write narrative reflections, and share their work
with other students. These learning experiences will allow students to go beyond
traditional linear thinking and structured problem solving to explore innovative
solutions for challenging engineering problems. This study will examine the
impact of creative experiences, changes in students’ perception of creativity,
and academic growth through the development of creative skills. Using surveys,
student interviews, and assessments of student work, the project will study the
impact of this approach on the development of students’ CPS skills and level of
student engagement. Workshops and tutorials will be created to help engineering
faculty at other institutions adopt and adapt this CPS strategy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve students’ CPS
skills by introducing CPS modules and strategies into an existing electronics
circuits course. Visual representation methodologies will be used to help
students practice creative exercises by connecting relationships between
concepts, objects, and ideas that seem unrelated in current learning contexts.
Students will work on a series of CPS activities that take the students through
the stages of CPS, namely, (1) critical reflection in which students identify
the problem, reflect on what they have already learned, and then engage in
active inquiry and further research on subject matter; (2) brainstorming that
catalyzes imaginative and divergent thinking from different perspectives; (3)
visualization and synthesis of creative solutions; and (4) contextualization
that links creative ideas with the underlying principles of the knowledge
domain. These creative exercises will be designed to foster creative skill sets
(such as fluency, flexibility, and originality), promote students’ motivation to
pursue creative solutions, and develop engaging, challenging, and inspiring
classroom learning. The project will address a set of research questions
including: (1) To what extent do the modules improve students’ CPS skills? (2)
What effect, if any, do the modules have on student learning in the course?
Results from student surveys and assessments of student work will be used to
answer the research questions by comparing the results from a control group and
a treatment group. This project will offer exhibitions and workshops for
engineering faculty to increase awareness of strategies for CPS and student
engagement. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.