* 2120174
* Partially Ordered Item Response Modeling for Longitudinal and Multivariate Data
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Edward Ip, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 284,994.00

This research project will develop methods for longitudinal and multidimensional
models with partially ordered sets of responses or posets. Precise and valid
measurement of psychological and social constructs are key to progress in the
social sciences. However, many psychological constructs such as personality,
self-efficacy, and emotional intelligence are not directly observed. These
constructs are measured indirectly through questionnaire instruments with a
designated response format, such as multiple-choice questions. Scores are
assigned to individuals in a way that communicates quantitative information
about the construct. In many measurement situations, however, scoring is a
challenge and there may be no best answer. The resulting responses often result
in data that are a mix of ranked responses and responses that cannot be ranked.
Such a structure forms a partially ordered set or poset. This project will
advance measurement science by including poset response as a new category of
response format. Publicly available software will be developed. The project will
train and mentor graduate students with the support of an established
psychometric graduate program at the University of North Carolina. Collaborative
activities with the Educational Testing Service will broaden the impact of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a flexible
class of measurement and predictive models for poset responses within complex
settings that include multivariate, multidimensional, and longitudinal data.
Because of the mix of different measurement scales, posets are notoriously
challenging to model. This has been reflected in the predominantly non-model-
based methods that have so far been used for handling posets; e.g., collapsing
categories or summarizing by weighted means. The project's approach to poset
measurement will be based on the theory of latent variable modeling. This method
will enable researchers to test and falsify the model to advance the science.
The poset model will allow measurement errors to be quantified, a feature that
is often lacking in other methods. The model will be validated using simulation
experiments and real-world applications across a broad range of areas, including
cognitive tests, posets derived from latent class or cluster analyses,
situational judgment tests, and attitudinal surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.