* 2120812
* MCA: Destroying continental plates - unraveling the role of magmatism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Mousumi Roy, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 324,240.00

A fundamental idea of plate tectonics is that most of the ‘action’ (earthquakes,
volcanoes, faulting) happens at plate boundaries and that the interiors of
tectonic plates are stable and undeforming. While this is mostly true for the
interiors of continents (such as North America), geologic evidence shows that
under the right circumstances previously stable continental tectonic plates can
deform, mobilize and possibly rift apart—with accompanying plate-interior
earthquake and volcanic activity. This project will investigate one of the key
processes that may lead to this destabilization: the infiltration of buoyant,
hot, molten rock (magma) into the base of a continental tectonic plate. This
project will explore how magma interacts with the continental mantle rocks as it
infiltrates and how such melt-rock interaction may profoundly alter tectonic
plates. This award will provide research and career enhancement to a female mid-
career scientist who has faced barriers to research, allowing her to return to
cutting-edge research. Additionally, the project will train two female graduate
students (one of whom has a documented disability) in critical thinking, data
analysis, numerical modeling, and machine learning, preparing them to contribute
to a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce. Overall, the project will
enhance the participation of women, persons with disabilities, and
underrepresented minorities in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
combine data analysis, numerical modeling, and machine learning to develop a
process-oriented understanding of the consequences of thermal and chemical
disequilibrium during magma-infiltration into the continental mantle
lithosphere. The team will exploit recent insights from the geochemistry of
Cenozoic volcanic rocks in southwestern North America to determine how magma-
infiltration aided in a progressive transformation of the physical and chemical
state of the lithosphere: from earlier (&gt;60 Ma) subduction-related
deformation and magmatism to the current (post 20 Ma) state of
extension/transtension and associated magmatism. The research will test the idea
that the Cenozoic transition in the physical and chemical state of southwestern
North America is reflected in a regionally-consistent compositional transition
in volcanic rocks, specifically in Ta/Th values. Using this transition as a
starting point, a statistical methodology will be developed for uncovering other
patterns in volcanic rock compositions in order to identify different styles of
magma-lithosphere interaction. In analogy with supervised learning, the team
will “train” its statistical methods on canonical volcanic rock chemical and
isotopic patterns in North America, and then will apply these methods to “test”
data from the Tibetan Plateau, another region of abundant Cenozoic continental
volcanism and lithosphere degradation. The geochemical interpretations will
inform numerical models of thermal and chemical disequilibrium between
infiltrating magma and the surrounding lithospheric mantle. This integrative
approach will yield a process-oriented understanding of magma-lithosphere
interaction and its role in modifying and potentially degrading previously
stable continental lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.