* 2120691
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Unraveling the evolutionary mechanisms associated with miniaturization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Luca Pozzi, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 26,927.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme reductions in body size
evolved multiple times within the primate tree-of-life, a process thought to
provide evidence of convergent evolution. This doctoral dissertation research
project compares whole-genomes of various species to examine the evolutionary
processes and biological mechanisms explaining body size reduction in primates.
The project leverages historical museum collections to generate novel whole
genomes of primate species that fill important gaps in genomic databases. All
data generated in this study will be made publicly available to provide
additional research opportunities beyond the scope of this project. Outcomes of
this research contribute to the understanding of primate genetic architecture,
thus allowing a better contextualization of human genomic variation in an
evolutionary framework. Moreover, this project extends bioinformatics training
opportunities and accessibility of students from historically underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Convergent evolution provides compelling evidence
that similar ecological circumstances can lead to similar evolutionary
solutions. However, the role of natural selection in primate size reduction
remains largely speculative, especially when it comes to understanding how
adaptation occurs at the molecular level. It is not clear if all small-sized
primates evolved such diminutive body size via changes in the same genetic
mechanisms, or if changes in different combinations of genes and regulatory
sequences could lead to similar outcomes. To address these standing questions,
the investigators will compare whole-genome sequences of pairs of miniaturized
and non-miniaturized species to access the degree of similarity at the molecular
level and the pace of molecular evolution. This research specifically examines:
(1) whether small-sized species share the same genetic underpinnings; (2)
evidence of selection acting in protein-coding regions related to size reduction
in primates. Results will inform a more general understanding of how bodily
variation arises over evolutionary history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.