* 2120006
* Engaging Multicultural Audiences through Inclusive STEM content on YouTube
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sara Yeo, PBS FOUNDATION
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,667,927.00

This Innovations in Development project is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance new approaches to and
evidence-based understanding of the design and development of STEM learning in
informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments; and (d) engage the
public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing greater diversity, equity, and
inclusion in science not only presents a social justice goal, but is also vital
to the financial and social success of the nation. The stereotype of the older
white male scientist has obscured the contributions of women and people of
color. This project seeks to remedy these perceptions which are barriers to
entry into STEM fields. The project will create a large-scale hub for STEM
themed video content on YouTube and other social media platforms, featuring 100+
original STEM videos produced by PBS partners. This hub and accompanying
research seeks to identify the characteristics of online STEM content that
attract (or fail to attract) underrepresented groups, specifically Black and
Hispanic communities as well as women of all races. The objectives of this
project are to 1) provide a unified online science-themed hub, PBS Terra, on
YouTube and other platforms for hosting, sharing, and distributing digital STEM
series from diverse producers from across the PBS system; 2) conduct surveys and
focus groups to examine and understand the needs and expectations of women,
Black and Hispanic communities and their consumption of STEM video content
online and 3) test hypotheses about the communicative strategies of STEM videos
that feature Black and Hispanic female scientists. Project collaborators include
PBS, researchers at the University of Utah and the University of Georgia, and
consultants and advisors with expertise in broadening participation and
inclusion in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about how or why adult
Americans seek science content on YouTube, especially the motivations of adults
from underrepresented minorities and females. The key research questions in this
project are: 1) Why do Black and Hispanic audiences and women of all races seek
science video content online? 2) How does showing Black and Hispanic female
scientists in science video content on YouTube impact viewers’ identification
with and sense of belonging in STEM? 3) How does the use of humor by Black and
Hispanic scientists in YouTube science content affect viewers’ perceptions of
the communicator and their engagement with STEM content? 4) How does the
appearance and manner of dress of Black and Hispanic scientists in YouTube
science content affect viewers’ perceptions in the aforementioned areas? A
nationally representative baseline survey will be conducted. A probability
sample of 2000 respondents will be obtained including oversampling of Black and
Hispanic audiences. To complement findings from the survey, focus groups will be
conducted in eight different regions of the country to learn why these targeted
audiences do or do not seek science content on YouTube and what motivates them
to share the content with their social media network. In addition, an experiment
embedded in an online survey will test the hypothesis that greater on-screen
representation of women and scientists of color will broaden existing
perceptions about scientists. The experiment will consist of a 3 (scientist’s
race: Black/Hispanic/White) × 2 (science issue: controversial/non-controversial)
× 2 (style: casual/professional) between-subjects design. Survey participants
will be randomly assigned to the experimental conditions. These factors (science
issue and host appearance) can be altered by content producers to better reach
and engage the targeted audiences. The project not only investigates theoretical
questions at the intersection of STEM stereotypes and race, but findings related
to these experimental conditions will offer practical insight into strategies
that can be used by science communication
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.