* 2120496
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Large: Rapid-Response Frameworks for Mitigating Online Disinformation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kate Starbird, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 797,106.00

Disinformation is a critical, pressing challenge for society. It diminishes our
ability to respond to crisis events, including acts of terrorism and pandemics.
It makes us vulnerable, as individuals, groups, and a society, to manipulation
from foreign governments, financial opportunists, and a range of other bad
actors. This problem, exacerbated by the design and widespread use of social
media platforms, is inherently a problem of trust — disinformation undermines
trust in information, science, democratic institutions, journalism, and in each
other. This research advances our understanding of online disinformation and
applies innovative approaches and collaboration infrastructure to address this
challenge at a sophistication and pace on par with the dynamic and
interdisciplinary nature of the challenge. Through the development,
implementation of rapid response frameworks, the research team rapidly
identifies disinformation campaigns and communicates those findings uniquely to
diverse stakeholders in government, industry, media, and the broader public —
helping to build societal resilience to this kind of
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three integrated
components: 1) developing models and theories of how disinformation is seeded,
cultivated, and spread that take into account the sociotechnical nature of the
problem; 2) developing and applying innovative, rapid-analysis frameworks for
responding to disinformation quickly; and 3) implementing and evaluating the
impact of multi-stakeholder collaborations to address disinformation in real-
time during real-world events. The work applies a mixed-method approach that
integrates novel visualizations and network analysis to identify patterns and
anomalies with qualitative analysis that reveals the meanings of those features.
Extending from a rapid response approach, investigators are also developing and
evaluating, using interviews and experiments, strategies for communicating these
findings with diverse stakeholders. Conceptually, this research leverages
theories of rumoring from sociology and social psychology and the growing body
of literature related to online manipulation to shed light on the participatory
dynamics of disinformation campaigns. In terms of impacts on scientific
infrastructure, this effort builds collaboration frameworks that others can use
to create their own systems for rapid response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.