* 2120399
* CCRI: Grand: Integrated Laboratory for Advanced Network Data Science (ILANDS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kimberly Claffy, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,119,162.00

There is a dearth of suitable data to support Internet infrastructure research,
for understandable reasons: complexity, scale, and cost of measurement,
processing, and storage instrumentation; privacy, security and commercial
sensitivities; and lack of incentives to gather data in the first place. This
lack of data hinders researchers' ability to understand and reason about real-
world properties of the Internet such as robustness, resilience, security, and
stability. In this project, University of California-San Diego's Center for
Applied Internet Data Analysis (CAIDA) and University of Oregon's Network
Startup Resource Center (NSRC) propose to upgrade and integrate two key Internet
measurement capabilities -- 100GB traffic capture and BGP routing data
collection -- to enable a community of researchers to collaborate on a focused
agenda: understanding the evolving character of the Internet, with the objective
of assessing, modeling and shaping its security and
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a
transformative cyberinfrastructure for the aforementioned two key Internet
measurement capabilities that supports collection, curation (including
anonymization), archiving, and expanded sharing of data needed to answer
critical questions about the Internet as evolving critical infrastructure. This
project will enhance infrastructure to sustain increased packet rates and
routing table growth, expand storage and compute resources to support long-term
use of the data, and develop additional tools to facilitate their combined use.
While these two data sources have existed separately in the past, current
privacy-protection approaches have prohibited joint analysis across them.
Another goal of this effort is to evaluate and deploy approaches to protect
privacy that will permit integration of the gathered data, a new capability that
is critical to some of the identified research goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed enhancements to support data acquisition, curation, and privacy-
respecting sharing will have an inherent equalizing effect on the community,
lowering the barriers to undertaking and validating empirical Internet-related
research. The data and outreach activities will enable advances to a broad range
of disciplines that now depend on data about the Internet, including network
science, socioeconomic studies, international relations, and political
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be linked from the
proposal and milestones page at: https://caida.org/funding/ccri-ilands at least
through the duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.