* 2120806
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Incorporating Immunology into the Curriculum to Promote Interdisciplinary Science Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Rebekah Taylor, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2022
* USD 74,999.00

Immunology is a content-heavy, rapidly-evolving field, which makes “keeping up”
difficult for instructors. The inclusion of immunology-related topics in
undergraduate biology curricula at an introductory level is limited due to lack
of faculty expertise and/or costly resources required for immunology labs. Yet,
immunology is important for training the next generation of scientists and
medical professionals. Demystifying immunology’s discipline-specific knowledge
to encourage public dialogue has the potential to positively impact numerous
societal issues, such as promoting acceptance of vaccines leading to an increase
in the rate of immunization. Interdisciplinary thinking fostered by immunology
is also critical to tackle current societal challenges, such as the effect of
global climate change on emerging infectious diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Immunology network will connect educators who are committed to interdisciplinary
undergraduate immunology education and active learning. The network will develop
teaching resources that integrate immunology related interdisciplinary learning
outcomes, for example those intersecting with ecology and chemistry. These
interdisciplinary learning outcomes aligned with the key concepts and
competencies noted in The Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education:
A Call to Action report, will be identified with feedback from the educator
community. Non-immunology educators, representing diverse institutional and
disciplinary expertise, will be paired with an immunology educator for
developing these interdisciplinary teaching resources, based on backward design
approach and active learning strategies. The products generated at the end of
this RCN-UBE incubator, will be shared with the network participants at a
virtual symposium, disseminated for use by educators at the American Society for
Microbiology Conference for Undergraduate Educators and as an Open Educational
Resource via the QUBES hub site. The network will result in significant
professional development opportunities for faculty and empower them to
positively impact diverse student populations including underrepresented and
first-generation students and veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in
Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.