* 2120501
* The many-body problem in the age of quantum machine learning
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Adrian Feiguin, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2024
* USD 360,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research with an aim to develop and apply new machine learning
algorithms and computational tools for investigating novel properties of quantum
materials in which the electron-electron interactions are very strong. These
materials can serve as building blocks for devices with new functionalities
beyond the semiconductor paradigm. Numerical modeling of such systems, on the
other hand, is challenging, as it requires dealing with a large configuration
space: Datasets are comprised of all possible electronic configurations and
cannot be stored in the memory of the largest supercomputer. Hence, the strongly
interacting many-electron problem can be interpreted as an “extreme data
science” problem from an information processing perspective. A game-changing
idea that tackles this complexity consists of identifying patterns and
compressing datasets in a spirit very similar to algorithms to compress images
and videos. In the past five years, a novel line of research, now referred to as
“quantum machine learning”, has emerged that uses neural networks and machine-
learning algorithms to extract insightful information and represent the complex
structure encoded in quantum mechanical states. In this project, the PI will
develop new algorithms based on quantum information and machine-learning ideas
to study the electronic and magnetic properties of a variety of strongly-
interacting model systems and real materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports several educational and outreach activities. The PI will (i) work
in collaboration with the Center for STEM Education at Northeastern to enrich
current program offerings for high school and community college students and
teachers through seminars and presentations, and (ii) establish a broad reaching
program of class visits to high schools in underserved communities with a large
population of minority students to expose them to scientific research. In
conjunction, a year-round mentoring program will be created for students who
want to choose a scientific career path. In addition, the PI will continue to
organize the International Quantum Matter Seminar series, which is live streamed
on Zoom and YouTube. Finally, the PI will continue to maintain and develop an
open-source collection of programs and libraries for the simulation of strongly
correlated quantum lattice models, that is currently being used by dozens of
researchers and students around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research with an aim to develop and apply new machine learning algorithms and
computational tools for investigating novel electronic and magnetic properties
of strongly correlated quantum materials. The research consists of two main
directions. In the first thrust, the PI and his team will develop several new
algorithms to study ground-state, excitation spectra, and thermodynamics of
quantum many-body problems using neural networks and Gaussian processes as
approximators. In the second thrust, they will study interacting chains and
ladders with long-range interactions that realize actual spontaneous symmetry
breaking and true long-range order, thus enabling one to study competition
between phases that are currently out of reach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports several educational and outreach activities. The PI will (i) work
in collaboration with the Center for STEM Education at Northeastern to enrich
current program offerings for high school and community college students and
teachers through seminars and presentations, and (ii) establish a broad reaching
program of class visits to high schools in underserved communities with a large
population of minority students to expose them to scientific research. In
conjunction, a year-round mentoring program will be created for students who
want to choose a scientific career path. In addition, the PI will continue to
organize the International Quantum Matter Seminar series, which is live streamed
on Zoom and YouTube. Finally, the PI will continue to maintain and develop the
ALPS open-source collection of programs and libraries for the simulation of
strongly correlated quantum lattice models, that is currently being used by
dozens of researchers and students around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.