* 2120936
* Cultivating Innovative Thinking Skills in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Sadan Kulturel-Konak, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 286,185.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing innovative
thinking skills in STEM education, which is important for sustaining the
nation’s global leadership in science and engineering. Student innovation
competitions and challenges (ICCs) play an important role in motivating,
educating, and providing training grounds for the next generation of innovators.
Given the growth of ICCs in higher education entrepreneurship and innovation
ecosystems, this project will help advance the theoretical basis for explaining
how these experiential opportunities build students’ competence and self-
confidence in innovation and help them discover their limitations and
capabilities. Specifically, the proposed work will validate a theoretical
research model based on Transformative Learning Theory with the overarching goal
of helping STEM students become more open to new ideas, different identities,
social attitudes, and values while also enabling them with decision-making tools
to evaluate alternative viewpoints. By advancing the STEM education community’s
understanding of the roles and processes of ICCs in cultivating an innovation
mindset, the project outcomes will lead to better integration of ICCs within
existing STEM curricula, thereby helping more students to develop an innovative
mindset. Finally, a systematic investigation of strategies to attract a diverse
group of students to ICCs will facilitate broadening participation in
entrepreneurial and innovation ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
postulates that participating in ICCs is a transformative experience for
students as they gain deeper self-awareness of their capabilities in innovation
and become more open and critically minded. To answer research questions related
to this main hypothesis, the project puts forward a research model that
synthesizes the Transformative Learning Theory and Kern Entrepreneurial
Engineering Network’s 3Cs (Curiosity, Connections, Creating Value) Framework.
The project’s research activities are organized in five interconnected research
thrusts: (i) capturing students’ experiences in ICCs through interviews; (ii)
developing the Transformative Learning Scale for the Innovation Mindset (TLSIM)
to assess transformations in students’ mindset toward innovation; (iii)
validating TLSIM in various ICCs and other experiential learning settings
including internships and capstone courses; (iv) investigating the relationships
among attributes of ICCs, student backgrounds, transformative learning
processes, and student outcomes; and (v) studying the factors that motivate
diverse groups of students to participate in ICCs. The project outcomes will
generate new knowledge about how different aspects of ICCs can facilitate
transformations in students’ mindsets toward innovation, thereby laying the
groundwork to improve ICCs’ potential for building student agency and self-
efficacy. In addition, the project outcomes will help to increase diversity and
inclusion in STEM fields in two ways. First, the research model’s underlying
hypothesis, which posits that transformative experiences lead to mindset
changes, can stimulate new research on the effectiveness of STEM-related
activities in attracting more diverse students. Second, by emphasizing
open‐mindedness as a key outcome of ICCs, the project outcomes will support
enhancing diversity, equity, and inclusion in entrepreneurial ecosystems.
Project results will be disseminated to the STEM education community through
technical conferences, engineering education journals, and academic social
networks. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.