* 2120066
* Mechanocatalytic Ammonia Synthesis over Transition Metal Nitrides
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carsten Sievers, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 461,245.00

Ammonia manufacturing is the key step to producing sufficient fertilizer to feed
the world. However, the dominant Haber-Bosch industrial process requires high
temperatures and pressures that are only commercially viable in centralized
plants at very large scale. A more scalable process would allow for
decentralized fertilizer production in remote or rural areas, thus reducing
transportation costs and associated hazards. The project investigates the
suitability of a relatively new type of catalysis, known as mechanocatalysis,
for small-scale, ammonia (NH3) manufacturing. Broader impacts include
educational and training classes on sustainable chemistry and an online lecture
archive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanocatalysis involves collisions in a ball
mill or similar device to activate solid catalysts and create unique reactive
environments with limited lifetime. NH3 manufacturing can thus be operated at
nominally ambient conditions. Activation of the stable triple bond in the N2
molecule is possible, and ammonia can be formed while the catalyst returns to
its non-activated state. However, many questions remain regarding the nature of
the reactive environments, kinetics of different reaction steps, and the impact
on properties and durability of the catalysts. The project focuses on the
driving forces for mechanocatalytic ammonia manufacturing utilizing transition
metal nitride catalysts. The formation of hot spots and highly catalytically
active metastable sites are the most probable explanations for observed
mechanocatalytic activity. Consequently, specific aims target each of these
phenomena. Since highly active sites in mechanocatalytic processes tend to
decay, novel characterization approaches will be developed to quench or sustain
them to allow for effective characterization. A combination of ball drop
experiments, measurements of thermal conductivity, and the rate of
mechanochemical N2 activation will be used to derive a transient energy balance
for an individual milling collision event and the subsequent decay of the hot
spot. The resulting transient temperature will be the basis for kinetic models
of the ammonia synthesis process. In addition, chemical and mechanical
descriptors will be identified correlating to the performance of the various
nitride catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.