* 2120154
* I-Corps:  3D Printed Smart Hand Orthosis
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Eric Barth, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rapidly customizable, 3D printed, powered hand orthosis to help
stroke survivors regain their manual dexterity and independence. Stroke is a
debilitating, life-changing event. Part of the brain dies, and the mind-body
connection is lost. Stroke survivors experience problems such as lack of hand
control, including difficulties grasping and opening, and instability. These
problems leave them dependent on others for some of the most basic tasks.
Current medical devices are inadequate. The devices come in limited sizes and
either prevent motion or constrain the hand to unnatural movement. A custom-
sized orthosis could mitigate all these problems, providing a better fit and
more effective recovery. Automating the customization process may reduce the
risk of design/fitting/fabrication error by the orthotist, as well as the need
for a skilled technician, in addition to time and monetary costs. The proposed
technology may benefit the orthotics industry, making custom assistive devices
more accessible to patients and enabling them to reach new levels of
independence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a rapidly customizable, 3D printed, powered hand orthosis. Prior
to design, anatomical data was analyzed to determine mathematical relationships
between hand length and width and individual joint and bone positions. The
intellectual merit of this innovation involves several key components including
a smart computer aided design (CAD) package based on the anatomical
relationships to generate custom size part files that can be rapidly 3D printed,
reducing the need for a skilled orthosis technician. In addition, flexible
joints will enable multiaxial mobility. An active, intelligent control will
provide the needed assistance for users to perform activities of daily living
independently. Currently, a preliminary CAD package and orthosis prototype have
been developed. The primary design challenge remaining is how to fit the entire
actuation system within the anthropometric envelope without sacrificing
assistive capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.