* 2120103
* PFI-TT: High-Energy Supercapacitors Based on Materials Stable Over Large Voltage Ranges
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jason Azoulay, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 349,974.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to fill a critical need for
supercapacitors with high energy and endurance through the commercialization of
a novel, uniquely stable redox may offer faster charging and a longer cycle life
than batteries, to complement current energy storage devices for powering
wireless networks that are vital in industrial automation, smart homes and
transportation, healthcare, etc. This project will deliver processing knowledge
to scale up the synthesis of materials and demonstrate manufacturable prototypes
to meet energy storage requirements in the electronics sector, facilitating the
development of next-generation, energy-autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable improvements in the
energy density of supercapacitors by deploying new molecular design paradigms
that impart high stability in redox polymers and allow high voltage operation.
The goal of this research and technology commercialization project is to
determine processing design rules that encompass structural and electrochemical
strategies. These strategies are critical to implementing manufacturing
processes for a new class of high-endurance, energy-dense supercapacitors. The
research tasks include: refinement of redox materials design, scale up of
monomer synthesis, and optimization of electropolymerization conditions to
synergistically combine reduced graphene oxide and the redox polymer in
supercapacitor electrodes. The project seek to develop a path to manufacture
high-performance supercapacitors that address energy storage problems in
wireless electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.