* 2120630
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The evolution of the neural basis of learning and behavioral control
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Chet Sherwood, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 22,797.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every thought, memory, and
decision that someone experiences is created by different parts of the brain.
And while great progress has been made in understanding the functions of diverse
brain networks, their evolution remains less well characterized. This doctoral
dissertation project focuses on a crucial network in the evolution of
intelligence, the cortico-striatal system (CSS), which mediates learning and the
regulation of behavior, two of the most outstanding cognitive adaptations in
humans. The investigator measures the neuroanatomical variation of the CSS
across many primate species, thereby enhancing our understanding of the
evolutionary changes in the brain that led to the emergence of human
intelligence and cognition. The project also includes public science outreach
activities and generation of open source data. This research also has impact
beyond the anthropological sciences by informing clinical research on species-
specific vulnerability to neurodegenerative diseases and
addiction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies the relative size and
connectivity of the CSS across primates. As specific subregions of the striatum
mediate different modes of learning and stages of behavioral control, the
investigator quantifies the variation of the relative volumes of the three
striatal nuclei to understand how CSS-based learning and behav-ioral
optimization have evolved in primates. The connectivity of the striatal
subregions is measured across pri-mates to elucidate selection on cortico-
striatal pathways that may relate to species-specific behavioral de-mands. The
project employs phylogenetic comparative methods to model changes in scaling and
rates of evolu-tion of functionally specific components of the CSS at different
taxonomic levels (e.g., primate order, anthro-poid suborder, human
genus).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.