* 2120500
* Diversity as an Organizational Capability: A Multilevel Examination of Board Composition and Firm Effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aaron Hill, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

In the midst of increasing legislation to diversify the boards of publicly held
organizations, insight into why such diversity matters has remained relatively
stagnant. Several states have instituted requirements that the boards of public
companies become more diverse in terms gender, race, and sexual orientation or
provide evidence of the company’s broader commitment to developing and
maintaining board diversity. Yet, while researchers have explored the
performance impacts of board demographic composition, the findings remain
equivocal given little attention to the mechanisms through which such
relationships occur. This project endeavors to fill this gap within the
diversity and strategy literatures to advance insight into the value of and for
diversity in corporate governance. With a central hypothesis that board
demographic diversity impacts organizational performance through experience-
based diversity, this project will examine the effects of director demographic
and experienced-based characteristics on organizational strategic actions and
financial performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will utilize data on
director and board characteristics across approximately 1,500 publicly traded
firms in the U.S. over a ten-year period from 2007-2017. These data along with
data on firm governance quality, strategic choices and firm performance will be
obtained from several databases, including BoardEx, CompuStat, the Institutional
Shareholder Services (ISS),&lt;br/&gt;RavenPack News Analytics, and Morgan
Stanley Capital International (MSCI). Director data will be aggregated and
combined with firm-level data to estimate the effects of board diversity
variables on firm organizational actions and performance. Overall, this project
offers an integrative, process-based perspective for understanding value
creation and capture as it pertains to board diversity. By encouraging and
establishing a future research agenda for a more systemic approach to the study
of board diversity and firm performance, this project has the potential for
enhancing the explanatory power and practical usefulness of future firm-level
diversity research. More broadly, project has the potential for building
diversity-related partnerships between academia and industry and transforming
the ways in which organizations approach diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.