* 2120051
* GP-UP: Building Opportunities through Networks of Discovery in the Geosciences (GEOBOND)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Aric Mine, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fresno State and the State Center
Community College District serve the agriculturally-rich, ethnically-diverse,
and socio-economically disadvantaged San Joaquin Valley of California, providing
critical educational pathways for geoscience majors and careers. This project
will strengthen professional networks and streamline student pathways within the
San Joaquin Valley, which has been affected by severe air pollution, drought and
water contamination issues, and climate change impacts, all of which
disproportionately impact socio-economically disadvantaged communities. PIs plan
to implement a student support system, along with community-based problem
solving curriculum, and undergraduate research experiences that cross
institutions. The project aims to increase the number and diversity of students
entering and graduating from undergraduate geoscience majors in order to support
an innovative and committed geoscience workforce that can tackle environmental
justice challenges in the San Joaquin Valley and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building Opportunities through Networks of
Discovery in the GEOsciences (GEOBOND) is a collaboration between Fresno State
(four year college) and multiple local two-year colleges to create a novel
student support system for undergraduate geoscience students that accommodates
the various pathways through which they join the program at Fresno State: first-
time freshmen, change of major, and transfer students. The project involves
three-mutually reinforcing activities:1) Developing an undergraduate Geoscience
Learning Community cohort program that includes a connected sequence of courses,
co-curricular professional development activities, and scaffolded research
experiences; 2) forming a Professional Learning Community to collaboratively re-
design geoscience courses across partner institutions that incorporate
environmental justice themes and evidence-based teaching strategies; and 3)
establishing a Community-Based Research Program to investigate local
environmental issues in collaboration with community organizations and
geoscience professionals. The proposed project will advance knowledge about
which strategies are most effective for recruiting and retaining undergraduate
students and creating inclusive environments in the geosciences that are
attractive and supportive to students from groups that have been historically
excluded in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.