* 2120467
* Collaborative Research: STEPP-NET: Steppe Parasite Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Bryan McLean, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 11/30/2024
* USD 271,399.00

This project focuses on collecting and describing mammals and their tapeworm and
flea parasites from the grasslands of Central Asia. These parasites are highly
diverse and ecologically important groups, and many are sensitive indicators of
ecosystem quality; further, the parasitic infections they cause can have major
negative impacts on wildlife. They also can play an important role in
transmitting diseases from wild to domesticated species, and also to humans.
However, knowledge of the diversity of parasite species, their geographic
distributions, and the precise hosts they occur on and in remains highly
fragmentary for much of the world. Central Asian mammals and their associated
parasites are particularly highly imperiled but also little studied. This
project will collect new material and study how tapeworm and flea parasites from
the region evolve in conjunction with their mammalian hosts; it will also
consider how the hosts and parasites have responded to various ecological
changes across the region. This work is extremely time-sensitive, with many
Central Asian ecosystems on the cusp of major land use change as economies shift
and major construction occurs in the region. Numerous specimens will be
collected, and these will serve as a repository of parasite diversity useful for
assessing how future global change influences the distribution of parasites and
their hosts. This may ultimately improve public health outcomes. The work will
also involve training the next generation of early-career STEM researchers for
careers in biodiversity science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEPP-NET project
will rapidly advance discovery and description of species diversity, host
associations, and community assembly, in two mammal-associated macroparasite
clades - fleas and cestodes - across the vast grasslands of Central Asia. This
region is a prototype for exploring host-parasite dynamics and spillover in
response to human activity; historically, as a conduit for ancient Silk Road
trade routes, and, currently, from intensifying land use changes and
construction. STEPP-NET leverages existing museum specimens, new expeditionary
collections in Mongolia and Kazakhstan, and genomic analyses of hosts and
parasites to advance knowledge of species boundaries, environmental and host
niche breadth, and the exploration of novel host interfaces by focal parasite
clades in response to global change pressures. A key outcome of STEPP-NET will
be an extended specimen network for Central Asia, in which mammal and parasite
specimens are durably linked to derived data and immediately useful in global
biodiversity studies and public health initiatives. The project also creates
opportunities for STEM graduate and undergraduate students to participate across
the spectrum of modern biodiversity science, from international fieldwork to
specimen curation and digitization, genomics, and integrative taxonomy. It will
build out this community of early-career STEM researchers even further by
developing undergraduate and graduate educational modules that are implemented
across our institutions and hosted online for broader biodiversity
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.