* 2120679
* RCN-UBE: Biologists and Graph Interpretation:  Professional development for an online curriculum to foster data literacy and value diverse identities
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Rachel Pigg, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,978.00

Like other STEM disciplines, biology undergraduate students from historically
excluded groups graduate at lower rates than their counterparts. To increase
student persistence in biology, classrooms should promote student confidence and
foster students’ sense of belonging. Specific strategies towards these goals
include improving representation of diverse scientists in the curriculum and
incorporating data interpretation skills, which are increasingly critical for
student success in biology. However, faculty often lack the experience and
resources to create curricula on their own that both highlight counter
stereotypical scientists while also addressing complex data literacy skills. In
this project, a Research Coordination Network of faculty participants will work
collaboratively to create, revise, and disseminate the “Biologists and Graph
Interpretation” curricular materials. Modules within the curriculum will teach
students data literacy skills through an activity that highlights the work of a
counter stereotypical scientist. Each module will also contain a video interview
with that scientist and offer students a moment to reflect on diverse
representation in biology. Curricular materials produced by network participants
will cover both introductory and advanced topics, will include extensive
instructor guidelines for classroom implementation, and will be available as
open access resources on the Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and
Synthesis Hub. To further facilitate dissemination of the curriculum, network
participants will also lead workshops that guide faculty through the process of
finding and incorporating a module into their course. The database of Biologists
and Graph Interpretation modules will provide an accessible alternative to
textbook resources that historically have not highlighted the work of counter
stereotypical scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create
multiple faculty development opportunities within a supportive network as
faculty generate, disseminate, and train others to use “Biologists and Graph
Interpretation” curricular materials. To achieve this goal, online Faculty
Mentoring Networks will first create, pilot, revise, and publish curricular
materials on the Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education and Synthesis Hub
(QUBEShub). Next, workshops will train new faculty participants in the
implementation of the curriculum. Participants will have the opportunity to take
leadership roles in future iterations of Faculty Mentoring Networks and
workshops. Throughout, participants can engage with and support one another via
network-wide online activities and discussion boards. Partnerships established
between this network and other initiatives will facilitate continued growth of
this supportive faculty community. The efficacy of the network’s professional
development will be assessed by monitoring faculty gains, while the impact of
the curriculum will be assessed by measuring student outcomes. The diversity of
scientists featured in the curriculum will also be quantified relative to
standard textbooks. With more diverse representation and deliberate integration
of data literacy skills in biology courses, all students are expected to have a
greater sense of belonging as well as an increased confidence in the biology
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure as part of efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.