* 2120742
* MCA: Towards a Theory of Engineering Identity Development &amp; Persistence of Minoritized Students with Imposter Feelings: A Longitudinal Mixed-methods Study of Developmental Netw
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rajashi Ghosh, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2024
* USD 306,762.00

The project aims to advance the principal investigator’s research agenda on
developmental relationships as mechanisms for career advancement of women and
people of color. The investigator will undertake a new area of research by
exploring imposter syndrome among women and minoritized students and
intersectionality in STEM while also gaining expertise in latent growth curve
analysis. The project aims to develop a theory on the relationship between
minoritized students’ developmental networks and their engineering identity and
disposition development. The research includes a longitudinal data analysis,
experimental research, use of Subject-Object Interview (SOI) to assess
developmental stage empirically as an antecedent of developmental networks, and
quantitative and qualitative examination of Imposter Phenomenon (IP). The study
integrates the Social Cognitive Career Theory and the theoretical framework of
intersectionality to theorize the value of developmental networks s a relational
space that can enable minoritized students to address imposter feelings stemming
from the conflict between their multiple identities through intersectional
identity work. Nine propositions are offered to examine the mechanisms through
which a network of developers can build capacity of minoritized students in
engineering to engage in intersectional identity work needed to develop an
engineering identity and persist. The results of the project are expected to
broaden the understanding of factors that increase STEM persistence among women
and minoritized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine three
overarching research questions: (1) What individual and developmental factors
determine the optimal structure and content of developmental networks needed for
supporting women and students of color to develop a stable engineering identity
needed to persist in engineering over time? (2) How does the structure of one’s
developmental network in terms of strength of relationships with developers
similar and dissimilar to women and minoritized students in terms of race/gender
and density in regard to the extent to which those developers know each other
influence their likelihood of overcoming imposter feelings and develop
engineering identity to persist in engineering over time? (3)How does the
content of one’s developmental network in terms of culturally relevant mentoring
support received from developers from multiple social spheres influence their
likelihood of overcoming imposter feelings and develop engineering identity to
persist in engineering over time? Quantitative and qualitative data will be
collected from minoritized engineering students who will participate in surveys,
workshops, and exercises and analyzed using correlational analysis, means,
standard deviations, reliability analysis of scale, demographic instruments,
latent growth curve modeling, and structural equation modeling. The study will
develop theory about developmental networks that can guide interventions
designed to increase STEM persistence of women and minorities in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Mid-Career Advancement
program that offers opportunities for scientists and engineers to substantively
enhance and advance their research program through synergistic and mutually
beneficial partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.