* 2120211
* Collaborative Research: Climatic and geologic controls on the threshold conditions for bedrock single- and multi-thread channels
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Brian Yanites, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,866.00

Rivers carve valleys, transport nutrients and sediment, and create habitat in
mountainous regions. Of particular importance in mountain regions are bedrock
rivers, whose banks and bed are solid rock rather than gravel or sand. Bedrock
rivers can be contained to a single channel or can branch into multiple channels
known as braided or anastomosing. Whether the river has one or multiple channels
impacts the hillslope-to-floodplain-to-river connection that is crucial to
nutrient transfer and habitat. The goal of this project is to understand why
bedrock rivers form one or multiple channels based on the climate and tectonic
conditions. The research will help understand where bedrock rivers have greater
potential for habitat and can inform conservation efforts in mountain rivers.
The project will introduce high performance computing to a small undergraduate
college through mentored research and will support outreach to Colorado K-5th
grade schools through a flooding and erosion hazards
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the climatic, lithologic, and
rock uplift conditions that lead to single-thread bedrock channel stability
through the development of a new numerical model that explicitly considers
variable channel width during meandering. The numerical model is calibrated
using cosmogenic radionuclide and optically stimulated luminescence derived
rates of channel migration and erosion in the Smith River, Oregon, as well as a
global dataset of bedrock channel conditions. Expected results will distinguish
the geologic and climatic conditions suitable for rich habitat development and
nutrient/sediment connectivity, and help scientists understand the past
conditions encoded in bedrock rivers and their terraces. The developed model
will be publicly shared through the NSF-supported Community Surface Dynamics
Modeling System (CSDMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.