* 2120607
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Biology through art:  an innovative, interdisciplinary approach to teaching biology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Anca Segall, National University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2023
* USD 67,487.00

This project establishes an interdisciplinary network of biologists and artists
to develop and implement teaching practices that integrate artistic expression
with biology education. This approach builds on the demonstrated cognitive and
academic benefits of art-enhanced instruction in biology courses to increase
creativity, course engagement, and concept comprehension by diverse students:
traditional and non-traditional, and biology majors and non-majors. This
project’s rationale is rooted in two national trends. First, undergraduate
students are becoming increasingly “non-traditional”, and these students show
lower degree completion rates and more difficulty integrating into university
life than their traditional counterparts. Second, this proposal is a response to
recent calls from national advisory bodies for the integration of education in
biology and the sciences with the arts and humanities, as well as emphasis on
the college graduate as a scientifically literate member of society. To engage
diverse students with diverse learning preferences, this project emphasizes
concrete, immediate expression of concepts in biology, and encourages thinking
about concepts from diverse perspectives. By providing opportunities for
students to interpret and express course material in personal, creative ways,
this project addresses the achievement gap faced by non-traditional students and
enriches the course experience of biology majors and non-majors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two main objectives: establish a
collaborative network of biologists and artists to develop and implement methods
and techniques of art-enhanced instruction in undergraduate biology courses and
increase course engagement and concept comprehension among biology-majors and
non-majors through art-enhanced instruction. To achieve the first objective, the
network will hold a series of meetings to develop feasible art-enhanced course
material, as well as appropriate assessment approaches and metrics for project
evaluation. Ten art-enhanced biology instruction and ten non-art-enhanced
biology courses will be implemented at four institutions (two HSIs, a teaching-
focused university, and an international institution that includes programs
offered through a Native American education center); three courses for non-
majors and seven for majors. Major courses will include lower level (General
Biology) and upper level (Invertebrate Zoology, Ecology, Cell Biology, and
Microbiology) biology. Formative evaluation will assess the processes through
which the network develops and implements the integration of artwork in biology
courses and summative evaluation will examine the outcomes of implementation
through assessment data on student course engagement and concept comprehension.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, as part of efforts
to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.