* 2120021
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: ALRISE - Accelerate Latinx Representation In STEM Education  with Institutional Intentionality and Capacity Building for Experiential Learning
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Maria Reyes, Arizona State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 4,985,243.00

The ALRISE Alliance is developing a network of faculty, staff, administrators,
and students at 2-yr and 4-yr Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs) and emerging
HSIs (eHSIs) to accelerate Latinx representation in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) education. Challenges such as (1) campus
environments that are not intentionally culturally-responsive to Latinx STEM
students; (2) deficit mindsets of STEM educators that devalue Latinx students’
strength and resilience; (3) Latinx STEM retention and graduation rates that are
significantly lower than enrollment; and (4) the underrepresentation of Latinx
professionals in STEM job clusters compound broadening participation efforts.
These factors place a necessity for change on institutions, educators, and
employers to intentionally harness Latinx students’ assets and create a more
welcoming environment that fosters reproducible success. The ALRISE Alliance
provides professional development for faculty, staff and industry to serve
Latinx students with intentionality through culturally-responsive undergraduate
research and work-based experiential learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uniquely
focused on the intersectionality of Latinx STEM students and experiential
learning, ALRISE fills an important gap in ongoing broadening participation
efforts, with its focus on culturally-responsive experiential learning in an
action-oriented and data-driven environment of continuous improvement and
collaboration. The Networked Improvement Community (NIC) collaborative
infrastructure of the ALRISE Alliance will mobilize large-scale change through
shared vision, partnerships, common goals and metrics, leadership and
communication, and potential for expansion, sustainability, and scale. The
ALRISE backbone organization, Science Foundation Arizona Center for STEM at
Arizona State University, provides leadership and communications structures to
connect and collaborate amongst four Regional Hubs that coordinate a total of 26
HSI/eHSI institutional members and their STEM Planning educator teams. Partner
subgroups defined by professional expertise in experiential learning and
intentionality, undergraduate research, work-based experiences and advocacy and
policy will provide services for assessing and developing intentionality across
the Alliance. A continuous improvement cycle will be used to effect change
locally while also improving the ALRISE Alliance and processes. Quantitative and
qualitative data will be collected and analyzed at the student, institutional,
and experiential learning program levels to provide evidence for practices
supported and disseminated by ALRISE. Triangulated findings from multi-level
mixed methods research, and outcomes from formative and summative evaluation,
will advance knowledge on culturally responsive practices, HSI intentionality,
and as-yet undiscovered common challenges and synergies within and across
Alliance members. Instilling intentionality to serve Latinx students at the
institutional level, and through asset-oriented educator professional
development and coaching, will build capacity to effect change at each member
institution. This capacity-building approach will not only serve the Latinx
students actively engaged in experiential learning programs but also retain the
knowledge and programs to impact a far greater number of students in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALRISE Alliance is funded by NSF Inclusion
across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in
Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national initiative to
enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing on diversity,
inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale and the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (NSF IUSE): Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI)
program, which supports efforts to enhance the quality of undergraduate STEM
education and to increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of
students pursuing associate's or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.