* 2120464
* CCRI: New: An Open End-to-End Extended Reality System Infrastructure: Enabling Domain-Specific Edge Systems Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sarita Adve, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Extended reality (XR), which encompasses virtual, augmented, and mixed reality
(AR, VR, MR) and also referred to as immersive computing, is expected to pervade
most human endeavors --- it will affect the way we teach, conduct science,
practice medicine, entertain ourselves, train professionals, interact socially,
and more. Many have said it will be the next interface for most of computing.
While current XR systems exist today, they are far from providing a tetherless
experience approaching perceptual abilities of humans. There is a gap of several
orders of magnitude between what is needed and achievable in performance, power,
and usability, requiring deep innovations from system researchers. At the same
time, with the end of Dennard scaling and Moore's law, application-driven
specialization or domain-specific computing has emerged as a key architectural
technique to meet the requirements of emerging applications, Computer architects
have responded with an explosion of research on highly efficient accelerators,
targeting machine learning and other domains. To truly achieve the promise of
efficient domain-specific computing in general and for the XR domain in
particular, however, requires systems researchers to broaden their portfolio
beyond specialization for individual accelerators. Instead, researchers must
develop the science for specializing for a domain-specific system which may
consist of multiple sub-domains requiring multiple parallel heterogeneous
accelerators that interact with each other to collectively meet end-user
demands. A key obstacle to domain-specific systems research for XR is that
(until our work) there have been no open source benchmarks or testbeds covering
the entire XR workflow to drive such research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops an open source end-to-end infrastructure for XR devices. It
builds on an initial research prototype, ILLIXR (Illinois Extended Reality
Testbed). The system is being designed to contain state-of-the-art components
for a complete XR workflow, an extensible runtime that orchestrates the
scheduling of these components, and extensive telemetry support to measure
performance, power, and end-to-end quality of experience metrics. The system is
extensible and supports a variety of operating systems (e.g., Linux, Android)
and heterogeneous platforms (e.g., NVIDIA Jetson, Qualcomm Snapdragon, etc.),
sensors (e.g., cameras, IMUs, etc.), and various XR applications. It enables new
research opportunities in all parts of the computing stack to tackle end-to-end
XR system innovations that were previously not possible. Systems researchers
benefit from using the infrastructure to drive new research in post-Moore
domain-specific systems, in the areas of computer architecture, programming
languages, compilers, runtime systems, and security and privacy. The end-to-end
infrastructure drives new techniques in co-designed systems that are optimized
for end-to-end user experiences. For applications, XR encompasses multiple sub-
domains such as computer vision, robotics, graphics, signal processing, and
machine learning. Algorithms researchers in these areas can prototype and test
new algorithms that are optimized for end-to-end system efficiencies without
worrying about implementing the rest of the stack, and XR researchers in
particular will be able to design systems optimized for the end-to-end user
experience. This work addresses two of the most important problems in computing
-- dealing with the end of Moore's law and designing systems that achieve the
potential of immersive computing. Both have the potential for tremendous impact
on society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.