* 2120156
* Investigating the Impact of Arts on Student Learning by Introducing Glass Science in the Materials Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jon Kellar, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving STEM learning
environments with a focus on engineering education. A key focus of the project
is the introduction of creative glass science elements that enable the creation
of a STEAM (STEM + Arts)‐infused engineering curriculum and co‐curriculum. This
STEAM-based project will support the recruitment and retention of engineers and
deliver quality science and engineering content to a diverse group of students
and to the community. The project hypothesizes that positive student outcomes
can be achieved through strategic curricular and co‐curricular modifications
that integrate and embrace development of STEAM programs. The project builds on
prior research that involves highly successful curricular and co‐curricular
programming integrating arts into an undergraduate engineering degree program.
Advances that result from the project have potential to inform and enhance STEAM
teaching within programs in undergraduate engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
South Dakota School of Mines and Technology proposes to create a degree program
that incorporates glass science into an undergraduate materials engineering
degree. The project aims to increase the creativity, innovation, collegiality,
entrepreneurship, critical thinking, and intellectual diversity of students in
the program, and possibly also improve its gender diversity. Specific aspects of
the program include new curriculums in glass science and engineering,
integration of STEAM laboratory and design content with inclusion of content
from an embedded artist‐in-residence, and formation of a campus STEAM Council.
The project’s research elements address the sustainability of the proposed
modifications through: 1) translation of selected programmatic elements to other
campus engineering programs, 2) recruitment of students into the revised degree
programs, 3) marketing to the campus, local, and state community, 4) involvement
of private‐sector partners through STEAM‐influenced design projects, and 5)
dissemination to targeted professional societies and associated stakeholders,
including local art centers. A rigorous external assessment of the research will
be conducted that includes use of Herrmann Brain Dominance Inventory and the
Critical Thinking Assessment Test to determine the effectiveness of program
outcomes. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.