* 2120508
* Tracing Human Response to Environmental Variability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Dan Cabanes Cruelles, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 237,214.00

Urban populations are projected to continuously increase for the foreseeable
future. In urban societies, environmental deterioration produced by human and
climatic factors is a significant stress agent. The archaeological record offers
a wealth of long-term case studies indicating that climatic disruptions may have
played an important role in the breakdown of urban societies. However,
environmental deterioration did not inevitably lead to collapse and past
societies responded to environmental stress using different strategies.
Understanding how societies coped with environmental variation could provide
information for evaluating current urban risk factors under the present climatic
scenario. To investigate past human responses to climate fluctuations,
archaeologists correlate archaeological site data with spatially distant
environmental proxy sources, producing challenging spatial and temporal
uncertainty. As a result, human-scale responses to environmental shifts remain
elusive when studied with conventional archaeological
approaches&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this challenge, this project
approaches the human-scale experience of past-climatic shifts using a
combination of geoarchaeology, paleobotany, stable isotopes, and traditional
excavation methods and aims to further clarify how past human-environmental
interactions influenced technological, social, cultural, and political aspects
of such societies. In multiple regions highly variable climate and gradient of
ecological zones, abundance of urban sites, human modified landscapes, and
cyclical wet and dry periods generated a diversity of adaptive exploitation
strategies and new forms of social organization. This project focuses on using
both fossil and modern phytoliths to investigate how the inhabitants of such
centers responded to environmental changes through time. The project emphasizes
the use of geoarchaeological methods to identify site formation processes
involved in phytolith accumulation and will use stable isotope values from
charred plant remains and a battery of 14C dating to exponentially improve the
resolution of climatic reconstructions. The project results will be compared to
the regional proxies, the material culture record, and the textual sources to
provide information on urban resilience strategies at multiple chronological,
social, cultural, and spatial scales. The projectâ€™s research and collaboration
framework will offer training and educational opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students. In regions where increasing aridity is affecting and will
continue to affect millions in the foreseeable future, understanding how ancient
societies negotiated environmental constrains provides the public with examples
from the past on the risks urban societies faced during climatic
shifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.