* 2120651
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Large: Privacy-Preserving Abuse Prevention for Encrypted Communications Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Jorge Matias, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,169,281.00

This project will address the immense challenge of mitigating abuse in
communication services where interactions between the parties are private and
fully encrypted. Such services have become popular for individual and group
communications, and their security features help protect individual privacy and
rights. But these platforms are also used for harmful and illegal purposes such
as organizing violent activities or sharing child sexual abuse materials. In
addition, users on these platforms are subject to abuse such as hate,
harassment, and misinformation. The encryption used by such services makes
detecting and blocking harmful content extremely difficult. This work will
develop new trust and safety approaches to enable secure and trustworthy
communications that preserve privacy while mitigating abuses. The project will
aim to provide (1) technical advances in developing novel cryptographic tools
and techniques to support mitigation of abuse; (2) human-centered advances in
understanding perceptions and expectations of privacy and abuse mitigation, as
well as creating novel designs for individual and community interactions; and
(3) legal, policy, and regulatory advances to support and enable these abuse-
mitigating features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort is organized
around two overlapping thrusts: algorithmic-driven approaches and community-
driven approaches. The algorithmic approaches will focus on developing better
cryptographic tools for privacy-aware abuse detection in encrypted settings,
such as detection of viral, fast-spreading content. These designs will be
informed by a human-centered approach to understanding people's privacy
expectations, and supported by legal analyses that ensure tools are consistent
with applicable privacy and content-moderation laws. In the second thrust, the
community approaches will focus on providing communities with the tools they
need to address abuse challenges in encrypted settings. Given the challenges and
pitfalls of centralized approaches for abuse mitigation, the project will
explore building distributed capabilities to support communities and groups on
these platforms. An importantly ingredient is working with communities and
community moderators to understand their needs, as well as guide design of legal
and policy frameworks to support new approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taken
together, this project will address the challenge of abuse mitigation on
encrypted platforms, while preserving privacy protections for individuals and
communities. It will especially consider the perspectives of individuals and
communities most in need of privacy and abuse protection. The work, if
successful, should fuel new innovations in the design of encrypted messaging
platforms, and in basic research in cryptography, human-centered design, and
Internet law.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.