* 2120617
* Community dynamics of public space management and abandonment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Bailey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 270,605.00

Public spaces serve as places to gather, remember past events, and mark the
legacy of influential individuals. The location and care of these spaces informs
notions of community heritage, identity, and outlook because, together, these
traits play key roles in how community spaces are managed. This project
investigates the processes that lead to the preservation versus abandonment of
an important type of public space, cemeteries, which can mark strong community
meaning. They can be important ways to remember our war heroes, our leaders, our
ancestors, as well as families and friends. The research examines how changes in
identity and cultural belonging, in turn, affect the management of such spaces
and notions of heritage. Specifically, the research leverages archaeological,
ethnographic, and geographic theory and methods to understand the factors
associated with the preservation or abandonment of those spaces that are key
markers of our past. The project trains several students, disseminates findings
broadly, including via a dynamic website, and plans for community outreach
events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has three aims: (1) to determine the
relative rates of abandonment of public cemeteries in relation to individual-
and community-level variables; (2) to depict the processes by which these spaces
are abandoned and rediscovered; and (3) to understand the feedback between
abandonment versus preservation and concepts of identity and belonging. To do
so, the investigators are building a data base of relevant locations that
includes information on site condition, geographic location in relation to
environmental variables and community centers, and relevant demographic and
historical variables. Project team members plan to characterize and map a
particular space to test whether observed relationships hold within as well as
across these types of public spaces. Finally, the investigators plan to
interview and involve community members in documentation and preservation
activities to test how local identity shapes and is shaped by abandonment versus
preservation. In sum, this project utilizes a unique blend of archaeological,
historical, ethnographic, and community-based approaches to examine patterning
in meaningful public space loss, to examine historical factors contributing to
their abandonment, and to discover how communities' interactions with these
spaces contributes to collective identity and
belonging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.