* 2120906
* MCA: Modeling Surface Aerodynamic Temperature over Agricultural Fields
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Chavez, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,334.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study the heat
transfer process, from agricultural fields into the atmosphere, to improve the
estimation of crop water use rates (evapotranspiration, ET). The project will
integrate three-dimensional (3D) crop height, crop density and orientation,
weather data, wind angle of attack, and crop light reflectance and temperature
images, from drones, in the heat flux modeling effort. Modeling heat fluxes
accurately will promote the adoption of a land surface energy balance (EB) model
to map ET and improve irrigation management. The 3D crop characterization and
its dynamic interaction with the wind have not been incorporated in heat flux
models yet. Current EB models use one-dimensional crop characteristics, often
resulting in ET estimation inaccuracies, which limits the general applicability
of EB models. Benefits from this study include the scientific characterization
of Ag fieldsâ€™ dynamic heat fluxes, enhancement of the research process, updating
academic courses, training of students and dissemination of results through
webinars, scientific papers, and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate modern
technology with knowledge from micro-meteorology, agronomy, remote sensing, and
engineering to model a dynamic aerodynamic temperature. Two locations will be
included, one in Colorado and another in Spain. The specific research objectives
are to: a) characterize crop canopy directional (3D) structures and their
effects on the zero-plane displacement height, roughness length for momentum
transfer, friction velocity and surface aerodynamic resistance, as the wind
(from a given angle of attack) interacts with the structure, under different
surface and environmental conditions; b) develop a robust surface aerodynamic
temperature model for agricultural applicability; and c) evaluate derived
sensible and latent heat fluxes, to determine their accuracy, and advantages and
improvements over existing one-dimensional models. Intellectual Merit: The
novelty of this study is the incorporation of 3D crop characteristics into
aerodynamic and temperature terms to model the surface aerodynamic temperature
and accurately determine agricultural sensible heat fluxes. Broader Impacts:
crop ET will be well determined, which will promote a global adoption of the EB
algorithm to improve water management decision making and foster agricultural
sustainability. Research results will be disseminated through scientific
publications, conferences, webinars, and academic
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.