* 2120588
* RCN-UBE Incubator: The STEM Career Exploration Laboratory Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Basil, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 74,781.00

Students in STEM majors nationwide frequently fail to translate course learning
experiences into career aspirations. Course content often lacks connections to
societal issues or fail to address public problems using skills students
developed in their majors. The STEM Career Exploration Laboratory Network
(STEMCEL) is designed to develop and implement a “course to community and career
skillset” approach to enhance students’ civic engagement and encourage them to
explore a variety of STEM careers that can bring socioeconomic
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Network will build a bridge between
community problems and educational institutions by having students apply their
classroom curricula to develop solutions to societal and social justice needs.
An example is development of rapid environmental testing tools that contribute
to identifying and monitoring contaminated local sites. The overarching goals of
the STEMCEL incubator are to: connect biology students to civic-engagement by
identifying communal needs, develop a multimodal approach to the problem through
hands-on research exploration in early laboratory courses that will train
students in state-of-the art techniques, participate in building a network with
peers and experts in the fields of STEM careers, and advance scientific critical
thinking to provide practical solutions to real-life problems with deliverables.
This work will establish and improve connections that will result in positive
environmental impact in local regions, by developing a rapid contaminant
detection test. STEMCEL partners from 2-year community colleges, 4-year
colleges, research institutes, industrial liaisons as well as New York city
civil offices, will work together to enrich the students’ research and
networking experiences in the curricula and in real-life implementation
processes. The STEMCEL network will bring career exploration into early
undergraduate curricula to expand students’ view of other rewarding and
important career paths outside of the healthcare-related fields that they are
familiar with when they enter college. The project will be scalable nationwide,
as environmental contaminants are a major issue for the whole country. The
STEMCEL philosophy is to create courses incorporating authentic research that
contribute to large data sets nationwide while educating our students to the
variety of STEM careers available. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.