* 2120988
* MCA: Using multilayer-network analysis to link the social and physical processes that underlie natal dispersal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Karen Mabry, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 239,400.00

How do the physical environment, interactions with others, and an animal’s own
characteristics act together to influence that animal’s movements through a
landscape? This project will answer this question by bringing together several
of the most influential themes in recent animal behavior and ecology research:
movement ecology, individual behavioral differences, and social network
approaches. Specifically, this project will employ new multilayer interaction
network approaches to understand how interactions with other animals and the
environment influence movement behavior in wild mice. This project will use
animal location data obtained used automated tracking, hormonal and behavioral
profiles of individual brush mice (Peromyscus boylii), and information about the
physical environment through which mice move. Broader impacts of this project
include teaching and mentoring of students, development of educational materials
for K-12 students, and the development of animal tracking infrastructure
available for use by the wider scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the clear importance of animal
dispersal as a central link between individual behavior and larger-scale
ecological and evolutionary processes, the causes, consequences, and process of
natal dispersal, movement between the birthplace and site of first reproduction,
remain relatively enigmatic. The primary focus of this project will be the
integration of established and influential paradigms for the study of the
movement ecology and individual variation in dispersal behavior with rapidly-
advancing multilayer network approaches connecting physical and social processes
to develop a truly integrative understanding of individual variation in
dispersal through a socially- and physically-heterogeneous landscape. This
project will integrate multilayer interaction networks constructed using data
obtained from automated tracking of Peromyscus mice with genetic, endocrine,
behavioral, and environmental data to develop an integrative understanding of
animal dispersal through landscapes that vary in social and ecological
conditions through space and time. An additional objective is the development of
research infrastructure through the reestablishment of animal tracking
capabilities after previous tracking technology was destroyed by
wildfire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.