* 2120131
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of differentiation and morphogenesis of the ligule/auricle hinge
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrew Nelson, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 311,411.00

A fundamental question in plant biology is how plant cells are patterned to
develop the specific forms and functions that comprise plant organs. This
collaborative project will investigate the cellular and developmental genetic
mechanisms whereby leaf boundary cells acquire their specialized cell fates, an
agronomically important process that contributes to light capture and crop
yield. This project will train a graduate student and two postdoctoral
scientists in state-of-the-art techniques in microscopy, gene expression and
genome structure. Machine learning approaches will be used to analyze these
complementary data. The project will also train undergraduate summer interns in
these techniques and will sponsor yearly, hands-on, educational webinars and
workshops on computational analyses of big biological data. In addition, the
data generated during this project will seed team-learning projects in a new
course developed as part of a separate NSF-funded graduate student training
grant, which will also sponsor a free, online training course on machine
learning for plant scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How cell-fate acquisition
is genetically regulated is the fundamental question in plant organogenesis. A
common feature of multicellular organisms is the formation of distinct
boundaries between developmentally distinct tissues of an organ. The
ligule/auricle comprises the developmental boundary within maize leaves, forming
a specialized hinge-like structure between the proximal, supportive sheath
tissue and the distal, photosynthetic blade. Ligule/auricle morphology shows
natural variation and is a genetically tractable trait; the resultant difference
in leaf blade angle are relevant to maize improvement. The cellular parameters
of ligule/auricle outgrowth will be characterized during three distinct
ontogenetic stages. Single-cell RNA-seq will identify cell-specific genetic
networks during ligule/auricle outgrowth, and single-cell ATAC-seq will identify
key transcription factors and cis-regulatory features during these same three
stages. Machine learning strategies will synthesize and correlate these cell-
biological, transcriptomic, and chromatin data, to identify genomic networks and
candidate genes involved in ligule/auricle
differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.