* 2120285
* Virtual Career Development Workshops for Undergraduate and Graduate Students in the Ocean and Coastal Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Valerie Sloan, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 49,877.00

The National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and The Coastal Society will
design, organize and host a virtual workshop series for professional development
of early career marine science students, particularly those who are attending
Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) or who are from groups historically excluded
from ocean science careers. The project will aid undergraduates considering a
graduate degree, graduate students seeking their terminal degree, and graduates
embarking on their career pathway. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence in the recent
educational research literature and informal feedback from faculty and students
at MSIs confirm the value of professional development and mentoring. Efforts to
enlist faculty as co-facilitators will extend the merit of the proposed work
well beyond the students who attend the events. The project will involve faculty
from sixteen MSIs to work in clusters of four with the workshop organizers to
tailor the professional development training according to the needs of the
students at their institutions. Four sets of events will be hosted for students
at those MSIs, with a projected attendance of a few hundred students. The
agendas, speakers, content, and format for these events can serve as models for
the faculty to use in future years, thereby positively impacting future students
in their programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.