* 2120834
* CompCog: Computational Models of Plasticity and Learning in Speech Perception
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Naomi Feldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 508,931.00

When it comes to speech perception, listeners are lifelong learners. Although
infants’ perception becomes tuned to their native language in their first year
of life, their speech sound categories continue to change well into childhood
and adolescence. Adults also continue to show substantial capacity for
perceptual learning, particularly in settings that involve feedback or rewards.
This project uses computational modeling to investigate the learning mechanisms
that allow listeners to adapt their speech perception to particular languages
and environments. By building theories of auditory perceptual learning, the
project will contribute to our understanding of the difficulties that adults
face when learning another language. It could also provide a framework for
understanding the difficulties faced by certain populations, such as children
with cochlear implants, when learning their first language and may facilitate
future development of treatments or interventions for these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two types of computational models are
developed based on adult perceptual learning data: probabilistic cue weighting
models, which are designed to capture fast, trial-by-trial changes in listeners’
reliance on different parts of the speech signal, and reinforcement learning
models, which are designed to capture longer term, implicit perceptual learning
of speech sounds that occurs in response to a reward, such as points in a video
game. The models are tested on their ability to capture adults’ perceptual
learning behavior in experimental settings. A second series of simulations then
explores whether and how these models that were developed on adult data can
predict aspects of children’s perceptual learning of speech sound categories in
laboratory discrimination tasks that involve rewards, such as exciting toys, and
in naturalistic settings where the speech is more complex and there is a less
obvious reward structure. Results from the project are expected to provide
insight into what types of speech representations children and adults have at
different stages of development, as well as which perceptual learning strategies
learners rely on at different ages and in different learning
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.