* 2120709
* RCN-UBE Incubator: U2-SAFE: Unifying Undergraduate Student Access to Field Experiences using The Virtual Field Platform
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Sarah Oktay, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2022
* USD 74,923.00

This project will create a new network composed of staff at field stations and
marine labs combined with faculty and students at community colleges, tribal
colleges, professional student organizations, and minority serving institutions,
and educators with video content creators. This research coordination network
incubator will take the virtual learning products developed for the Virtual
Field platform (thevirtualfield.org) in response to COVID-19 travel restrictions
and improve and refine them with feedback from students. Only a small proportion
of the hundreds of thousands of college students can be hosted at natural areas
to conduct research and take classes. This project brings underwater coastal
marine and estuarine communities, vast grasslands, alpine forests, and rocky
foothills into the classroom with both recorded and live instruction and real
scientists and graduate students as role models, enabling a broader range of
college students to experience, observe, catalog, and explore the natural world.
Place-based learning experiences have a profound effect on undergraduate
students, creating deeper connections with the concepts studied, a long-term
engagement in sciences, and exposure to developing STEM careers unfamiliar to
these audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a global distribution of 1268
terrestrial, coastal, and marine stations, over 75% affiliated with
universities, Field Stations and Marine Labs (FSMLs) are in a unique position to
respond to the needs of the next generation of undergraduate biology students.
Unfortunately, many students are unable to visit these often-remote locations
where hands-on research can be conducted. In addition, it can be extremely
difficult to conduct cross-site comparative research in locations that are far
apart. This project will take the videos and curriculum created previously,
train FSML staff and associated faculty to develop additional material and hone
the results with direct feedback from faculty and students to create adaptive
modules for a variety of disciplines from geology to hydrology to
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, as part of efforts
to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.