* 2120279
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: Medium: A Development and Experimental Environment for Privacy-preserving and Secure (DEEPSECURE) Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 10/31/2022
* USD 780,000.00

While machine learning (ML) is embraced as an important tool for various
science, engineering, medical, finance, and homeland security applications, it
is becoming an increasingly attractive target for cybercriminals. DEEPSECURE is
a first-of-its-kind development and experimental platform to support secure and
privacy-preserving ML research. With its novel modular design integrated with
fully customizable function blocks and sample modules, DEEPSECURE is a game-
changing tool to effectively support research in this emerging field by enabling
fast design, prototyping, evaluation, and re-innovation of trust-worthy ML
applications. It enables a variety of compelling new research projects that
focus on ML security and privacy, leading to breakthroughs to protect ML systems
and accelerating their development and widening their adoption. It will
contribute significantly to the protection of the future cyber and physical
world and safeguard human society. DEEPSECURE receives strong community support
from over 20 key stakeholders across the country. The project includes
significant efforts for fostering and sustaining an ML security and privacy
research community, including monthly virtual open forums to provide a regular
update to and seek feedback from the community, quarterly advisory board
meetings, annual symposiums, and a training workshop series. The project
includes specific measures and plans for inspiring the participation of
underrepresented groups and infusing diversity and inclusion in all DEEPSECURE
events and activities. The project output includes an open-source and easy-to-
use learning platform for curriculum development and workforce training. To
support building a sustainable workforce development pipeline, the project team
participates in the existing annual GenCyber summer camps for K-12 students and
a Cyber Saturday series to introduce cybersecurity and AI career paths and
educational resources to K-12 school counselors, teachers, students, and
parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent development in privacy-preserving and
secure ML draws expertise from both ML and security/privacy to tackle the multi-
faceted problem. However, the research community is facing fundamental
challenges in this emerging area due to its interdisciplinary nature. On the one
hand, although deep learning frameworks such as Pytorch and Tensorflow have been
made widely available, a critical hurdle faced by ML researchers is the steep
learning curve to effectively use security techniques and libraries to tackle ML
security and privacy problems. On the other hand, while the security community
has developed highly efficient cryptographic libraries, it remains nontrivial to
integrate them into deep learning models to achieve a computation efficiency
suited for practical applications. The overarching goal of the project is to
close the gap by developing DEEPSECURE, which integrates a spectrum of essential
functions and building blocks that are ready-to-use to flatten the learning
curve for researchers coming from both ML and security/privacy communities. At
the same time, DEEPSECURE is fully customizable and scalable, enabling deep and
fundamental research toward privacy-preserving and secure ML. To meet the
overarching goal, specific project objectives include: (1) acquiring a scalable
and re-configurable compute environment based on the latest Dell, AMD, and
Nvidia technologies to establish the DEEPSECURE hardware infrastructure across
the campuses of Old Dominion University and University of Buffalo; (2)
developing a new software platform to support DEEPSECURE SDE (Software
Development Environment) and MEC (Multi-user Experimental Chamber). The platform
is integrated with PyTorch to enable great usability for both beginners and
advanced researchers and feature a scalable and customizable modular framework
with seamlessly integrated libraries, function blocks, and sample modules; (3)
promoting DEEPSECURE across the nation to ensure broad participation,
collaboration, and sharing; (4) leveraging DEEPSECURE to foster a long-lasting,
self-sustainable ML security and privacy research community that engages all
stakeholders in a sustained and ongoing way; and last but not least, (5)
educating and training diverse cybersecurity workforce to safeguard the future
intelligent cyber systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.