* 2120931
* Determining the rates and conditions of subduction initiation beneath the Samail Ophiolite
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrew Smye, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,802.00

Subduction zones are the primary loci of chemical exchange between the surface
and the deep Earth. Understanding how subduction initiates and evolves is
important for characterizing the nature of this exchange. The geological record
contains a rich archive of subduction initiation in the form of ophiolites,
which are pieces of oceanic crust and mantle emplaced on continents. These
ophiolites often contain a thin veneer of rocks smeared out and welded to their
base (“metamorphic soles”) that are thought to represent the first increments of
subducted material in a newly formed subduction zone, i.e., when a plate first
begins to sink. This proposal seeks to characterize the thermal and chemical
record of these earliest subducted rocks along the base of Samail Ophiolite
(Oman/UAE) to determine the rates and conditions at which subduction started in
the Samail system. These data will be critically tested against geodynamic
models to understand the tectonic settings and physical parameters leading to
subduction initiation. The data will also be used to trace the earliest phases
of subduction-related chemical exchange between the surface and the deep Earth.
The project is spearheaded by two early career scientists; supports the
educational, technical, and professional development of two undergraduate
students; and funds the development of a virtual museum exhibit about ophiolites
for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is expected to
identify: i) the duration of high-T metamorphism in the Samail sole, ii)
metamorphic conditions and mass flow paths (P-T-t) in the sole, and iii)
variations in (i) and (ii) along the length of the ophiolite. Analytical work
will be performed on garnet amphibolites previously collected from the Samail
metamorphic sole. We will collect garnet, clinopyroxene, and Ti-phase trace-
element spots and maps (LA-ICPMS); quantitative garnet and clinopyroxene major-
element maps (EPMA); bulk-rock major and trace-element data (XRF, ICPMS); and
Raman spectra on strained quartz and zircon inclusions in garnet. These data
will be used for conventional, single-element (e.g., Zr-in-titanite), and
elastic thermobarometry to characterize P-T paths experienced by each of the
studied samples, as well as diffusion modelling of trace- and major-element
profiles in garnet and clinopyroxene to constrain T-t histories. These data will
also be used to test between order-of-magnitude differences in metamorphic
timescales from different geochronological techniques, potentially supporting
either long-term “forced” subduction initiation or shorter-term “spontaneous”
subduction initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.