* 2120907
* MCA: A Computational Framework to Study microRNAs in Cell-Cell Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Haiyan Hu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,791.00

Cell to cell Interactions are essential for the overall function of
multicellular organisms. Recent studies have discovered that non-coding
microRNAs (miRNAs) can be transferred from one cell to another cell to perform
certain physiological functions. Understanding which miRNAs participate in this
intercellular crosstalk and how they function under specific environmental
conditions is essential to gaining a new perspective of intercellular
communications. Biotechnology advancement has generated a large amount of
transcriptomics data that motivate efficient computational strategies to
understand miRNAs in cell-cell interactions, which is fundamental to modeling
biological systems. This project investigation miRNAs in cell-cell interactions
will generate methods and tools that will be freely available to the scientific
community. The research will be incorporated into graduate, undergraduate and
K-12 education, and will be disseminated to the research community and the
public to enhance scientific understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
seeks to integrate large-scale transcriptomics data and create efficient
computational algorithms to model miRNA activities relevant to cell-cell
interactions under different conditions. The advanced statistical algorithms and
probabilistic models of miRNA activities related to cell-cell interactions
promise to unveil various roles of miRNAs in cell communications and phenotype
formulation. The research is expected to not only advance scientific
understanding of cell communications but also stimulate interest in developing
and advancing efficient computational modeling and data integration methods in
the informatics research field. Outputs of the project will be made available
through the project website
(http://hulab.ucf.edu/research/projects/cell2cell/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.