* 2120358
* CCRI: New: RUI: Testbed as-a Service: A Sandbox for Fostering Smart and Connected City Research &amp; Development
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Farah Kandah, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,374,885.00

Smart Corridor+, which is built on Chattanooga’s city-wide 10 Gbps fiber optic
Internet, contains an urban road segment as well as a freeway segment. The urban
portion includes the existing MLK Smart Corridor, which is a 1.25-mile stretch
of Chattanooga’s walkable urban core developed by University of Tennessee at
Chattanooga (UTC) and the Chattanooga Smart Community Collaborative. The freeway
portion is 2.5-miles of HWY27 with on and off ramps on the east corner of the
MLK Smart Corridor. The goal is to build a Testbed-as-a-Service (TaaS) research
infrastructure on Smart Corridor+. This will allow research projects by enabling
access to comprehensive data representing an urban environment and facilitating
deployment, testing, and validating algorithms in a large-scale and real-world
setting.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This programmable and accessible heterogeneous
infrastructure spans multiple road types and technologies and collectively
provides essential IoT, diverse communication technologies, and edge computing,
Level-2 and Level-4 connected/autonomous vehicles, and software services. A web
portal will allow scientists to access data and carry out specific experiments
using the proposed TaaS. Research projects will focus on innovative IoT
applications for improved urban mobility, public safety, smart infrastructure,
and human/device behavioral analysis that cannot be otherwise performed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will host community events, conferences,
hackathons, and workshops to recruit a diverse pool of users. An Advisory Board
and a User Community Steering Committee (UCSC) will ensure that the
infrastructure will benefit researchers and stakeholders, including residents.
The proposed infrastructure and focused research projects will be leveraged to
support multiple STEM education and research opportunities for all levels of
students (graduate, undergraduate and high school) and researchers that will
help develop a highly competitive and diverse STEM workforce for smart cities,
public safety, IoT, transportation, and communication industries. The
educational activities include improved graduate education, graduate,
undergraduate, and K-12 research experiences, and broaden
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.