* 2120881
* Collaborative Research: Emerging Engagements of Energy Democracy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrea Feldpausch-Parker, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 267,321.00

On September 20, 2017, Hurricane Maria made landfall on the U.S. territory of
Puerto Rico. The category five hurricane disconnected the island’s aging fossil
fuel-based electricity grid and uncovered the shortcomings of Puerto Rico’s
energy system in the context of ongoing economic crisis, energy transition,
natural disasters, and climate change. As a result, Puerto Rico is at an energy
crossroads: continue with status quo reliance on imported fossil fuels or make a
transition to renewable energies, such as solar. The goal of this project is to
analyze the post-disaster energy transition in Puerto Rico as a case study for
understanding the ways people communicate about energy democracy. Energy
democracy is both a social movement that seeks to make decisions about energy
technology as democratic as possible. This project collects data from fieldwork
in Puerto Rico, interviews and focus groups with stakeholders involved in energy
decision-making in Puerto Rico, and Puerto Rican media sources (TV, radio, and
print) that report on and influence communication about energy transition and
democracy. Analysis of how different groups of people communicate about and
justify competing visions for Puerto Rico’s future energy system will contribute
to understanding current and future controversies over energy transition in the
midst of the climate change, natural disasters, and other crisis events. The
project’s findings will contribute to developing more democratic and just energy
decision-making in a range of contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using qualitative
fieldwork and news media analysis methods, this research will answer the
research question: What are the forms of communication used by stakeholders
(industry, citizens, government officials, activists, regulatory bodies, and
scientists) in Puerto Rico to describe and justify energy transition in relation
to democracy? This project will contribute to the emerging area of Science,
Technology, and Society (STS) research on energy democracy. The Justice-
Participation-Power-Technology (JPPT) framework developed by the Co-PIs explains
how energy democracy relies on the intersections of these four elements in each
particular context. This research tests the JPPT framework’s applicability in
the case of Puerto Rico’s post-disaster energy transition. Furthermore, the
project supports ongoing efforts by researchers to study how energy transitions
relate to democracy; Puerto Rico’s evolving energy system; and the social,
political, and cultural influences on implementation of energy technologies.
Findings can be applied to other energy technology controversies with
stakeholders in similar geopolitical contexts towards designing energy systems
that are democratic, culturally appropriate, and equitable. Through
collaboration with energy democracy practitioners in Puerto Rico, the project
includes hosting community workshops, conducting research for grassroots energy
organizations, and developing research-informed best practices for promoting
energy democracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.