* 2120894
* Noticing in Mathematics: A Video-Annotation Curriculum to Enhance Instructors' Understanding of Student Thinking in Proof-Transition Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Roberto Pelayo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving instructional
teams’ understanding of student mathematical thinking in introductory college
proof courses. Large percentages of undergraduates fail proof-transition
courses. The notable increase in content difficulty and transition from
computational to proof-based mathematics are factors in determining whether
students pursue studies and careers in STEM. This issue affects students from
underrepresented groups disproportionately. To address these challenges, this
project will investigate the effectiveness of a video-annotation curriculum
designed to support responsive and equitable mathematics instruction in
undergraduate proof-transition courses. The project will provide professional
development for six instructional teams for an Introduction to Abstract Algebra
course. The instructional teams will consist of a course instructor, two
graduate teaching assistants, and four undergraduate learning assistants. The
project’s aim is to enhance instructional practices to increase student success
in college courses for mathematics majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
draws on extensive K-12 mathematics education research to ground its design of
an innovative professional development curriculum centered on teacher noticing.
Noticing entails attending to student mathematical thinking and positioning in
the classroom, responding strategically and appropriately, and improving both
learning and sense of belonging. This project will provide novel and important
findings about adaptation of the noticing construct to the higher education
setting. Through a design-based research approach, the project’s
interdisciplinary team will engage in three phases of research: exploratory,
early implementation, and efficacy study. Through multiple cycles of revisions
the team will design and rigorously test the curriculum for its impact on
student learning and instructional teams’ knowledge, noticing competencies, and
instructional quality. The University of California-Irvine, a Hispanic-Serving
Institution, will test the efficacy of the curriculum specifically on Latinx
students. Additionally, the curriculum will be made freely available to other
institutions, including those serving large percentages of students from groups
underrepresented in their participation in STEM courses of study. Findings will
be shared via publications and conference presentations. The NSF IUSE: EHR
program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.