* 2120539
* The role of neural oscillations in coordinating competing cognitive processes
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ian Fiebelkorn, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 552,068.00

How does the human brain flexibly sample and prioritize incoming sensory
information? Imagine a busy scene in Times Square in New York City on New Year’s
Eve: towering skyscrapers, flashing lights, blaring music, swirling traffic, a
colorful crowd of mingling people, the hubbub of multiple conversations, all
while you are trying to listen to a friend talking with you on your cell phone.
Since our brain has limited sensory processing resources, we simply cannot fully
process all of the surging flood of incoming sensory information arriving in
this scene. So instead, we selectively focus our attention on the most
behaviorally important information and events. The brain uses attentional
filters to determine what should be prioritized, and these filters can boost
relevant information. For example, attention can selectively boost auditory
processing of your friend’s voice, and enhance visual processing, focused on the
street corner where you agreed to meet. Whereas previous research has sometimes
described visual attention at a specific location (e.g., at a specific street
corner) as a sustained spotlight that illuminates behaviorally important
information, other recent investigations have instead shown that this
attentional spotlight flickers at about four times per second. That is, the
strength of the attentional spotlight rhythmically increases and decreases over
time. This rhythmic flickering of the spotlight suggests that the brain is
“checking-in” or “updating” about four times per second to ensure that the
present focus of the attentional spotlight is still the most important and
relevant focus for the observer. This rhythmic checking-in process creates time
windows when it is easier to shift the attentional spotlight to a new location,
potentially creating a critical balance between sampling and shifting behaviors.
Rhythmic flickering of the attentional spotlight may have developed as a
survival mechanism to help our ancestors (and other animals), for example,
flexibly look for food while still keeping an eye out for predators. This
project investigates the neural origins and behavioral consequences of this
rhythmic flickering of attention in normal human subjects. This research may
also shed new light on brain disorders associated with abnormally limited
attentional flexibility, such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), in which individuals can become fixed in behavioral states associated
with either high distractibility (i.e., shifting behaviors) or hyper-focus
(i.e., sampling behaviors).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to investigate how and
why the strength of the visual attentional spotlight rhythmically waxes and
wanes about four times per second, this research uses eye tracking (a behavioral
measure of eye position), and electroencephalography (EEG, a non-invasive,
global measure of electrical activity in the brain) in humans. First, this
research explores whether time periods associated with a weaker attentional
spotlight are also associated with increased distractibility. The results of
these experiments will test the hypothesis that the brain is wired to be
periodically distractible to enhance updating of selective attention. While this
may be critical to performing everyday tasks that require both focus and
preparedness for unexpected events, such as one may encounter while driving a
car in busy rush-hour traffic, it is potentially problematic in our increasingly
distracting modern environments (e.g., with a laptop open in front of us and a
smart phone nearby). Second, this project investigates whether rhythmic change
in the strength of the attentional spotlight reflects a fundamental mechanism
that the brain uses to mediate competing functions. Previous research has shown
that the very same brain regions (such as the frontal eye fields in the cerebral
cortex) that direct attention-related boosts in visual processing, also direct
eye movements toward behaviorally important information. This projects'
experiments test whether these brain regions perform these potentially competing
visual and motor (i.e., eye movements) functions by alternating between them
over time, such that time periods associated with a weaker visual attentional
spotlight are also associated with more eye movements. Finally, this project
investigates whether the brain uses such rhythmic coordination of competing
functions, not only in sensory processing, but as a more general mechanism for
resolving sources of possible cognitive conflict, that might occur in a task
where subjects are asked to simultaneously remember several similar items for a
short period of time. These experiments test whether the strength of
representations for these to-be-remembered items rhythmically fluctuates over
time (i.e., similar to the flickering strength of the attentional visual sensory
spotlight). This research will increase understanding both of how the brain
dynamically samples visual information from the environment and also how the
brain continuously updates to maintain critical cognitive
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.