* 2120910
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The effects of nutritional ecology and feeding competition on growth and development
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,750.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning what to eat, how, and
where to find food are significant challenges that arise over the course of
development. Such challenges can also be social, when individuals have to
compete with others for access to food. Yet how feeding competition affects food
choice and developmental outcomes is poorly understood, particularly in
scenarios where food is abundant and distributed evenly across an environment.
This doctoral dissertation research tests how variation in feeding ecologies,
including food competition, affects food choice and developmental outcomes among
wild juvenile non-human primates inhabiting changing ecological and demographic
environments. Results contribute to existing conservation management plans and
provide concrete training opportunities to graduate and undergraduate students.
Results will be disseminated widely to academic and non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal merges theory from nutritional
ecology and life history to investigate the significance of feeding competition
among developing non-human primates, who lack the foraging competence of adults.
Major objectives include investigating: 1) variation in food nutritional
properties along ecological gradients; 2) development of adult-like foraging
competence; and 3) impacts of feeding competition on dietary development of
infant and juvenile individuals. The researchers integrate novel and long-term
data on food nutritional properties and feeding behavior sampled across a
diversity of habitat types. They collect novel nutritional data from plant food
samples as well as feeding data generated through long-term monitoring and new
behavioral observations. Results inform understanding of the evolution of
primate juvenile periods, by improving our understanding of how immatures are
impacted by feeding competition, even in contexts where food is apparently
abundant. Further, this research generates insights regarding developmental
responses to changes in ecology, which are important for predicting population
dynamics and associated implications for conservation
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.