* 2120596
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Diet, Mobility, and Social Dynamics Using a Multi Isotopic Approach and GIS
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Tosha Dupras, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,986.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout human history, many
factors have influenced an individualâ€™s mobility and diet, and in many cases,
dietary practices have diverged alongside changes in other factors such as
social status and belief systems. Using bioarchaeological research methods that
combine skeletal analyses with aspects of environment and culture to examine
diet and burial style at the population and individual levels, this doctoral
dissertation research examines how social reorganization affected a broader
community in past human populations. Exploring dietary choices during life and
status after death advances knowledge about how food and burial practices relate
to and reaffirm social roles. Broader impacts of the project include STEM
training of a female graduate student, strengthening of international scientific
research collaborations, and dissemination of research to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the relationship of belief
systems and social status to diet, origins, and mobility. The investigators
consider these dynamics in conjunction with age, sex, and status for two
skeletal samples representing religious elites and non-elite individuals,
respectively, from the same community. The research examines whether there are
dietary differences based on potential status differences and whether place of
origin can be identified for non-local individuals. The project utilizes a
combination of biochemical, geospatial, and statistical methods, including four
isotopic discriminants (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and strontium), the Bayesian
FRUITS mixing model, and geospatial analysis of the study
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.