* 2120535
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Adaptive Strategies in Variable Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eleanor Harrison-Buck, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 14,364.00

Comparatively little research has focused on transitions to agricultural-based
lifestyles. Previous research revealed that some people engaged in early
horticulture as part of this transition. Furthermore, worldwide environmental
evidence indicates that a global drying event took place approximately several
thousand years ago. How this event impacted development and processes of
cultural adaptation are not yet well understood at local or regional scales. How
did cultural groups make decisions about where to settle, when to move, how to
procure important resources and interact with their neighbors, and how to react
to changes in the local landscape? By examining multiple ecological zones, this
project provides data to evaluate a wide range of hyper-local adaptations and
the localized impacts of climate change. This research expands understandings of
land use traditions and offers valuable insight into sustainable subsistence
strategies in the midst of long-term environmental variability. The project
trains undergraduate students in field methods, while local community members
are involved in all stages of the research. Additionally, students and staff
will develop a museum exhibit and cultural heritage center, and complementary
K-12 curriculum is also being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with an
interdisciplinary team of researchers the project investigates how hunter-
gatherers adapted to unique micro-environments, including freshwater and
brackish lagoons, swamp forest, pine/oak savanna, and tropical broadleaf
forests, and how, if at all, these adaptations were impacted by the global
drying. Current research indicates that the period was characterized by small,
relatively mobile hunter-gatherer groups dwelling within a range of
microenvironments and employing a variety of subsistence and mobility strategies
(including incipient agriculture). This project teases apart the multifaceted
question of which subsistence and mobility/settlement strategies were most
successful in the range of microenvironments located around the study area, and
which zones would have been most conducive to early agricultural
experimentation. This study combines geospatial analyses, paleo-ecological
studies, surveys and test excavations, materials analyses, and radiometric
dating. The resulting interdisciplinary dataset allows the researchers to
investigate the coupled interactions between human-natural systems at the local-
to-regional scale and will provide a model by which further studies can be
carried out to enhance broader understandings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.