* 2120466
* Metacognition and Misconceptions: Using Web-Based Writing Exercises in Gateway STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Indika Kahanda, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 296,519.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing the metacognitive
skill and conceptual understanding of undergraduate students who typically
struggle in foundational Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) courses. It is well known that student difficulties in STEM courses such
as electric circuit analysis and engineering statics often arise from an
inability of the student to accurately identify their knowledge gaps and to
develop and follow strategies to close these gaps. This process is a means of
exhibiting advanced metacognitive skill. The project will implement a novel
writing-centric approach in an introductory circuit analysis undergraduate
course to help students build mental models, overcome misconceptions, and
enhance metacognitive skill. The introductory circuit analysis course will
require students to utilize accurate mental models of abstract phenomena in the
physical world. Students often enter such courses with faulty mental models of
abstract phenomena. As such, conceptual change is necessary for content
mastery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a deeper understanding of
how to design short-answer writing exercises that require the student to
consider problems in which misconceptions are common. Promoting deep reflection
and providing instantaneous and personalized feedback, the writing exercises
will be evaluated for their ability to enable both conceptual change and
metacognitive skill development. The fact that the feedback is to be both
immediate and individualized is particularly notable as feedback is known to be
most effective when it is timely and targets the precise interpretation of a
given student. To achieve an instantaneous and personalized feedback system that
works at-scale, the writing exercises will be implemented as web-based
applications that leverage recent advances in Natural Language Processing (NLP).
To ensure the software developed in this project is broadly applicable,
instructors from multiple disciplines across the country will use the web-based
templates developed by the research team to implement conceptual-based writing
exercises in their foundational STEM courses. In addition to contributing to a
deeper understanding of how to best employ short answer writing in STEM
foundational courses as well as increasing retention in such courses, this
project will train undergraduate and graduate students in implementing software
systems made possible with algorithms employing artificial intelligence. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.