* 2120238
* Bringing Land, Ocean, Atmosphere and Ionosphere Data to the Community for Hazards Alerts
* TIP,ITE
* 03/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Ramesh Singh, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Jemin George
* 04/30/2022
* USD 86,752.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The objective
of this workshop on Bringing Land, Ocean, Atmosphere and Ionosphere Data to the
Community for Hazards Alerts is to help identify topic areas for new tracks in
the NSF Convergence Accelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together Earth System scientists engaged in research on land, ocean, atmosphere,
cryosphere and ionosphere phenomena to discuss land-based natural hazards and
the impact of such hazards on corresponding parts of the Earth system, viz.,
ocean, atmosphere, cryosphere, and ionosphere, as well as on human populations
in the vicinity of those hazards. Much of the research on natural hazards has
tended to focus on one Earth system – for example, tropical storms are studied
primarily by ocean scientists, and not as much by, say, earth or atmospheric
scientists. However, increasing availability of ground-based, borehole and
satellite-based observations at higher spatial and temporal resolution over the
globe, and optical and microwave satellites capable of providing meteorological
and atmospheric parameters at different pressure levels, are enabling more
detailed analyses that show stronger coupling among various Earth systems due to
natural hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Convergence Accelerator workshop
will provide a platform for ideation and brainstorming on using all available
data sources to develop an “alert system” for natural hazards, and to
communicate such information to people via various social and digital media in
order to reduce loss of life and property and protect human health. The workshop
will bring together experts in ground, surface, meteorological and atmospheric
data, together with social science researchers, city planners and other local
government stakeholders, representatives from non-governmental organizations and
those assisting in disaster management to discuss the needs as well as effective
approaches for reaching the affected communities during a natural hazard.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will help advance understanding of coupled
land-ocean-cryosphere-meteorological-ionosphere systems in the context of
natural hazards of all types, and their impact on local/regional infrastructure,
resources and people. The key objective of the workshop is to advance the use of
all available data from different platforms and leverage the myriad social and
digital media platforms to alert the community and get them prepared for
impending hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.