* 2120546
* Collaborative Research: The role of perceptual and word identification spans in reading efficiency: evidence from deaf and hearing adults
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Karen Emmorey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 462,670.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to read efficiently is
critical to success in modern society. Populations with low literacy rates
(e.g., individuals with dyslexia and deaf individuals) suffer from a number of
negative outcomes, including poor academic and employment opportunities which
can lead to reduced upward economic mobility, limited access to public
information which can lead to increased fatality and health risks, as well as
reduced civic engagement which can lead to increased feelings of isolation and
depression. In order to improve literacy rates in these populations, researchers
first must understand the mechanisms underlying successful reading so that
interventions will be appropriately targeted. Decades of literacy research and
instruction have focused on the importance of language abilities (particularly
vocabulary and the ability to sound out words) while largely ignoring the role
of attention, perception of text in non-central (peripheral) vision, and the
coordination of these processes to support efficient reading. The investigators
propose that visual and linguistic information obtained from the text in
peripheral vision both play an important role in reading efficiency, but that
they do so in different ways. For example, individuals with dyslexia exhibit
abnormal eye movement behavior when reading text, but not when moving their eyes
between simple visual elements such as dots. This suggests that reading
difficulties arise less from needing to move the eyes precisely than from the
requirement to process text linguistically. Moreover, some deaf individuals are
more efficient readers than their hearing counterparts, suggesting that their
reading behavior may be augmented by either auditory deprivation (which may
enhance visual processing abilities) or experience with American Sign Language
(ASL; which may enhance linguistic processing abilities). However, little is
known about the degree to which deaf readers’ abilities are linked to their
unique visual or linguistic experiences. By clarifying these mechanisms, this
project has the potential to inform deaf education policy by increasing
scientific understanding of the role of sign language in the cognitive
development and academic success of deaf individuals. By extension, the
investigators’ work will also be useful for understanding dyslexia by revealing
the distinct contributions of visual and linguistic processing to reading
success that have been implicated as potential deficits that underlie
dyslexia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the distinct
contributions of non-linguistic visual processing and word recognition abilities
to reading success in both hearing and deaf adults. The investigators use gaze-
contingent eye tracking reading paradigms to gather reading efficiency measures
(e.g., reading rate, and fine-grained eye tracking metrics) at the participant
level and conduct regression analyses to investigate what abilities predict
these aspects of reading proficiency. To assess the predictors of reading
ability, the investigators collect measures of general cognitive and linguistic
abilities (e.g., English text comprehension, English spelling ability, English
vocabulary, non-verbal IQ, and ASL comprehension), as well as conduct
experiments that assess each individual’s ability to process various types of
information in peripheral vision (e.g., simple visual features, English words,
ASL signs), and to make eye movements to peripheral locations. By accounting for
both visual and linguistic processing abilities simultaneously, and by comparing
reading behavior in deaf signers and reading-matched hearing adults, the
investigators are able to identify how language and/or sensory experiences
impact reading processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.