* 2120610
* A test of a novel non-probabilistic model of 3D cue integration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Fulvio Domini, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,996.00

Despite at least a century of scientific investigation, it is still not entirely
understood how the human brain constructs a perception of three-dimensional (3D)
objects and space from the 2D information reaching the eye through light
rays.  It has been known for a long time that this ability is attained on the
basis of a variety of different visual signals (that the brain interprets)
called “depth cues”, which the brain then combines together to derive the 3D
structure of the scene.  Examples of depth cues can be observed in paintings
where linear perspective, shading, and even simple contours depict a 3D world on
the flat canvas just as they do on the flat human retinas while people observe
real 3D objects. However, how these cues encode 3D information and how the
different cues are combined to generate our stable coherent perception of 3D
visual space and objects remains poorly understood.  The prevailing theory in
the scientific literature (Bayesian probabilistic inference theory) postulates
that the brain derives a 3D structure of the world by determining how likely a
particular 3D structure is given the information on the retina. Implementing
this model requires a host of assumptions, such as that depth cues deliver
“noisy” estimates of 3D parameters that are still, on average, accurate.
However, a number of common and important observations cannot be fully explained
by the Bayesian model and cast doubt on the critical computational assumptions
of the model. Moreover, the Bayesian model struggles to explain important
differences in the “quality” of 3-dimensionality that we perceive between
viewing the real world and artificial situations such as pictorial images, or
virtual or augmented reality (VR, AR). This project tests a new theory (the
Intrinsic Constrained theory) that makes an entirely different and simpler set
of assumptions compared to the Bayesian theory, but that can predict a wider
range of perceptual phenomena.  The project integrates the IC theory with a
recently proposed theory that postulates that the visual system does not
generate a single encoding of 3D space, but two distinct encodings, one which is
relevant to understanding the scene (i.e., 3D object shape and layout) and the
other that underlies visually guided movements like reaching for and grasping an
object.  The latter encoding is claimed to underlie the special subjective
experience of 3-dimensionality that is most obvious while viewing stereoscopic
images (e.g., 3D movies). This project will show that the IC model can
efficiently incorporate the claims of two distinct representation of 3D space.
In doing so, it is able to provide a better explanation of a range of
fundamental aspects of our perception of 3-dimensionality that are challenging
to explain with the prevailing model, including those required for a better
understanding of factors important for developing 3D technology (e.g., VR and
AR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports empirical research that tests a
computational model arising from the Intrinsic Constraint theory of cue
integration against the prevailing computational model belonging to the Bayesian
framework. Specifically, the new model challenges three main assumptions of the
Bayesian model that will be tested by experiments in distinct work packages: (1)
that depth cues on average provide veridical (accurate) 3D estimates; (2) that
these estimates are stochastic and that their probability distributions are
encoded by the visual system; and (3) that the process of cue integration
results in a single encoding of 3D structure. Instead, the Intrinsic Constraint
model predicts that cue estimates are biased, deterministic, and that cue
integration results in two distinct encodings of 3D structure. Using state-of-
the-art visual display and motion tracking apparatus that allow both
psychophysical and psychomotor response measurements, the investigators are
conducting a comprehensive set of experiments aimed at critically testing two
theories (Bayesian and IC). The first work package establishes which theory
better explains 3D perception based on single or combined depth cues. The second
work package establishes if depth cues provide stochastic estimates as proposed
by the Bayesian theory or if cues provide deterministic noise as proposed by the
IC model, with noise in 3D estimates due to extraneous experimental factors. The
third work package shows how differences in the subjective experience of
3-dimensionality is linked to the efficacy of the 3D encoding underlying
guidance of movement, but not that underlying perceptual
judgements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.