* 2120689
* Collaborative Research: Scaling of ciliary flows at intermediate Reynolds number
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Margaret Byron, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 318,782.00

Cilia are flexible hair-like appendages commonly used to create fluid motion in
biological systems, facilitating swimming, feeding, reproduction, and other
functional behaviors. Typical cilia are tens of microns long, but ctenophores
(comb jellies) use cilia at much larger scales—around a millimeter in length. At
small scales, ciliary flow is highly constrained by fluid viscosity. However, at
larger scales, inertia becomes more important, leading to quantitative and
qualitative differences in the velocities and forces produced by the cilia.
These differences will be explored with a combination of laboratory experiments
and computational simulations, using ctenophores as a model system for large-
scale cilia. A better understanding of the fluid dynamics of cilia across scales
will provide new tools to ask and answer questions related to biology, ecology,
and the fundamental physics of how flexible structures create flow across
scales. This knowledge may lead to new developments in engineering, including
bioinspired devices, sensors, and robots. The project will also include the
development of several educational components, including a new module on the
viscous-inertial transition for high school physics students and outreach
activities for young women interested in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of the project is to understand the physical principles that govern
ciliary flows from low to intermediate Reynolds numbers. This study will
explicitly examine the effects of substrate geometry and deformability on
ciliary flows. A combined experimental-numerical approach will be used to
investigate hydrodynamic interactions of multiple flexible propulsors at low-to-
intermediate Reynolds numbers and develop useful scaling laws. The experimental
approach will employ both planar and volumetric particle image velocimetry to
visualize the flows generated by living ctenophores across a range of animal and
propulsor sizes. The material properties of the ciliary substrate (mesoglea)
will also be characterized during the investigation. These results will guide
the development of a scalable computational fluid dynamics model, which will be
used to investigate the larger parameter space of ciliary flow generation across
scales. The project will focus on the effects of three key variables: (i)
propulsor kinematics, including the degree of bending and spatiotemporal
asymmetry; (ii) substrate geometry, from flat to curved; and (iii) substrate
deformability, from rigid to highly deformable. This integrated approach will
enable an in-depth investigation of how flexible structures generate flow across
the viscous-inertial transition, and the development of broadly applicable
scaling principles to guide future technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.