* 2120962
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of early life adversity on bone growth and maintenance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Shannon McFarlin, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 16,748.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adversity in early life has wide-
ranging effects on individual growth and development. Research has documented
important deficits in growth, especially in the limbs. Yet, changes induced by
early life adversity are almost certainly expressed in other aspects of skeletal
morphology. This doctoral dissertation research project uses life history theory
to investigate how energetic trade-offs impact bone growth as well as bone
structure and dynamic remodeling to develop a more complete understanding of the
effects of early life condition on growth and development outcomes. These
insights also shed light on more general drivers of individual variation and the
evolutionary and biological mechanisms that enable such variation. The project
supports the training and mentorship of diverse undergraduate and graduate
students. Results will be shared via publications, outreach, and educational
efforts to ensure broad dissemination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project investigates these issues in primates with well documented variation in
growth and development outcomes and in socio-ecological environments during
development. The investigators test the hypothesis that individuals born into
high quality early life conditions (moderate rainfall, mothers of high dominance
rank) will have improved markers of growth and structural and material
properties of bone. The investigators test the additional hypothesis that the
magnitude of impacts will be stronger in comparison to individuals with multiple
sources of early life adversity. The investigators test the hypotheses via
analysis of long bone lengths, cross-sectional geometric properties of bone,
bone porosity, and parameters of bone remodeling. The study is novel in its
integration of standard whole bone measurements with investigations of bone’s
internal microscopic structural properties. Findings leverage bone’s ability to
act as a window into an individual’s developmental past, providing insight into
how the skeleton responds to environments throughout life and more general
insights into the primate evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.