* 2120949
* MCA: Application of Quantum Computing in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christopher Bartlett, The Research Institute at Nationwide Children's Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 358,345.00

This Mid-Career Advancement award supports both computational and theoretical
research, through education and practical experiments, to advance biological
computing with quantum computing methods. Given the rapid pace of technological
development generally and the speed of the so-called second quantum revolution
we are now experiencing, the need to develop a quantum workforce is becoming a
serious matter for academics and industry. From the academic side, building
applications for quantum computing is much more challenging than is true for
modern classical computers. Research questions must be recast into the quantum
formalism for calculation on quantum devices, which is a task that requires
close collaboration between physicists and non-physics domain experts. A quantum
computer performs a fundamentally different type of calculation using different
concepts and mathematical tools. The result is that porting bioinformatics for
quantum computing is not as simple as writing computer code in a different
programming language. As such, bridging the gap between quantum physics and
biology requires close collaboration between disciplines to make progress. This
Mid-Career Advancement award responds to the need for biologists to meet in the
middle with their physics colleagues to transform
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the PI in learning how
to bridge classical statistical analysis of biology problems to quantum
information theory. This task, while challenging, is reasonable since the
language of linear algebra is common to both fields. The PI will develop three
sub-projects that progressively build to toward practical quantum computing
driven bioinformatics. First, analytical work on the implications of how
orthogonality and uncorrelated imply different statistical properties will be
applied in the quantum computing framework. This work is of interest since some
quantum machine learning algorithms relay on inner products to classify data,
and inner products are well defined for orthogonality but not always so for
uncorrelated data. Second, embedding schemes for genomic data will be
analytically defined for quantum computing. Third, the statistical properties of
the proposed embedding schemes will be empirically tested on quantum computing
simulators as well as quantum computing hardware&lt;br/&gt;available to
academics. This award meets the NSF’s mission of workforce development while
also facilitating a broader impact on the field of bioinformatics by extending
the computational tools available to biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.