* 2120684
* Collaborative Research: Converging Design Methodology: Multi-objective Optimization of Resilient Structural Spines
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nathan Brown, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 259,899.00

Post-earthquake reconstruction efforts in New Zealand, Chile, and Japan are
motivating the development of novel, low damage lateral force resisting systems
to minimize social disruptions and property damage. These efforts, combined with
earthquake scenarios highlighting seismic risks to cities in the United States,
have led U.S. agencies to focus on increasing urban resilience against future
extreme events by defining performance goals in terms of post-earthquake re-
occupancy and functional recovery metrics. In parallel, non-profit organizations
are driving the use of more sustainable building materials and construction
practices. This project will create a new design paradigm within structural
engineering that employs multi-objective optimization to maximize post-
earthquake functional recovery while integrating sustainable building practices
into the design process. The new design paradigm will be applied to the design
and construction of resilient mass timber structural systems. The novelty of
mass timber construction and limited availability of codes and standards make it
uniquely positioned to pioneer innovative structural systems and new design
paradigms, such as incorporating multi-objective optimization. The unique design
paradigm developed in this project is called "converging design," as the
methodology will be better able to converge across competing life-safety, post-
earthquake functional recovery, and environmental sustainability objectives. The
research will be complemented by an outreach program that includes training of
the next generation of industry and academic leaders and fosters increased
partnerships among academia, industry, building code officials, and government
agencies. In addition, the research will lead to several undergraduate student
experiences in STEM through an institutional Research and Extension Experiences
for Undergraduate Student program and collaborations with NSF-funded Research
Experiences for Undergraduates sites. This project will support the National
Science Foundation (NSF) role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to integrate
functionality-based design and multi-objective optimization into a single
converging design paradigm that will support resilient, sustainable seismic
solutions for lateral force resisting systems. The project will integrate
existing and new data from laboratory and numerical work to (1) define
functional recovery and sustainability metrics, including quantification of
uncertainty, for the design of innovative lateral force resisting systems
employing mass timber spine solutions; (2) create and implement a multi-
objective optimization converging seismic design methodology that considers
resiliency and sustainability goals; and (3) develop optimized seismic lateral
force resisting systems, whose performance is validated through a six-story
full-scale building test program at the NSF-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) outdoor shake table at the
University of California, San Diego (UCSD). The six-story specimen re-uses an
existing ten-story shake table specimen that will be tested on the UCSD shake
table in 2021/2022. A series of expert elicitation interviews and participatory
workshops will support the definition of resiliency metrics, including time to
functionality and sustainability metrics (e.g., embodied carbon) to meet the
goal of the research. Educational modules for industry and higher education will
be created. An industry working group will promote increased collaboration and
foster innovation among academia, industry, and government agencies. This
project will lead to new seismic design possibilities and advance knowledge of
the functionality and sustainability of mass timber structures based on decades
of research in seismic design, advances in high-performance computing that
support optimization in design, and functional-recovery modeling, including
sustainability goals. Project data will be archived and made publicly available
in the NHERI Data Depot (https://www.designsafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.