* 2120142
* SHF:Small:Proving User Interface Testing Programs Correct
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 476,544.00

The Graphical User Interface (GUI) that is ubiquitous in today's computing world
consumes about 60% of the software development cost of a GUI APplication (GAP)
and as much as 45-60% of its code. Ensuring the quality of GAPs is extremely
important for a society that is increasingly reliant on GAPs to manage all
aspects of users' lives. Currently, although there are hundreds of GUI testing
approaches, algorithms and tools, the field is deeply fragmented and lacks
common abstractions, and it is very difficult to integrate different UI testing
approaches so as to create powerful solutions to the problems of Reusing and
Repairing UI test suites while also Reducing their execution time and resource
demands (R3). The goal of this proposal is therefore to create a novel
theoretical foundation to connect these R3 problems with the problem of proving
the behavior of complex Programs for User Interface Testing (PUITs), especially
when the structure and the functionality of a GAP is constantly changed during
its evolution and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A connecting thread in the
research thrusts of this proposal is to abstract PUITs as functional reactive
systems using Eilenberg's X-Machine, which is a generalization of a Finite State
Automaton (FSA) in which state transitions are associated with functions which
operate on the FSA's data. Test engineers are to create PUITs using a formal
functional language in a proof management system called Coq. The research team
is expanding the Razet theorem package for Coq that contains a generic proof for
Eilenberg's X-Machine to apply to arbitrary GAPs using the types generated from
the GAP FSA. Since the physical structure of the GAP is abstracted away from its
PUITs, it is being shown that their reuse will be enabled on different
functionally related GAPs. The resulting verified executable PUITs can be
generated automatically in a target language using the Coq's generation
facilities. The benefits of the proposed research direction are much bigger than
the sum of its constituent parts since a new property of type-directed
verification emerges that enables automated reasoning of PUITs, which are
created using the semantics of the data in the UI objects, and that enable test
engineers not only to prove PUITs correct but also to address R3 problems from a
unified perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.