* 2120831
* Collaborative Research: Arc plutonism along the Denali Fault, Alaska: Possible fault controls on incremental magma transport and assembly along a long-lived strike-slip fault
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sean Regan, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 290,273.00

Volcanoes above subduction zones almost always appear as an irregular or curvy
line on the surface of the earth. Scientists have a general idea of why these
“arc” volcanoes, such as the Cascade arc, create linear chains, but whether
vertical faults that penetrate deep in the crust control their specific
location, composition, and potential eruptive volume is a subject of much
debate. Volcanoes erode quickly so a study of their large magmatic roots, called
plutons, will provide a more spatially and temporally complete record to better
understand whether vertical faults provide direct conduits between deeper crust,
where magma is produced, and the upper crust, where magma forms a reservoir for
volcanic eruptions. The Alaska Range has been shaped by subduction and
translation for tens of millions of years, as southern Alaska moves westward
relative to the Alaskan interior along the active Denali fault, which extends
for over 2000 km and ruptured during a magnitude (Mw) 7.9 earthquake in 2002. A
suite of 45-35-million-year-old arc plutons are spatially associated with the
Denali fault. This proposed research will study the physical relationships of
melt transport along a long-lived strike-slip fault (the Denali fault) to test
how continental-scale structures may control the rates of transport of melt to
the surface, geometry of pluton growth, and magma evolution. In addition, the
Principal Investigators will try to use plutons analyzed during this study to
provide better constraints on the long-term slip rate of the Denali fault. The
project will include undergraduate students, graduate students, and professors
from public universities that have diverse undergraduate programs. The tallest
peak in North America, Denali (formerly Mt. McKinley), includes arc plutons of
this study that are cut by the Denali fault. Outreach efforts will include
developing a social media presence for the Denali fault and updating public-
science dissemination exhibits at the Museum of the North in Fairbanks and
Denali National Park. We will develop curriculum for the GeoForce learning
community, a STEM-focused organization focused on engaging rural and first-
generation students from Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Crustal-scale structures
are often linked to the transport of lower crustal melts through the upper
crust. However, the mechanism(s) by which and if melt is transported along
active strike-slip faults is still an ongoing problem in the petrology
community. Distinguishing disparate mechanism(s) or combinations therein is
critical for unraveling the complex interplay of granitoid petrogenesis in the
upper crust, mass and thermal mantle-surface communication, and how structural
processes are manifested in a petrologic system. The Denali Fault is a classic
long-lived orogenic (&gt; 2000 km) dextral strike-slip fault system with &gt;
400 km of lateral offset associated with, and perhaps localizing, arc plutonism
for over ~70 My. This research project will test the hypothesis that crustal-
scale faults can facilitate melt transport and pluton construction that results
in systematic temporal-spatial geochemical and petrophysical patterns linked to
strike-slip motion. The research will include collecting a fault-relative
petrochemical and petrophysical dataset on a suite of Eocene plutons on both
sides and along a ~350 km transects of the Denali Fault to evaluate how magmatic
processes are manifested at the spatial and temporal scales relevant to magma
transport and emplacement along an orogenic-scale strike slip fault. Field
characterization combined with whole rock major and trace element geochemistry,
zircon U-Pb geochronology, and O isotopic tracer analysis will be applied with
these fundamental objectives: 1) identify petrographic, geochemical, isotopic,
and/or structural gradients and 2) interpret results as they relate to pluton
geometry as well as to the Denali Fault. In addition to testing kinematic
controls on granitoid petrogenesis, these data will resolve a long-standing
problem in Cordilleran geology, by evaluating a potential Denali Fault piercing
point. Preliminary data indicate a possible pluton correlation may exist across
the Denali Fault that would indicate an average slip rate of 8-10 mm/yr since 40
Ma, similar to the present-day dextral slip rate in this section of the fault.
Data from this study will provide a recipe for distinguishing actually offset
plutons from a suite of similar intrusive bodies preferentially emplaced along a
fault system and help explain temporal-spatial petrochemical and petrophysical
variability during continental arc assembly along strike-slip
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.