* 2120065
* ISN2: Detecting and Interdicting Illicit Wildlife Trafficking Supply Chains
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,10/31/2023
* Meredith Gore, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 10/31/2023
* USD 646,249.00

This award promotes economic welfare and progress of interdisciplinary science,
by studying how illegal wildlife supply chains react and respond to policy, law
enforcement, and market interventions. Wildlife trafficking generates an
estimated US$23 billion annually for the global criminal economy; it can
undermine national security, decrease economic prosperity, and fuel social
conflict both in the U.S. and abroad. This project builds fundamental insight
about how different computational approaches aid methods for detecting network
patterns in illicit wildlife supply chains and new understanding about how
illicit wildlife supply chain organizations operate (even using legal networks
at times). The study will inform resource allocation, monitoring and
enforcement, and communication to facilitate effective interdiction activities
to combat wildlife trafficking. Further, the award will benefit decisions about
how, when, and where to intervene and disrupt illicit wildlife supply networks.
The interdisciplinary approach creates new channels of communication between
geography, supply chain management, operations research, conservation social
science, and computer science. The project supports broad engagement of PhD
students in interdisciplinary science, will diffuse results into research
journals via publications, university education via business case studies, and
conservation practice via engagement of practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using complementary lines of inquiry into the global
problem of wildlife trafficking, the project develops a new, fundamental
understanding of wildlife trafficking supply chains (WTSCs), including decision
points, behavioral patterns of participants, dynamic linkages between component
parts, and convergence with legal supply chains. The research will define,
describe, and map key nodes and components of a specific supply chain using
existing, team-collected data from an illicit WTSC, create qualitative framework
models associated with decisions about WTSCs, develop methods to detect
meaningful patterns of weakness and resilience in WTSCs, and create new
quantitative WTSC interdiction models and solution approaches building on
techniques for network design optimization, the multi-armed bandit, the
orienteering problem and green security games. Our outcomes will be to measure
operations in a real-world system, develop geospatial information science and
computational models about system operations, refine and revise these models to
predict resiliency, and test the scalability, performance of the models at
tactical and strategic levels and convergence with other illicit supply chains.
Results have potentially transformative implications for science and decision-
making in broader society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.