* 2120599
* Collaborative Research: Revisiting the water-saturated granite solidus
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Ackerson, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 58,969.00

Earth’s uppermost continental crust is composed on average of granitic material.
Granites are igneous rocks, a subset of rocks that form by the cooling and
subsequent crystallization of molten materials. The temperature at which a
water-bearing granite melts (or, upon cooling of a magma, the temperature at
which the last drop of molten material crystallizes) is known as the granitic
water-saturated solidus (G-WSS). The G-WSS is one of the most important phase
boundaries in all of geology. Its location in pressure-temperature space
controls the formation of our continents, the generation of economically
important gem and ore deposits (e.g., sapphire, lithium, gold, and copper), the
eruption of devastating and explosive volcanic eruptions, and how rapidly our
planet has cooled over eons. The position of the G-WSS changes with depth
(pressure; P), temperature (T) and bulk composition. The G-WSS is analogous to
the freezing point of aqueous fluids, and the compositional effect on magmatic
freezing points is analogous to changes to the freezing point depression of
water caused by addition of various salts (e.g., NaCl, KCl, CaCl, etc.).
Pioneering work performed over 60 years ago remains the basis for our
understanding of the G-WSS. However, numerous observations from natural systems
suggests igneous rocks crystallize at temperatures ~75–100 degrees C lower than
the widely accept¬¬ed G-WSS. These observations combined with advances in
experimental and analytical techniques provide the motivation and opportunity to
re-investigate the location of the G-WSS. The PI’s preliminary work surprisingly
demonstrated that the G-WSS is &gt;100 degrees C lower than previous findings,
which will transform long-standing views on granite formation processes,
continental crust formation, thermal structure in terrestrial bodies, plate
tectonics, innumerable aspects in hard-rock petrology and affect explorations of
economically important ores. The PIs will conduct a series of laboratory-based
experiments to systematically re-define the G-WSS, and then apply observations
to the natural rocks contained in the National Museum of Natural History
collections. Beyond providing research opportunities to PhD students and
Washington DC high school students from under-served communities, the PIs will
also produce a series of educational outreach experiences to teach National Mall
visitors how ancient magmatic systems generated building stone rocks that
compose many of the National Mall’s most famous monuments and
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granitic and rhyolitic rocks are the end-product
of continental crust differentiation. Most magmatic systems evolve towards
granitic bulk compositions during crystallization, and the first melts of many
rocks are broadly granitic. The granitic water-saturated solidus (G-WSS) is the
lowest temperature phase boundary fundamentally separating metamorphic and
igneous realms; thus, understanding its location in -pressure-temperature-
composition space is critical for interpreting the rock record. The accepted
G-WSS was largely determined &gt;60 years ago using experimental and analytical
techniques that leave open the possibility that the G-WSS may be inaccurate. In
natural systems, various thermobarometric applications to granitic and rhyolitic
composition rocks commonly return temperature estimates ~75–100 degrees C lower
than the widely accept¬¬ed G-WSS. The availability of modern experimental and
analytical approaches and the low temperature estimates for mineral
crystallization in granitic rocks raise two overarching questions that will be
resolved by performing work outlined in this proposal: (1) What is the P–T
position of the G-WSS?, and (2) What are the compositions of melts and crystals
that coexist along the G-WSS? The PIs will perform a systematic experimental and
analytical program to determine the P–T position of the G-WSS and related
compositional variations over conditions that span the continental crust.
Experiments will be conducted in cold-seal pressure vessels (P&lt;5 kbar) and
piston-cylinder devices (P&gt;5 kbar). The PIs will use electron probe
microanalysis to measure major element compositions of experimental run
products. Fourier transform infrared and Raman spectroscopy will be used to
measure water concentrations in the melt. A statistically rigorous experimental
approach, called a design of experiments, will be employed to determine
compositions along the G-WSS over a range of pressures spanning the continental
crust. Geochemical analyses and thermobarometry of natural granitic rocks will
reveal the extent to which low temperatures are recorded in the rock record.
Preliminary results from experiments performed from 0.5 to 10 kbar on granitic
composition rocks demonstrate that the G-WSS is significantly lower than
unanimously accepted estimates. A more accurate understanding of the position of
the G-WSS will help to reconcile interpretations of granite formation and
storage conditions within silicic magmatic systems, provide new opportunities to
understand the thermal structure of the crust on Earth and other terrestrial
bodies, and will influence myriad aspects of hard-rock petrology, geophysics,
and mineral/ore exploration that will benefit from an accurate description of
the G-WSS. This program also includes research opportunities for graduate
students, DC-local high school students from underserved communities,
development/implementation of Next Generation Science Standards for 5-8 grade
students across the country, and an outreach program called “Magmas on the Mall”
aimed at educating the broad public on magmatism and how it created the building
stones used across the National Mall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.