* 2120252
* Testing the Effectiveness of a Digital Tool, Tandem, in Assessing and Supporting Inclusive and Equitable Teamwork in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Robin Fowler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,983.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving how teamwork in
introductory engineering courses is assessed and supported, with specific focus
on equity and inclusion. Learning how to work effectively in a team is clearly
an important goal for preparing undergraduate engineering students. However,
supporting inclusive teamwork remains challenging. Marginalization on teams has
been linked to aspects of students’ social identity, such as identifying as a
woman or person of color. It can take a variety of forms, including ideas going
unheard or being pushed into more menial tasks. Particularly in introductory
courses and at large colleges and universities, engineering instructors face the
additional hurdle of having many students and student teams. With these
compounding factors, it is difficult for instructors, and even students
themselves, to be aware in real-time when inequitable behaviors are occurring on
their teams, and to know how to address them. The consequences of inequitable
teams are serious, leading to inequities in mastery experiences and ultimately
contributing to students leaving engineering degree programs. To address this
problem, this project introduces a digital pedagogical tool, called Tandem.
Tandem holds promise for disrupting inequitable team behaviors. Developed at the
University of Michigan, Tandem is a multi-faceted tool for course teams that
delivers tailored lessons to students about effective teamwork. The tool
provides feedback to students and instructors about how teams are doing. The
objective of this project is to study the effectiveness of Tandem in assessing
and supporting inclusive and equitable teamwork in engineering. This project
seeks to improve the diversity of students that participate in engineering as
well as improve novel educational tools. Further, the project will address two
components of the research agenda outlined in the National Research Council’s
discipline-based education research report. This includes conducting research
that: 1) seeks to understand similarities and differences between student groups
that differ by, for example, gender and race/ethnicity; and 2) goes beyond
assessing gains in conceptual understanding by focusing on outcomes associated
with affective dimensions of learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using mixed method
study designs, this project will address the overall objective through the
following research questions: 1) In what ways can Tandem be used to observe
inclusive and equitable teamwork in engineering? And 2) In what ways can Tandem
be used to support more inclusive and equitable teamwork in engineering? While
Tandem is currently being used across a range of courses at the University of
Michigan, the scope of the project will be limited to Engineering 100, the
cornerstone first-year engineering design course. Engineering 100 is a useful
context in part because small differences in teamwork experiences early in a
student’s college coursework can be magnified in subsequent team project
experiences and because the first and second years in college are considered the
most impactful in terms of retention and persistence of STEM majors. Key data
sources include data from student surveys and responses to lessons collected
throughout the term in Tandem, student interviews, and observations of
engineering student teams during class meetings. The expected outcomes from this
work include 1) generalizable knowledge about an approach to measuring teamwork
competency that emphasizes inclusion and equity and fosters instructor and
student awareness of inequitable team behavior, 2) improvements to survey and
lesson features within Tandem that will support the ability of teams to behave
inclusively, and 3) improved pedagogical practice in this engineering course
context. The positive impacts of this project will be further propagated through
the use of Tandem in other team-based courses at the University of Michigan as
well as at other institutions. This project has transformative potential in the
tailored support that Tandem can provide to instructors and students in
recognizing and addressing inequitable behavior in teams and promoting
conditions in which all can be successful. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.