* 2120459
* RCN-UBE: The Undergraduate Student Experiences with Citizen Science Network to Transform Learning and Broaden Participation in Science
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Heather Vance-Chalcraft, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,258.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing student
engagement with science and facilitating the persistence of students in STEM
fields. In addition, the quantity and quality of scientific data will have
significance to the local communities in which colleges and universities are
located. These national interests will be addressed by facilitating the
effective implementation of an educational approach that combines the high
impact practices of student participation in research and community-engaged
learning. Specifically, the proposed network will empower undergraduate
instructors to use citizen science effectively with their students to create job
ready, scientifically literate, critical thinkers who use science to engage
constructively with their communities. Citizen science - that is, the inclusion
of the public in the methods of science with the goal of advancing scientific
knowledge or application, is sometimes called community science, participatory
science, or public participation in scientific research. The inclusion of
citizen science in higher education will improve student learning outcomes while
helping instructors to maintain flexible, collaborative approaches to learning
that embrace technology and acknowledge the social context in which students
live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research coordination network will create a
diverse community of practice of instructors invested in using citizen science
to engage undergraduate students in authentic scientific practices in both face-
to-face and online settings, improve student and instructor learning outcomes,
and broaden participation in science. This community of practice will make
citizen science more impactful and efficient by bringing together individuals to
develop and test recommended practices for the implementation and assessment of
citizen science with students, facilitate the adoption of citizen science by
instructors, and assist citizen science project staff in attracting instructors
to use their project. Network information will be shared widely through social
media, digital resources on the network website, office hour drop-in sessions
via videoconferencing, and peer reviewed publications. This work will further
the field of biology education research by mapping educational theoretical
frameworks to the use of citizen science in higher education, developing
recommendations for different aspects of the use of citizen science (e.g., for
online instruction, as a means of community engaged learning), and fostering
multi-institutional research collaborations to test these recommendations. As
instructors at new minority serving institutions in the network increase their
use of citizen science, the network activities may be particularly impactful for
groups of students whose proportionate participation in science is below their
representation in the overall population. This project is being jointly funded
by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.