* 2120658
* Understanding Optimal Size for Group Work in Face to Face and Virtual Research Methods Courses for Undergraduate Psychology Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Wiley, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,472.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing a set
of exploratory learning activities designed to help students understand
foundational scientific concepts in undergraduate STEM courses. Students are
often assigned to work in collaborative groups to complete laboratory or
recitation activities in their STEM courses. This study intends to answer
practical questions that many teachers have asked â€“ What size groups are best
for learning? Is it better for each student to work individually? Are small
groups more effective? Are there differences between working with one other
student as a pair, or working with two other students in a triad? This project
builds on work suggesting distinct advantages for triads, and study this finding
in the context of virtual collaborations (where students interact fully online).
Collaborative activities are a popular instructional approach in many
educational settings. Consistent with the intuition that two heads may be better
than one, many teachers rely on collaborative learning activities in their
classrooms with the aspirational goal being that peers can provide some support
to each other. Yet, results are mixed when the learning of students who work
with peers is compared to students who work alone, and few experimental studies
have tested for group size effects using the same instructional materials. Thus,
the main goal of this project is to test which group size leads to more
effective learning. Results from this project have the potential to be
informative for effective delivery across a broad range of STEM courses and will
help to identify effective instructional techniques and best practices to
promote student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test for
differences in learning outcomes as a function of completing recitation
activities in different size groups (versus individually) in a gateway STEM
course (Introduction to Research Methods in Psychology) at a diverse, urban,
public institution. Initial findings suggest that students working in triads may
learn better than students working in dyads or alone. However, these results are
from face-to-face settings. This study will test whether the same effects may be
found with small group activities through a virtual mode of course delivery.
Trace data will be collected to inform how the activities support better
learning. The effects of group size on learning will be examined while holding
the activities (and all other aspects of the course) constant, using both
quantitative and qualitative methods. The main quantitative questions to be
explored are whether interacting online with other students to complete
recitation activities benefits learning, and whether the size of the group
affects the probability of any benefit over working alone. In addition, the
studies will generate a rich corpus of interactions to allow for the exploration
of which students might be more or less likely to benefit from working in
groups, which patterns of interaction might be afforded by different group sizes
or compositions, and which patterns of interaction best support learning.
Special attention will be devoted to determining which instructional conditions
provide the strongest support for students who may enter college with less
preparation for college-level coursework. A major benefit to society is that the
project will investigate which instructional contexts provide the most support
for student success in gateway STEM courses, and especially for those students
who are less prepared for college-level work, to promote and encourage
persistence in later STEM courses and careers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.