* 2120934
* Fostering Ideological Awareness in the Context of Postsecondary Biology through Open-source Course Modules
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Cissy Ballen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,950.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing and testing a
curriculum that integrates ideological awareness modules into existing science
content â€“ with an initial focus on introductory biology. Ideological awareness
is an understanding of biases, stereotypes, and assumptions that shape
contemporary and historical science. Science is often presented as a purely
objective discipline, far removed from societal issues. However, by
contextualizing societal and ethical considerations into biology curricula, we
highlight critical unquestioned assumptions of individual scientists and
ideologies that can bias research. The absence of discussions on these topics
communicates a vision of biology as objective and enlightened; however, the
discipline is subject to the same human biases as any other entity. Teaching
ideological awareness enables students to challenge prevailing worldviews and
the status quo. This research will evaluate how the inclusion of ideological
awareness in instructional materials affects student learning and experiences in
science, as well as how to use science. Teaching materials developed and tested
in this project will be freely available to the STEM education community for use
in biology classrooms that highlight ideological
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This discipline-based education research study
will evaluate the impact of introducing content modules with an explicit focus
on ideological awareness to undergraduate students across multiple institutions.
Project personnel will design new teaching materials that address unethical
experimentation and its relation to human rights evolution; how biological
science shapes societal views on identities; and persisting societal biases
shaped by historical beliefs in biology. The study will address three research
aims. First is to research a national sample of biology instructors to explore
perceived barriers to ideological awareness instruction in class and pedagogical
approaches to teaching ideological awareness. Second is to conduct pre/post-
course semi-structured interviews with instructors to address their perceptions
of barriers, comfort, and pedagogical approaches to understand how modules
impact how instructors discuss ideological awareness in their classroom. Third
is to assess how incorporating modules focused on ideological awareness into
biology courses affects student experiences in science (i.e., cognitive,
emotional, and social engagement); learning in science (i.e., indicators of
retention in STEM careers); and learning to use science (i.e., emotional
competency). The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.