* 2120929
* Increasing Gender-based Equity in Mathematics Through Improved Advising
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Maisie Gholson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Mathematics courses are core requirements within a variety majors at the
undergraduate level. This is particularly true for students majoring in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM). Students' mathematical skills
may impact their academic trajectory and potentially their life trajectory.
Academic advising sessions on mathematics courses play a key role in shaping
productive STEM pathways for students. During such advising sessions, advisors
and students co-construct stories about mathematical competence and readiness
when deciding on a first undergraduate mathematics course. Previously collected
data of a mathematics advising program at a large public university suggests
that gendered interactional dynamics strongly influence narratives of
mathematical competence and readiness, and consequentially, course
recommendations. The pilot data suggest that men tend to be encouraged to enroll
in more advanced or ambitious first mathematics course than their women
counterparts with similar placement scores and background. Having direct access
and insight to undergraduate advising sessions allow for a clear site of
potential intervention and radical transformation in STEM pathways for women.
This project will focus on the gendered dynamics of mathematics advising. These
dynamics deserve scrutiny and rigorous study. Such dynamics should be recognized
as flexible to be shaped to serve women interested in STEM and women in other
mathematics-intensive majors, or women uncertain of their majors who wish to
keep their possibilities open by taking ambitious mathematics courses. This
project will design and test an intervention to promote gender-equity in
mathematics advising sessions. This has potential to lead to an understanding of
how mathematics advising in a post-secondary context influences mathematics
course placement. The intervention will be made publicly available to the
undergraduate mathematics research and teaching community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the mathematics advising of a large
public university across four programs, including the general student body in
the liberal arts college and the honors program in the liberal arts college, the
engineering school, and the business school. In particular, the study focuses on
the of small-scale event of advising, that occurs in minutes between people, as
a uniquely critical site of womenâ€™s attrition (or misalignment) to STEM-based
pathways, as well as other technical majors. To reduce the mediating effects of
gender on mathematics course recommendations, the project aims to understand how
the interactional dynamics (i.e., talk, gesture, and body comportment) between
advisors and students of various gender identities influence narratives of
mathematical competence and readiness, and, thus, course placement. Using
positioning theory, along with international analysis, the research team will
analyze approximately 300 video records and surveys of academic advising
sessions to highlight specific advising practices that promote gender equity in
first-year mathematics course placement. Building off the analysis of video
records and using design-based methods, a key outcome of the project will be an
intervention (e.g., online mini-courses) that provides much needed resources to
guide students and advisors in navigating mathematics contexts, like mathematics
advising sessions, where the gender-based presentation of mathematics identities
is under scrutiny. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.