* 2120642
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Large: Building and Deploying a Verified JavaScript Runtime
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Deian Stefan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 483,014.00

Browsers run the complex Web applications modern society relies on. Browser
vendors go to great lengths to make Web applications run efficiently on user
machines, using just-in-time (JIT) compilers that turns Web application code,
written in JavaScript, into optimized machine code. Unfortunately, bugs in
JavaScript JITs have emerged as the single largest threat to web platform
security and the most dangerous attack surface of web-connected devices. Bugs in
JavaScript JITs can and have been exploited by attackers to target users,
including members of marginalized and at-risk populations. The goal of this
project is to build and deploy more secure JavaScript JITs. To this end, the
investigators will develop new techniques, frameworks, and principles that (1)
help browser developers build JIT compilers that are provably secure and (2)
don't incur the high costs and development timelines traditionally associated
with high-assurance software. If successful, this project will improve security
for the hundreds of millions of people who surf the web every day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (1) empirically evaluate JIT security,
identifying the JIT components that are most vulnerable to attackers and most
crucial to browser performance; (2) formalize what security and correctness mean
for various parts of the JIT; (3) modify and extend existing JIT compilers to
find and fix bugs, and provide formal guarantees of security for components
under active attack today; and, finally, (4) rethink the way that browsers
execute JavaScript programs from the ground up, by designing and building new
JavaScript interpreters and compilers that are extensible, maintainable, and
secure. The project will yield new innovations in the design of programming
languages and verification frameworks, and as a result will empower browser
developers to write safer JIT compilers with less
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.