* 2120432
* RCN-UBE Incubator: The Campus as a Living Lab
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Jaime Pawelek, College of the Canyons
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2022
* USD 74,707.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing opportunities for
undergraduate students at four-year and community colleges to engage in
authentic and relevant STEM research. With the development of a native bee
Campus as a Living Lab (CALL) research toolkit, the project will address two
main barriers that faculty regularly face in doing so, limited time and
resources. The CALL research toolkit will include materials and step-by-step
instructions to initiate and expand the study of campus native bee biodiversity.
All essential information will be developed in Spanish as well. Network faculty
participants will receive training with the toolkit so that they can introduce
students to biodiversity research on their respective campuses. With this easy-
to-implement and low-cost toolkit, faculty and students can turn their campuses
and nearby natural areas into research locations. This experience will increase
students’ knowledge and awareness regarding native bee distribution, ecology,
and to the science of habitat enrichment. Providing students this research
opportunity will enhance student’s connection to their campus, professors, and
fellow students, thereby increasing their sense of belonging and retention
within STEM degree and career paths. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project's
primary goal is to develop a network of faculty at community colleges and four-
year institutions who incorporate native bee biodiversity research into their
courses. Key objectives of this project include: 1) building the network of
faculty, and 2) creating, beta testing, and refining the native bee Campus As a
Living Lab (CALL)Toolkit. The PIs and steering committee members will develop
and expand a nationwide network of community colleges and four-year
institutions, representing geographically and ecologically varied locations.
Developing a network with many two-year colleges who serve a high percentage of
underrepresented students will achieve multiple goals, which include increasing
opportunities for faculty to share information on best practices to
institutionalizing research experiences into courses, strengthening the pathway
for students to transfer to four-year institutions, and generating opportunities
for collaboration among students and faculty. Native bee biodiversity data will
be entered into public databases and will be shared among the network
participants. Therefore, this research will contribute to native bee
conservation on a local and global scale. The shared data base will make it
possible to identify gaps in native bee species composition on campuses. These
gaps could then be filled by using targeted habitat enrichment. In this way, the
large landscape parcels on community college campuses can ultimately serve as
habitat islands and corridors. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/). This project is also supported by the NSF
HSI and IUSE: EHR programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.