* 2120633
* RCN-UBE Incubator: The Wokini Undergraduate Biology Education Network
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* ERICA MOORE, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2023
* USD 74,944.00

For institutions of higher learning to meet their goals of educating their
students effectively, the curriculum must be designed to acknowledge and
validate the experience of their various student populations. The Wokini (New
beginnings in Lakota) Undergraduate Biology Education Network will create a
group of scholars that integrates Indigenous thought and knowledge into the
teaching of biology, while meeting the core competencies as defined in Vision
and Change in undergraduate biology education. Applying Indigenous methodologies
and localization techniques will empower the network participants to engage
effectively with underrepresented Indigenous communities in the design of an
instructional curriculum that supports both an Indigenous and scientific
identity. Using a collective impact framework, the network will address ways to
increase recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of Indigenous
undergraduates in Biology and increase the number of Indigenous students
pursuing graduate education in Biology. Understanding that this goal requires
engaging students in culturally relevant learning, the network is highly diverse
and draws on knowledge and expertise outside of biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation and implementation of the Wokini
Undergraduate Biology Education Network will connect Indigenous and non-
Indigenous faculty at land grant institutions and tribal colleges, enrolled
tribal members, scientists, educational researchers, leaders of non-profit
organizations and language and culture experts. This incubator award will allow
the network to create a common language, shared understanding, and common goals
through strategic planning, a virtual learning community, regular dialogue and a
face-to-face summit in an Indigenous community. The network will collaboratively
develop and grow a local and international network, which will create, share,
and host resources through social media and an open-source digital hub for a
more inclusive curriculum, co-curriculum, and pedagogy in undergraduate biology
education. Resources will include case studies, activities, lesson plans, course
based undergraduate research experiences, and laboratory activities. These
activities have the potential to broaden participation and engagement of
Indigenous students who are underrepresented and underserved in undergraduate
biology and will also support all students in developing a deeper understanding
of the life sciences. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange.org/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.