* 2120302
* Collaborative Research: The role of Grain Boundary Migration in Water Weakening of Naturally Deformed Quartz
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sven Morgan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 433,254.00

This research is designed to understand how sub-microscopic amounts of water, in
minerals, can affect their strength. The overall effect of this tiny amount of
water, in rocks, can have a big significance to how plates interact. For
example, the Indian plate is colliding with the Asian plate to produce the
Himalayas, but the strong Indian plate is not deforming while the weaker Asian
plate is folding, faulting, experiencing earthquakes, and rising to produce the
tallest mountains on Earth. The uplift of the Tibetan Plateau (which is five
times the area of France) to an elevation of over 3 miles high (4.8 km) is
remarkable. One possibility for this huge difference in plate strength is that
deep rocks of the Indian plate are “dry” (no sub-microscopic water) whereas deep
rocks of the Asian plate are “wet” (they contain some sub-microscopic water).
Therefore, it is important to understand how and when this tiny amount of water
gets into the rocks. This research project involves collecting rocks, in the
mountains of California, along a 5 km transect where it is already known that
rocks undergo the transition from strong to weak behavior. Detailed chemical
analyses with advanced micro-imaging techniques will be conducted to determine
exactly how and where along the transect the water gets into and out of the
effected minerals. This research will support the education of one post-doctoral
researcher, 4-6 undergraduate researchers, as well as 12 inner city Detroit High
School (César Chávez Academy High School) students and three High School
teachers who will travel to California with the research team to sample and
learn about how water affects mountain building and plate tectonics. The effects
of water on shaping this part of Earth are visually evident (previous glaciers,
pre-historic and historic lake beds) and the effects of climate change, drought
and fires, and human intervention (water piped to Los Angeles) will also be
examined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
determine if grain boundary migration allows water to enter the quartz crystal
lattice and cause weakening. Oxygen isotope data will be used as the main proxy
for tracking water infiltration. Harkless Formation quartzite samples will be
collected along a 5 km transect, oriented perpendicular to the contact with the
Eureka Valley-Joshua Flat-Beer Creek pluton in the White-Inyo Range of
California. Contact metamorphism is first observed at 2.9 km from the pluton and
concordancy occurs abruptly at 1.1 km where the Harkless folds 90° and is
intensely attenuated. This abrupt transition is assumed to be a “rolling hinge”,
that progressed outward as the pluton expanded during emplacement. Samples will
be collected across this transition between regional structures and the forceful
concordance of country rocks with the intrusion. Standard petrography and
scanning electron microscopy techniques with advanced analysis including
electron backscatter diffraction and cathodoluminescence, will be used to
document; 1) where exactly grain boundary migration begins, where it becomes
pervasive and, 2) where the crystallographic preferred orientation begins to
develop and how it develops across the transition. Using a focused Secondary Ion
Mass Spectrometer beam with a small spot size (6-10µm pit size), grain
boundaries will be analyzed between unmigrated and migrated parts of the grains
to determine the oxygen isotope signatures for tracking water infiltration and
delineating the potential sources of this water. Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy will also be used to document the overall concentrations of water
(OH) on a microscopic scale in associated minerals. Trace element data will be
input into several TitaniQ models to determine the temperatures during
deformation and the overall Ti diffusional partial re-equilibration during the
cooling history. This overall strategy will help correlate rock/mineral strength
and deformation behavior with sub-microscopic water phenomena in minerals from
intense heating and pressure during mountain building
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.