* 2120367
* RAPID: Microbial Diversity along an elevational gradient in El Yunque National Forest before and after Hurricane Maria
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Sharon Cantrell, Universidad Del Turabo
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 02/28/2023
* USD 79,000.00

An award is made to Universidad Del Turabo to support student learning and
research which has been severely impacted by several natural disasters including
Hurricane Maria (September, 2017), the 2020 earthquakes (January, 2020), and the
current Covid-19 pandemic. The award will support stipends, supplies, and travel
for three undergraduate students and one masters student studying the impact of
Hurricane Maria on biodiversity across the elevation gradient of El Yunque
National Forest. The students will utilize a variety of genomic approaches to
analyze soil core samples taken across 15 plots to study how microbial diversity
changes along elevation gradients and whether Hurricane Maria significantly
altered the biodiversity across the elevation gradient. The students will
particular use of an ABI 3500 Genetic Analysis platform acquired with a previous
NSF MRI award (1726158).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change can have a
significant impact on microbial (fungi and bacterial) diversity by impacting
surface litter, canopy openings, solar radiation, and winds. The El Yunque
National Forest, located in Puerto Rico, has been dramatically impacted by
Hurricane Maria. The El Yunque National Forest provides a natural setting for
several forest types (tubonuco, palm forest, palo Colorado, and elfin forest),
across its natural elevation gradient, with each forest type having its own
endogenous biodiversity. The University has created 15 forest plots from 300 to
1000 meters in elevation at 50 meter intervals. At each elevation a 50 X 20
meter plots was established and divided into ten 10 X 10 plots. Soil core
samples were taken before and after Hurricane Maria from adjacent plots at each
elevation. The samples will be used to address two fundamental questions: 1) how
does microbial diversity change along the elevation gradient and 2) how was
microbial diversity effected by Hurricane Maria along the elevation gradient?
The students will extract DNA samples from each of the core soil samples and use
a variety of specific primers to amplify gDNA from the samples to quantify the
presence and abundance of specific microbial species. DNA sequence analysis will
be used to further identify and discriminate species providing insights into
both elevation associated diversity and changes in this diversity as a result of
Hurricane Maria. &lt;br/&gt;Students will obtain training in the use of a
variety genomics techniques and laboratory equipment and will further strengthen
current collaborations with the NSF-LTER at Luquillo, US Forest Service, DNA
Learning Center (at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory), and Bio-Link (NSF-ATE
BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.