* 2120819
* Understanding the Role of Undergraduate Research and Mentoring in the Self-Efficacy, Identity, and Success of Engineering Undergraduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chrysanthe Preza, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving academic success
and broadening participation for engineering students at the University of
Memphis. It has been shown that engineering identity and self-efficacy play a
role in student retention and graduation rates. This study will examine the
impact of mentoring and undergraduate research on developing students’
engineering identity and self-efficacy. An important aspect of the project is
understanding how the proposed interventions in research and mentoring can aid
college students who may not see themselves as “fitting in” with engineering as
a means of broadening participation. This project will increase the use of
undergraduate research as part of the curriculum, make research experiences
accessible for all students, and promote broadening participation in
engineering. The project team will adapt, implement, research, and evaluate a
targeted active learning focused undergraduate research experience for which
students will receive course credits towards their baccalaureate engineering
degree. Using peer and faculty mentoring, students who begin research as early
as their first year in college will continue in research and mentoring
throughout their time as undergraduate students. It is expected that these
interventions will help improve academic success and persistence as well as
broaden participation in the engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project goals are to improve academic success, retention, diversity, and
inclusion in engineering at the University of Memphis by integrating educational
interventions such as active learning through project-based research
opportunities and peer mentoring that involves networking and role modeling. The
educational interventions are designed to foster the development of engineering
identity and self-efficacy in undergraduate students. Project activities that
aim to foster an inclusive culture in engineering include research training
units, innovation seminars, and mentoring. The successful implementation of this
project is expected to increase awareness and interest in engineering majors and
provide a new approach to recruiting students to engineering. Important outcomes
of the project will be: 1) improving retention of all students in engineering;
2) making engineering majors at the University of Memphis more accessible to
undecided freshmen, particularly for the purpose of broadening participation;
and 3) supporting engineering identity growth, self-efficacy, and a sense of
belonging for undergraduate engineering students. Though other projects have
investigated some of the components addressed in this project, few have looked
at them collectively, as this project will do. As such, this project will
generate new knowledge in how to recruit, retain, and broaden participation in
undergraduate engineering. In addition, Memphis area community college students
and high school students will engage in research and mentoring through a one-day
summer summit. The adapted undergraduate research and mentoring model will be
disseminated through an established consortium and to other interested
institutions. Project results will be disseminated through conference
presentations and journal publications as well as through a dedicated website.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.