* 2120638
* 2021 MRS Fall Meeting: Symposium NM03 - Topological and Quantum Phenomena in Intermetallic Compounds and Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 6,000.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium “NM03: Topological and
Quantum Phenomena in Intermetallic Compounds and Heterostructures” at the 2021
Virtual Materials Research Society Meeting (April 17-23, 2021) provides an
interdisciplinary venue for scientists at varying stages in their careers to
share their research and establish new collaborations. It is the first
interdisciplinary symposium on this topic at an MRS Meeting, drawing on
scientists with training in Materials Science, Chemistry, Physics, and
Electrical Engineering. The two-day virtual symposium features 48 oral
presentations, of which 29 are invited speakers. 11 of the invited speakers are
female and 9 are untenured junior faculty or postdocs. Speakers are drawn from
all over the world, including North America, Europe, Asia, and the Middle East.
Support by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the Condensed
Matter Physics program in the Division of Materials Research facilitates the
participation of students, postdoctoral researchers, and junior
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intermetallic compounds host a broad range of
quantum, topological, and multiferroic phenomena, including chiral spin
textures, Weyl and Dirac states, novel superconductivity, heavy fermion
behavior, ferroelasticity, and magnetocaloric behavior. This diverse range of
properties rivals that of the well-studied transition metal oxides; however,
outstanding challenges remain in controlling stoichiometry and defects,
fabricating atomically precise interfaces, and characterizing the fundamental
electronic and magnetic structures. This symposium brings together experts to
explore common themes across the various families of intermetallics, including
Heusler compounds, lacunar spinels, Weyl semimetals, rare earth compounds,
skyrmion compounds, and others. The symposium, support by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program and the Condensed Matter Physics program in the
Division of Materials Research, highlights recent advances in bulk crystal and
epitaxial film growth, advanced characterization, materials prediction/design,
and new device concepts for intermetallic compounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.