* 2120710
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Incorporating Online Biological Data and Data Science into Undergraduate Education in Alaska
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Jeremy Jones, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2023
* USD 74,767.00

The availability of online biological data has skyrocketed during the past
decade, much of it originally funded from public sources, providing a wealth of
information on climate, environment, and ecology. These data sets could be a
valuable resource for preparing biology students for a future in which
quantitative skills and the ability to manipulate, analyze, and interpret data
will be increasingly important. However, data repositories are currently
underused by undergraduates and educators because accessing and manipulating the
data can be challenging for non-specialists. Nowhere is the value of
environmental data for biologists and biology students higher than in Alaska,
where climate and ecosystems are changing at an unprecedented rate and residents
have experienced climate change and its effects on infrastructure and
subsistence first-hand. University of Alaska campuses serve a high proportion of
rural and Indigenous students; populations that have traditionally experienced
equity gaps in undergraduate degree attainment, related in part to limited
physical access to the university. Educational tools that facilitate access to
online data repositories, placed within a context relevant to rural and Alaska
Native students, have the potential to enrich educational outcomes by
encouraging inquiry, improving quantitative skills, and encouraging the life-
long use of publicly available data as a way to understand the natural world.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to enhance the quantitative
skills of undergraduate biology students in Alaska by developing online
educational tools focused on the state’s changing environment; a topic relevant
to Alaska’s underserved student populations. A network of undergraduate biology
instructors, scientists, and data providers will develop educational modules
that incorporate online, publicly-available data sources. Modules will include
learning objectives, instructions for data access, exercises, and suggested
extensions. Centered at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) campus, the
network will link university faculty from institutions across Alaska with
representatives of the Arctic Long Term Ecological Research (LTER), Bonanza
Creek (boreal) LTER, National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), the
collaborative collections management program ARCTOS, and other data providers.
Working together, network participants will design, create, and distribute
online educational materials focused on Alaskan climate, permafrost thaw, forest
dynamics, and animal and plant populations in order to assist undergraduate
inquiry and learning at levels from non-majors to seniors. This project is
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, as part of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.