* 2120947
* MCA: Scalable Nanomanufacturing of Earth-Abundant Electrochromics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Richard Robinson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2024
* USD 337,635.00

By actively managing solar radiation and visible light coming through windows,
peak electricity demand in the U.S. could be reduced. Electrochromic, or
“smart,” windows control light transmission by reversibly changing their
opacity, stimulated by electrochemistry. Significant challenges hinder their
implementation because smart windows made from the most popular metal oxide
materials are prohibitively costly to manufacture. This Mid-Career Advancement
award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge for the
development of an earth-abundant materials platform for electrochromics that is
amenable to scalable nanomanufacturing. The target materials are ternary copper
sulfide semiconductors. Copper sulfide nanoparticles are more easily synthesized
than metal oxides, and are made from low-cost, highly available elements. This
award will advance discovery and understanding through the investigation of
alternative nanomaterials with metal-like properties that could outperform
traditional materials in optical applications. This research involves several
disciplines including manufacturing, electrochemistry, chemical synthesis, and
materials science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively impact
engineering education. The outreach programs will invigorate public excitement
about electrochromic windows. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles of ternary
copper sulfides have the ability to change their optical properties through
electrochemical charging and discharging. This electrochromic effect can be
enhanced by parameters such as size and composition. The team will investigate
the working hypothesis that size, composition, and chemistry modifications to a
metal-deficient copper sulfide phase will enable enhanced sensitivity to
electrochemical modulation. The team will use “solventless” conditions (low
ratio of ligand to cation) to control the nucleation and growth of the
nanoparticles and enable scalability through a one-pot method. Electrodes will
be assembled through electrophoretic deposition to establish a path toward
scalable device integration. In addition, this Mid-Career Advancement award will
provide protected time and resources for the PI to develop a collaboration with
and learn from a Spanish expert in the field of
nanoplasmonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.