* 2120050
* Support for Students to Attend 2021 APS-DAMOP Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Subhadeep Gupta, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 03/31/2023
* USD 12,000.00

This award provides support for student participation in the 2021 meeting of the
American Physical Society's Division of Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics,
expected to be held virtually due to the ongoing pandemic. The award supports
waivers of graduate student registration fees for approximately 120 students.
The conference program includes many of the research topics central to Atomic,
Molecular, and Optical Physics and Quantum Information Science. The support of
students through this award makes a substantial contribution to the education
and training of future scientists. Students who graduate with a background in
atomic, molecular, and optical physics acquire a broad range of knowledge and
skills that enable them to contribute to progress in many areas of science and
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting is scheduled to be held May 31
through June 4, 2021. Originally planned to be held in Fort Worth Texas, the
meeting will be held virtually due to the ongoing pandemic. The conference
offers an opportunity for students to present their research results and to
interact with senior scientists primarily from the United States, but also the
broader international community. Support is provided only for US students
(students enrolled in US universities).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.