* 2120804
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Co-Defining Climate Refugia to Inform the Management of Mountain Headwater Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* William Wieder, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 09/30/2026
* USD 102,313.00

Population growth and climate change increasingly stress public lands that
provide key ecosystem services such as clean water, habitat for plants and
animals, and income via tourism and natural resources. To ensure that services
remain sustainable, land managers allocate limited resources to alleviate
evolving stressors between society and the environment; however, land management
decisions are challenged by scientific limitations and inadequate communication
among scientists, decision-makers, and the public. This project aims to inform
land management decisions by identifying regions that provide stable ecosystem
services despite climate change and other human-caused disturbance. The project
team – representing climate science, geology, hydrology, social science, and
ecology – includes students from a Hispanic-Serving Institution and community
colleges. The team will work with decision-makers to develop measurement and
prediction technologies to estimate where, how, and when ecosystems may
experience irreversible change this century. The project will establish a
transferrable method to map at-risk and sustainable ecosystem services using
both science and public priorities to inform land management decisions in the
context of a changing climate.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The concept of refugia –
the mappable landscape units that are buffered from contemporary climate change
– is significant to many population segments that value and/or study ecosystem
services at the urban-wildland interface. However, no unified framework exists
in which to contribute new data or ideas, and there are technical barriers to
projecting future conditions, including climate change and other societal
pressures. This project will develop novel observations of water, energy and
vegetation to improve a next-generation terrestrial model to co-produce refugia
estimates through collaboration among land managers, citizens, and cross-
disciplinary scientists. It will undertake the complex task of combining public
values, land manager input, and an ensemble of climate change projections to co-
define refugia characteristics and predict the location and persistence of
refugia under climate change and other anthropogenic forcings. The research will
produce three specific advances: (1) a convergent blueprint for integrating and
defining the value of ecosystem services that are relevant to the public,
managers, and scientists as a means to characterize refugia, (2) improved
process-based model structure to predict the dynamics, thresholds, and
boundaries of future refugia, and (3) a novel modeling framework to separate
sources of uncertainty in projections of ecosystem
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.