* 2120980
* Education Research on Simulations and Visualization in Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* E Manher Jariwala, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students'
understanding of key concepts in physics with the use of computer simulations.
The focus will be electromagnetism, waves, and optics, which are topics usually
covered in the second semester of introductory physics at colleges and
universities. In previous research (supported by NSF Award DUE-1712159), the
investigators produced a collection of over 200 physics simulations dealing
mainly with topics in mechanics, and they compared the effectiveness of labs
that used the simulations to labs that used hands-on equipment. The rapid switch
to online learning during the recent COVID-19 pandemic made evident the
importance of having remote lab experiences ready to go. In this project, the
investigators will build several simulation-based labs, improve them with the
assistance of undergraduate learning assistants (students trained in pedagogy
who return to a course they previously took to help students learn), and carry
out education research to assess the effectiveness of the labs in a second-
semester introductory physics course. Building on their prior research, which
compared simulation-based labs with hands-on labs, the investigators will focus
on "hybrid" labs that merge the best of both environments -- allowing students
to investigate concepts in an idealized situation using simulations and then
compare those understandings to those gained in real-world scenarios with real-
world lab equipment. The researchers hope to demonstrate that several designs
for a lab can produce acceptable learning gains. Such a result will give
instructors and students flexibility to adapt to local conditions at their
institutions. The project will also give them materials they can use if they
need to switch to online learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project centers on
education research associated with HTML5 computer simulations for topics in
electromagnetism, waves, and optics. The investigators will design several
simulation-based labs, including the simulations themselves as well as
worksheets and guided-inquiry lab packets. They will test them in a class of
approximately 400 undergraduates, with a focus on comparing the effectiveness of
hybrid labs (labs that use both simulations and hands-on experiments) versus
hands-on (only) labs. They will also look at effectiveness in the context of
recitations in which students interact with simulations versus working through
the concepts without a simulation. The education research questions will
primarily concern how the use of a simulation in place of, or in combination
with, hands-on lab equipment impacts (1) students' gains in content knowledge on
written assessments for specific concepts in electromagnetism, waves, and
optics; (2) students' attitudes towards learning physics; (3) students' analysis
or use of visual tools and representations to explain specific concepts in
electromagnetism, waves, and optics; and (4) students' development of skills in
visual modeling and representation when learning about specific concepts in
electromagnetism, waves, and optics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.