* 2120153
* BII: New Roots for Restoration: integrating plant traits, communities, and the soil ecosphere to advance restoration of natural and agricultural systems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* James Bever, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Cooperative Agreement
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,379,567.00

Land-use conversion in urban and rural areas has impacted &gt;75% of lands
globally, resulting in ~50% loss of the worldâ€™s topsoil in the last 150 years.
Informed selection of plants based on an understanding of how they interact with
each other and with the soil will enable restoration of degraded lands in
natural and agricultural systems. Through their root systems, plants connect
aboveground components of ecosystems to the soil; however, how plant traits,
from roots to shoots (stems and leaves), govern these connections remains poorly
known. Plants are unusual among organisms because half of the plant body lives
aboveground, in air, while the other half lives belowground, in soil. The
scientific mission of the New Roots for Restoration Biology Integration
Institute is to address land losses by understanding how the soil ecosphere
(soil and soil microbes) and the plant community influences above and below
ground variation in plant traits, and vice versa: how do above- and belowground
plant traits influence properties of plant communities and the soil ecosphere?
Scientific advances made by the Institute will improve our ability to predict
below-ground functional traits based on above-ground structures. This
information can be applied to accelerate breeding (for perennial crops) and
select suitably diverse plants (for wild species) for use in ecologically and
functionally appropriate efforts to restore natural and agricultural ecosystems.
Recognizing that restoration requires a diverse, nimble workforce that spans
disciplines, the Institute establishes education, training, diversifying, and
outreach intentionally designed with many points of entry and ready mobility
across labs and institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Roots for
Restoration Biology Integration Institute advances the critical, cross-cutting
biological theme of how plant roots and shoots relate to one another, and how
those relationships influence and are influenced by plant communities and the
soil ecosphere. Scientific activities focus on genetic and environmental
determinants of perennial plant phenotypes, and the influence of perennial
phenotypes on communities and ecosystems using representative species from three
prominent plant families (Asteraceae, Fabaceae, Poaceae). A series of concentric
circles orient research activities: at the core are plant organismal systems, in
which contemporary phenotyping approaches quantify root and shoot systems and
are used to understand how above- and belowground plant traits covary among
individuals, populations, and species. Next, plants are placed in population and
community contexts to investigate how patterns of above- and belowground trait
covariation shift across populations and as a function of plant community
composition. To understand interactions between plants, communities, and the
soil ecosphere, new experiments examine how soil and soil microbiome mediate
root/shoot variation and interactions of populations and plant species, and vice
versa. Finally, structural equation modeling is used to assess relative
importance of plant phenotypic variation, species, communities, and site
properties to changes in soil. New Roots for Restoration engages researchers
from disparate disciplines (agroecology, community ecology, computer science,
genetics, plant biology, restoration, soil microbial ecology, soil science),
research contexts (natural, agricultural systems), and organizations (non-profit
research institutes, universities, botanical gardens), and is supported by
Institute Expertise Cores that provide technical training and data consistency
across projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.