* 2120843
* Understanding the Role of Student Engagement in Active Learning Outcomes in General Chemistry through Discourse Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jack Barbera, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,945.00

“Active learning” (AL) strategies have been at the center of national calls for
the adoption of evidence-based instructional practices to transform education in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. While there is
strong evidence to support the effectiveness of such strategies overall, in
practice student outcomes vary widely, with AL pedagogies sometimes having no
measurable effect. Thus, it is critical to understand what makes AL strategies
effective in some cases but not in others. This project examines a central
component of a wide range of AL approaches: the use of small-group discussions.
The project investigates students’ engagement in group work, the factors that
influence this engagement, and the relationship between students’ engagement in
discussions during group work and their understanding of course material.
Findings from the project will help inform the implementation of AL strategies
that rely on group work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses the Interactive-
Constructive-Active-Passive (ICAP) framework of cognitive engagement to gain
insight into when and how AL works in promoting the success of different
learners, and discourse analysis to identify the mechanisms through which this
occurs. The overarching goal of the project is to understand the mediating role
of cognitive engagement in active learning outcomes. The specific objectives are
to identify patterns in students’ cognitive engagement through their discourse
during group work in AL activities, determine how these patterns relate to both
activity design features and interactional dynamics, and evaluate the degree to
which students’ cognitive engagement in AL activities relates to their course-
based chemistry assessment outcomes. To accomplish these objectives, the project
team will collect video recordings of group work during AL activities in an
undergraduate general chemistry course. These recordings will be transcribed and
initially analyzed to determine the extent to which students’ observed
engagement during these activities matches the planned level of engagement based
on the activity design. Focal segments of the transcripts will then be more
closely analyzed using conversation analysis. Subsequent work will evaluate the
relationship between students’ cognitive engagement in each activity and their
understanding of the topic covered, using individual student engagement levels
from the transcripts together with students’ regular in-course assessments to
perform a repeated measures multivariate analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) for
each activity. The project will be assessed through annual reviews by a three-
person advisory board. Beyond contributing to fundamental research on students’
cognitive engagement during small-group AL in chemistry, the proposed project is
expected to have implications for improving STEM education. First, findings from
the study will inform the evidence base available to STEM educators when
evaluating the efficacy of AL in their specific learning environments. Second,
the research methods employed in this project can serve as a model and be
applied across a wide array of AL approaches that use group work. A professional
development workshop and archive of data and training materials will support
further application by others. Third, the project will provide cross-training
for graduate students from both applied linguistics and chemistry education,
exposing them to the wider research community in both fields and fostering
interdisciplinary collaboration among the next generation of STEM education and
applied linguistics researchers. The NSF IUSE: EHR program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.