* 2120807
* Humanistic STEM: Blending Humanities and STEM to Increase Undergraduate Student Engagement, Knowledge, and Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Susan Ganter, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 05/31/2024
* USD 291,873.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate STEM
education. To do so, it will develop, distribute, and research a transferable
Humanistic STEM (H-STEM) undergraduate curriculum model that blends humanities
and STEM. H-STEM is defined as “a blending of the study of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics with interest in, and concern for, human affairs,
welfare, values, or culture.” H-STEM highlights connections between humanities
and STEM, while reinforcing the relevance of each. The project will support
different levels of H-STEM curriculum development, from individual modules for
implementation within a course to full H-STEM courses, as well as an H-STEM
undergraduate minor. Project goals also include the development of the
Humanistic STEM Center to facilitate integration of the humanities and STEM
disciplines at other universities. Employers in STEM fields have stressed the
need for students to develop skills such as creative problem solving, critical
thinking, ethical reasoning, and communication. These are skills are often best
developed in humanities courses. The institutions participating in this project
will work to implement H-STEM at a variety of institutional types to create a
better prepared STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;H-STEM is a targeted
response to two main concerns: (1) a false dichotomization of ways of knowing
and skills as either humanities- or STEM-focused, a situation exacerbated by
institutional silos; and (2) the devaluing of skills associated with the
humanities as less important, or even irrelevant, to STEM students. The most
significant product resulting from this project will be a model for blending
humanities and STEM content in ways that result in students achieving a deeper
realization of the connections between these meta-disciplines. H-STEM can also
lead to more profound student understanding of the wide applicability of the
skills and competencies they acquire in their courses. Project leadership will
develop an assessment framework that will use direct empirical data to measure
project impact and inform future action. Evidence from a pilot shows that H-STEM
students can apply interdisciplinary knowledge, concepts, skills, and methods of
inquiry attained in academic settings to produce creative responses to complex
problems and situations. These skills allow the students to blend their
technical competence with the creative and critical thinking skills that are
increasingly essential for continued success in any STEM field in the United
States. The anticipated result of broad implementation of H-STEM will be STEM-
focused graduates who are more closely aligned with the expectations of industry
leaders, possess the requisite technical skills, and have increased capacity for
empathy, refined communication skills, and rich exposure to cultural diversity.
These outcomes will have full utility in areas of student lives beyond their
jobs, regardless of discipline, learner level or workforce sector. Through a
dissemination plan that targets a variety of academic audiences, and the
formation of a consortium comprising multiple institutional types, this
framework has the potential to significantly impact multiple student
populations. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.