* 2120712
* Calibration of internal representations vs. external information for the control of action
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Ulrich Mayr, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 698,151.00

While giving a presentation, we can speak freely from memory, but with some
danger of losing our train of thought. Alternatively, we can rely on notes but
risk a dysfluent and stilted presentation. This is one example of a type of
decision that we need to make almost constantly; namely whether to rely on
internal representations – that is, our knowledge and memory – or on information
from the environment to guide our actions in the world. Suboptimal
internal/external decisions can have important consequences. For example,
previous work has shown that older adults have a strong tendency to search the
environment for clues, even when they know perfectly well what to do next, which
in turn leads to highly inefficient performance. Other vulnerable populations,
such as individuals with attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
are likely to rely either too much or too little on external information and
therefore can appear either distracted or hyper-focused. Adequate balancing
between information sources is particularly important when people interact with
modern and emerging technologies. For example, the increasing salience of
information-rich displays in newer-model cars can pose a serious distraction
danger for individuals with a strong tendency to rely primarily on external
information. Yet, little is known about how internal/external decisions are
being made, what kind of information is used for such decisions, and what
exactly explains the suboptimal pattern in certain subgroups, such as in older
adults or individuals with ADHD. The current project will use computational
modeling and eye-tracking experiments to address this gap in the research
literature. The long-term goal of this work is to inform technological solutions
that support optimal internal/external information calibration, in particular in
vulnerable populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators use eye-tracking
technology to monitor human participants in experimental situations that require
performing one of several, simple tasks at any given point in time (e.g.,
responding to an arrow cue by indicating either its spatial location or the
direction in which it is pointing). The currently most appropriate task can be
determined either by utilizing the participant’s own knowledge (internal
representations) or by examining simple reminders that indicate what to do next
(external information). In Aim 1, the focus is on aspects that can
“irrationally” influence the internal/external decision process and that “pull”
the decision process towards relying on the environment, even when there is no
objective need to use external information. For example, preliminary results
have shown that both the saliency of external prompts and how frequently an
individual had inspected external signals in the recent past, strongly influence
the current use of information in the environment. Aim 2 focuses on situations
in which there is an optimal balance between relying on external or internal
information that participants need to try to achieve. The goal here is to
determine to what degree external/internal decisions can be explained by a
simple, rational model, and if not, how such a model would have to be amended in
order to explain participants’ behavior. For example, preliminary evidence
suggests that the subjective cost involved in making internal/external decisions
itself is a factor that can steer individuals towards suboptimal patterns of
information use. Aim 3 combines the experimental paradigms from the previous
aims to characterize internal/external decisions within a larger, heterogenous
sample of young and older adults, as well as individuals diagnosed with ADHD.
The project also includes an education and outreach component directed towards
increasing accessibility of STEM education for students with ADHD. Students from
the University of Oregon’s School of Journalism will develop animated material
about the nature of ADHD that will be tested in the University’s Accessible
Education Center. Combined, this work will generate new theoretical and
empirical knowledge about how individuals use internal versus external sources
of information and will lead to a better understanding of suboptimal information
use in vulnerable populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.