* 2120068
* I-Corps:  Amplification and Next-Generation Sequencing Library Preparation Using Picogram Quantities of Total RNA/DNA
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Praveensingh Hajeri, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to sequence DNA/RNA from biological materials in
small quantities. High-throughput RNA/DNA sequencing, called Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS), is a key technology in healthcare, medical research, and life
sciences. It is used in the diagnosis of emerging infectious diseases, biopsies,
pre-natal diagnostics, organ transplant, forensics, archaeology, and also basic
biological and medical research. However, sequencing of the biomaterials
available in small quantities is challenging and most precious biomaterials are
usually limited in availability. Single cell genomics and spatial genomics,
which also involve small quantity samples, are predicted to be important
technologies in the future that will drive the basic understanding of diseases,
diagnostics, and therapeutics. The proposed technology may broaden the use of
NGS and serve as an enabling technology for this rapidly growing
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
technology to generate DNA/RNA sequence information using Next-Generation
Sequencing (NGS) from small quantities of biological materials. Market research
suggests that about ~40% of laboratories believe that the biggest bottleneck in
NGS is in “library preparation methods.” The proposed NGS library preparation
technology may increase the scope of NGS applications. The proposed technology
has been shown to be 2-5 times more efficient and generates both quantity and
quality data using a lower quantity of template (1-1/100th) compared with
existing methods. In addition, the proposed technology may be used for
sequencing of small-RNAs using sub-nanogram (picogram) quantity of template,
which is not possible using existing technologies. This use of smaller sample
sizes may allow NGS to be used with new biological materials and be more
accurate, reliable, and informative, which may improve diagnostic and other
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.