* 2120969
* MCA: Plant-soil feedbacks and population dynamics of two arid system shrubs with contrasting spatial distributions and life histories
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maria Miriti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,954.00

Plant-soil interactions represent a burgeoning and impactful area of ecological
inquiry that is improving understanding of plant-plant interactions within and
between species, and controls on community structure. The complementary
expertise included in this study offers a novel collaboration to integrate
plant-soil feedbacks with plant population growth. This integration advances
understanding of context-dependent population regulation and promises to advance
future ecological research. Outcomes from this research will provide important
understanding of plant-microbial feedbacks at the population level and permit
long-term assessment of these feedbacks, which is increasingly important due to
ongoing changes in the occurrence and severity of drought in the US Southwest.
An integrated outreach component will support ongoing efforts to improve diverse
participation in ecology and environmental biology. By recruiting
underrepresented student participants from an existing project that examines the
relationship between identity and ecology education, the current project
provides a unique opportunity to assess student field experiences with cutting
edge research that treats cultural influences on student retention, and
pedagogy. This synthesis adds value to both research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines feedbacks between
two common plant species and the soil microbial community of a well-studied arid
plant system. These feedbacks will be studied at different life history stages
of two dominant species in the US Southwest, Ambrosia dumosa (A. Gray) Payne
Asteraceae, white bur-sage, and Larrea tridentata (DC.) Coville Zygophyllaceae,
creosote bush. The study will occur in a field site at Joshua Tree National Park
where more than 35 years of spatially-explicit demographic data have been
collected within a permanently mapped plot. Observational and experimental
studies of microbial respiration, microbial diversity, and microbial composition
in response to 1) plant species, 2) plant size and 3) plant density will be
conducted, and outcomes will be used to project future population growth. The
researchers will use specialized population models to measure differences in
population trajectories that differ by 1) exclusion of microbial activity, 2)
inclusion of microbial respiration but not diversity or composition, 3)
inclusion of microbial diversity and composition but not respiration, and 4)
inclusion of microbial respiration, composition, and diversity. By including the
influence of the soil microbiome on plant growth and survival, this project
advances the ability to understand how plant immobility and variable habitat
conditions interact to control the spatial structure and dynamics of populations
and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.