* 2120171
* I-Corps: An interactive gaming platform that uses motion assessment and virtual reality to incorporate STEM and social-emotional learning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,06/30/2023
* David Ahn, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an educational gaming platform to improve learning outcomes in
children. The proposed platform introduces students to deeper learning that
encompasses analytic reasoning, complex problem solving, and teamwork. The
curriculum is designed to introduce key concepts in social-emotional learning to
bolster any motivational hurdles learners encounter in understanding presented
materials. Focusing on social-emotional learning may assist learners in the
creative process and may more easily engage those who exhibit behavioral
challenges that may have impacted learning previously. In addition, the proposed
technology has the potential to assist in determining where additional
resources, support, or services are needed. This platform may play a critical
role in bridging the gap of services for underserved
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an interactive educational platform using virtual reality to
introduce STEM and social emotional learning to young learners. The proposed
online platform uses a framework focusing on imitating behavioral neuronal
networks based on user input. Artificial Intelligence (AI) algorithms are used
to replicate the functionality of the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex to
optimize habitual behaviors. The proposed technology specifically targets
increasing problem solving and creative thinking through real-life interactive
scenarios. To allow for the manipulation of 3D objects in an instinctual way,
the proposed platform combines the use of motion sensors with the software
framework. By combining motion and real-life interactive scenarios with growth
hacking development concepts, the technology may increase resiliency by
instilling long-term drive and motivation in STEM. An additional goal is
increasing the representation of diverse and minority populations in data sets
with the hopes of assisting in the effort to mitigate algorithmic
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.