* 2120835
* Biocultural perspectives on the role of youth in subsistence societies' responses to market intersections and changing economic conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Lee Gettler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/28/2025
* USD 286,071.00

Market economies create new job opportunities, technology, and trade practices
to communities. These opportunities often involve changes to existing values,
norms, and customs as opportunities challenge existing means of subsisting and
interacting. These shifts are often attended by changes in wealth and health –
some positive and some negative. Who stands to benefit from these changes in
rapidly changing contexts is not well understood. In particular, although the
differences in intergenerational beliefs in changing contexts has been well
established, we know relatively little about how youth are situated as change-
makers and what this means in terms of their health and well-being. This
research provides new knowledge about the role of youth in changing values and
in health outcomes as communities experience economic and social transitions.
The research team investigates these dynamics in two neighboring societies with
differing cultural practices to understand how social change and inequality
relate to health in settings differing according to attitudes toward and
acceptance of inequality. The project supports and trains undergraduate
researchers in the scientific method and in laboratory skills related to human
biology. It also supports and provides STEM learning camps for middle school
children from disadvantaged backgrounds to help increase STEM participation for
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates youth
values, behaviors, and stress-related biology in neighboring communities varying
in the extent to which they condone inequality and in experiences of market
integration. The research team will collect data from 600 youth and adults in
three communities experiencing differing levels of market-based economic change
to pursue the following research aims. First, the project describes youth social
networks and preferences for different types of learning models. Second, it
investigates whether community-level market integration are associated with the
social tolerance of inequality versus social norms enforcing egalitarianism.
Third, it tests whether market integration and social norms predict variation in
health and well-being outcomes. The project uses interviews, participant
observation, and biological data collection and analysis to pursue these aims.
In doing so, it contributes new understanding of the potential importance of
youth to the pace and direction of cultural change under changing economic
conditions and in the processes that underlie emerging disparities in health
through stress-related pathways, including hormone production and epigenetic
regulation of gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.