* 2120123
* Allopolyploidization, Niche Evolution, and Systematics of Central African Night Frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* David Blackburn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 09/30/2024
* USD 744,637.00

Most vertebrate species are diploid: they have two sets of chromosomes, one from
each parent. In some species, there is a duplication of each set leading the
species to become polyploid (i.e., it has more than two sets of chromosomes).
This can happen when two species hybridize and thus create a new polyploid
species that contains both sets of chromosomes from each “parent” species. The
newly formed species may be in competition with its parental species and may
therefore evolve to occupy new environments. Competition between polyploid
species and their diploid parents has been studied in plants but not in animals.
This project will focus on two closely related groups of frogs from forests in
West and Central Africa that are known to exhibit polyploidy: Night Frogs (genus
Astylosternus) and Hairy Frogs (genus Trichobatrachus). The project will collect
new data for thousands of genes from all of the species in these two groups. The
researchers will analyze these data to establish the relationships among these
frogs and to test hypotheses about how polyploid species compete with parental
species and are potentially driven to create new ecological niches, even in
relatively inhospitable environments. The results will provide new understanding
about how and why polyploid species come to inhabit extreme environments. Better
documentation of distributional and environmental requirements will also inform
conservation efforts for six of the targeted species that are considered
threatened by habitat loss. This project will train undergraduate students and
develop on-line learning modules to help undergraduates understand the science
of polyploid species. The researchers will lead a training workshop for
scientists in the U.S. and Cameroon that will provide hands-on training for use
of new tools to analyze the distribution and evolution of polyploid
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of the
processes generating polyploid species and the associated evolution of
ecological niches. It will also add to our understanding of how these processes
impact the formation of new vertebrate species in tropical ecosystems. The
project will develop new methods to construct ancestral state reconstructions of
fundamental niches on time-calibrated polyploid phylogenetic networks. These
methods will be broadly applicable across polyploid plants and animals. The
focal genera Astylosternus and Trichobatrachus are distributed across forest
types and elevational gradients in Central Africa. They thus represent a unique
vertebrate system for studying the geographic, climatic, and temporal factors
that influence the creation of polyploid species through hybridization and
subsequent niche evolution. Synthesis of phylogenetic relationships, species
distributions, available advertisement calls, and newly collected anatomical
data from CT-scanning will also facilitate a thorough taxonomic revision of
these poorly known frogs, including the discovery of undescribed
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.