* 2120668
* Electronic Materials Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Daniel Wasserman, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 7,750.00

The Electronic Materials Conference (EMC) is the premier annual forum for the
presentation and dissemination of research focused on the preparation, growth,
characterization and use of electronic materials. EMC talks, a majority of which
are given by students, present cutting-edge research in a wide range of fields,
from solar energy materials, metamaterials and plasmonics, quantum structures,
electrical and optical characterization techniques, wide bandgap and narrow
bandgap materials, nanocomposites, 2D materials, and many others. The design,
growth and synthesis, development, and characterization of electronic materials
are central to a wide range of scientific fields, from quantum sensing,
communication and computation to renewable energy, optical communication and
sensing, data storage, power systems, and nano-electronics. EMC provides a
unique opportunity for researchers from academia, government labs, and industry
to meet and share the latest cutting-edge results across these broad range of
fields. While currently drawing from a broad range of disciplines and
institutions, EMC is looking to broaden participation of scientists and
engineers from minority serving institutions (MSIs), including historically
black colleges and universities (HBCUs). This proposal aims to broaden
participation in the Electronic Materials Conference by forging close,
sustainable ties with MSIs and HBCUs, through the NSF Partnerships for Research
and Education in Materials (PREM) program, in order to build a more diverse
EMC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to broaden participation in
the Electronic Materials Conference (EMC) by building a sustainable relationship
between EMC and the NSF Partnerships for Research and Education in Materials
program, as well as electronic materials research groups at minority serving
institutions (MSIs). The proposed effort will: (i) increase the breadth of
research presented at EMC, providing opportunities for dissemination of research
results from MSI and HBCU researchers at an impactful forum for electronic
materials research, (ii) offer opportunities for networking and the building of
collaborative research efforts between MSI researchers and EMC attendees,
fostering new research efforts and directions, and (iii) strengthen the EMC by
broadening participation in the elected EMC organizing committee and pool of
invited organizers. The proposed effort will focus on bringing researchers from
MSIs and HBCUs into the EMC fold, both as attendees and presenters, but also as
invited organizers and members of the organizing committee. There will also be a
focus on reaching out to undergraduate researchers at MSIs, in order to expose
these students to a broad range of cutting-edge materials research, inspire
these students to continue their education at the graduate level, and thus
strengthen the STEM pipeline for under-represented populations. The program will
measure success by tracking attendance and participation by MSI and PREM
attendees, as well as with a post-conference survey to determine adjustments to
EMC that will further help to broaden participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.