* 2120070
* CCRI: ENS: Evolving the Defects4J Benchmark and Infrastructure to Enable Sustained Innovation and Reproducibility in Software Engineering Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Ernst, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Software engineering research aims to increase the quality of the software that
pervades modern technology. To make significant advances, reproducibility and
comparability of empirical results, using realistic artifacts, are essential in
many software engineering research areas, including software testing and
debugging, program comprehension, software evolution, and machine learning in
software engineering. The Defects4J database of real software faults and a
supporting infrastructure were developed to support the software engineering
research community, in particular to further reproducibility, to enable faster
and better completion of downstream research, and to free researchers from the
burden of (re-)developing an experiment
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evolves and extends Defects4J,
which has been widely adopted by the software engineering research community. It
focuses on enabling sustained innovation and reproducibility in software
engineering research by making Defects4J more broadly available and meeting the
growing interest and feature requests from the software engineering research
community. Specifically, this project aims to (1) grow the current set of
artifacts in Defects4J, based on community feedback, (2) develop a fully
automated framework for mining additional artifacts, (3) future-proof and
containerize all artifacts for use with modern compilers and runtime
environments, and (4) provide comprehensive tutorials and templates to support
researchers and educators. A high degree of automation and structured pathways
to community contributions will support sustained growth. Additionally, this
project advances scientific knowledge about defect patterns, prediction, and
prevention, applicability and limitations of research techniques, and best
practices for empirical evaluations. Finally, this project supports software
engineering education at the graduate and undergraduate level. The benchmark and
infrastructure allow students to reproduce published results, experiment with,
and compare, existing tools and techniques, and quickly evaluate new
ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.