* 2120998
* Improving Students’ Data Literacy in Environmental Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gregory Teegarden, Saint Joseph's College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 258,834.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’ data
literacy in environmental science through the creation and evaluation of a minor
in environmental technology and data literacy at St. Joseph’s College of Maine,
a small, private, liberal arts college. The addition of this minor is expected
to improve students’ understanding and use of technology and data for the
purpose of solving problems in environmental science. Environmental scientists
need to have the ability to collect, analyze, and interpret large data sets to
help make informed decisions related to ecosystems. Active learning techniques
have been shown to be effective in engaging students in courses and helping
students learn important concepts and skills. This project will build on
partnerships with public- and private-sector institutions to aid in the
development of a curriculum in environmental data literacy skills at the
undergraduate level that will be taught using active learning techniques. The
impact of the new curriculum on student learning will be assessed by
investigating changes in students' data literacy skill competencies and self-
efficacy. This minor can serve as a model for other undergraduate institutions,
which could help increase the number of students with the data literacy skills
that are needed in the environmental science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to (1) develop courses to improve students’ data
literacy skills and (2) provide students with field experiences and research
opportunities in a community-based learning format so that students can practice
their skills. This project will develop four new courses including Environmental
Sensors and Networking, Statistics of Large Data Sets, Interpretation and
Application of Environmental Data, and Technical Communication for Environmental
Science. An existing capstone course will be modified to focus on integrative
environmental data literacy skills using research projects from regional public
and private institutions. The project will address two research questions: (1)
How does an environmental technology and data literacy minor affect data
literacy skill competencies and self-efficacy? (2) How do data literacy and
self-efficacy correlate to completion of the minor and post-graduation
environmental science related employment or postgraduate education? The study
will use a mixed methods approach that will include assessing student learning
using a pre- and post-inventory of data literacy skills and assessing self-
efficacy using a self-efficacy survey instrument and focus groups. Project
results will be disseminated through conference posters, publications, and the
creation and implementation of a workshop. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.