* 2120038
* GP-IN: Pathways to tribal geosciences careers through cultural connections to iconic landscapes
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Benjamin Crosby, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2024
* USD 284,964.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on recruiting
and retaining Native American students into the Geosciences through three
strategies that engage with participants at multiple points of contact from
junior high to undergraduate levels. People of Native American descent make
about ~4% of Bannock County’s population (home to ISU), however they only
represent about ~1% of ISU’s student population and less than 1% of ISU
Geoscience majors. Initially, PIs plan to work with Shoshone Bannock Jr./Sr.
High School teachers and tribal elders to develop geoscience curriculum and
field-based activities that tie tribal culture to iconic landscapes of Idaho and
Wyoming. Secondly, a project mentor will focus on early-undergraduate and
transfer student geoscience internship opportunities to facilitate career
pathways. Geoscience faculty and the mentor will connect students to campus
resources such as Native American Student Services, Counseling and Testing and
the Career Path Internship program for educational and career pathway support.
Lastly, PIs will work with the ISU Bengal Bridge Program which is a transition
program between high school and college to develop best practices for recruiting
through field visits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will focus on
recruiting Native Americans into the geosciences at Idaho State University (ISU)
in collaboration with six educational and non-profit partners. The overarching
goal is to increase the number and diversity of geoscientists attaining
undergraduate degrees in eastern Idaho. To achieve this, the PIs offer a three-
pronged effort that will blend informal and formal geoscience learning ecosystem
strategies with multiple points of contact across a continuum of education
levels. The three levels of engagement for the participants include 1) building
a sense of identity by offering summer professional skill building through a
youth employment program and related activities, 2) accessing trained mentors
who will engage in both professional and geoscience development elements and 3)
providing access to a bridge transition program that will ready students to
enter undergraduate programs. The activities in this collaborative network of
partnerships are based on established Community of Practice and Self-Efficacy
models that can effectively support diverse recruitment and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.