* 2120757
* QLCI-CI: NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Robust Quantum Simulation
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Christopher Monroe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 20,950,000.00

Quantum mechanics governs the behavior of matter at the scale of atoms and
subatomic particles. Many key technological developments of the 20th
century—such as the laser, the transistor, and magnetic resonance imaging—relied
on understanding quantum mechanics through simplified models. However, such
approaches cannot address the behavior of complex quantum phenomena arising in
systems with many interacting components. The promise of quantum science and
technology depends on overcoming this obstacle by building a well-controlled,
well-characterized quantum system that can reliably simulate the behavior of
matter at small scales. Such a quantum simulator will represent a landmark in
our understanding of quantum phenomena. The Institute for Robust Quantum
Simulation will address this goal by combining theoretical studies with
experimental implementations on several leading hardware platforms. In addition,
the Institute will work to address the shortage of talent caused by rapid growth
of quantum industry by training and mentoring graduate students and postdocs.
New K-12 curricula will make quantum concepts more attractive and accessible to
a diverse set of youth, ensuring the long-term future of the workforce.
University courses developed in partnership with minority-serving institutions
will engage a broader set of students in quantum science and technology.
Workshops and degree programs for professionals will offer a clear perspective
on the possible utility of quantum science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for Robust Quantum Simulation
will use quantum simulation to gain insight into, and thereby exploit, the rich
behavior of complex quantum systems. Combining expertise in computer science,
engineering, and physics, the team will address the grand challenge of robustly
simulating classically intractable quantum systems of practical interest by
exploring the theoretical foundations of quantum algorithms and error correction
in conjunction with experimental implementations of reconfigurable quantum
simulators on four leading hardware platforms: trapped ions, arrays of Rydberg
atoms, quantum photonics with solid-state defects, and superconducting circuits.
The team will employ tight collaboration between theory and experiment to co-
design near-term simulation protocols with current and next-generation devices,
with joint development of optical and microwave control techniques across
different experimental platforms facilitating rapid advances in system size and
controllability. Three major challenges facing the attempts to realize quantum
simulators will be addressed: verifying the correctness of quantum simulations,
characterizing and mitigating noise, and developing large-scale systems capable
of advancing science and technology. Researchers will engage the broader
research community with events including summer schools and a new flagship
conference on quantum simulation. They will create outreach and education
programs that engage diverse groups of students in quantum science, introduce
cross-disciplinary undergraduate specializations in quantum information, and
provide quantum information training for postgraduates and
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.