* 2120375
* RCN-UBE Incubator:  Transforming Assessment and Feedback in Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Michele Lemons, Assumption College
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 04/30/2022
* USD 74,960.00

The Nation needs more STEM graduates in order to meet workforce needs and
address societal challenges such as climate change and new infectious diseases.
It is very common for students to begin study in these fields only to abruptly
leave after a few courses, and this attrition disproportionately affects already
underrepresented students such as women and students of color. One possible
explanation is that undergraduate biology education largely relies on high-
stakes quizzes and exams that students find demotivating, creating an
intimidating “weed out” culture. This is dismaying but at the same time, these
students must master a high degree of content to successfully transition from
community colleges to four-year programs and then to post-baccalaureate science
programs or careers. This Research Coordination Network will advance
undergraduate biology education by creating a network of scholars not only from
biology but also from the field of the scholarship of teaching and learning
(SoTL) to identify and facilitate educator use of more effective, nontraditional
approaches to assessment, grading, and feedback that nonetheless respect the
constraints presented by a comprehensive biology education. The goal of this
project is to improve assessment and feedback in undergraduate biology education
such that we expand and diversify students studying in these fields while not
sacrificing standards of excellence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A diverse network
representing institutions ranging from community colleges to primarily
undergraduate liberal arts colleges to HBCUs to large research-focused
universities will pursue the following aims: establish the research network; use
quantitative and qualitative designs within these diverse range of institutions
to identify sources of problematic assessments and feedback, use of novel
approaches, and barriers to implementation of innovations; present at several
leading biology and teaching conferences the insights on current barriers and
challenges to undergraduate biology assessment and feedback; and use data
gathered to formulate a full proposal that will implement and test effectiveness
of novel approaches. The purpose of the current incubator is to clarify the
current state in undergraduate biology education—the traditional methods still
being used, new methods being attempted and their relative successes and
failures, and the constraints and barriers particular to the study of biology
that should be kept in mind in the development of any new tools. The results
will form the basis for a larger study which will develop and test the
effectiveness of new tools for assessment and feedback that encourage rather
than discourage wide participation in the study of biology, thereby improving
student learning and performance and producing a better prepared and more
diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure as
part of efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.