* 2120499
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences for Students Underrepresented in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Prabir Mandal, Edward Waters College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2023
* USD 75,000.00

The goal of this project is to establish multi-faceted course-based
undergraduate research experiences in cellular genetics and socio-biology for
students underrepresented in biology. Community colleges serve almost half of
the undergraduates in the U.S., including many minority low-income, first-
generation, and underrepresented students, and many of these students are
pursuing careers in biology. In this rapidly changing field, it is important
that community college faculty have up-to-date teaching materials that reflect
the most recent discoveries in biology and innovative data-analysis approaches.
This network will bring appropriate teaching materials and offer professional
development with the goal of incorporating cutting-edge biology research and
high-impact teaching practices to improve student outcomes. Empowering community
college faculty to increase student success will have a significant impact on
the qualifications and diversity of the science and technology workforce. This
project will take place at Edward Waters College, distinctively the state of
Florida’s first independent institution of higher learning as well as Florida’s
first institution established for the education of African Americans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide-spread use of DNA sequence data to enhance
biological understanding, brings unique challenges for biology educators. Skills
from computer and data sciences have become core competencies for students even
though many biology faculty completed formal training without the computational
expertise needed to effectively engage in this field. This network will bring
together members of OMICS ((proteomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics))
education networks, leveraging their combined expertise to identify and curate
common analysis tools, associated curricular and assessment materials, and
faculty training strategies to facilitate the adoption of OMICS instruction. By
making existing resources accessible, the network will enable current faculty to
guide undergraduate biology students participating in authentic research
projects. Such work will enhance the ability of students to become productive
members of the technological work-force, to succeed in post-graduation studies
in biology and related disciplines, and to be better informed citizens and
decision makers. The network will develop a consensus set of vetted resources
and training materials to be disseminated to the education community through a
single web portal for use in undergraduate classrooms. The network will also
advance preparation of adjunct biology faculty and recruitment of future junior
faculty, who might not otherwise have the opportunity to build relationships
with tenured faculty around the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.