* 2120751
* Enhancing Student Help-Seeking Behavior and Reinforcing Problem-Solving Skills in Online Mathematics Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Kiran Bhutani, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,953.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula in
online remedial mathematics education for first-year college students. The
project will encourage students to develop positive help-seeking behavior,
improve first-year student preparation for challenging STEM gateway courses, and
equip students with skills to succeed in an increasingly technology-enhanced
academic environment. COVID-19 has forced institutions of higher education to
conduct academic instruction in online distance-learning environments. With much
of this work being asynchronous and learner-led, it is increasingly necessary
that students possess or develop instrumental help-seeking behavior (defined as
requesting assistance to promote understanding and guide one’s future
performance) to succeed in the isolated online environment. Specifically, the
project will conduct an exploratory research study that investigates: (a) help-
seeking behavior among students in need of math review, (b) points at which
students elect to seek help and why, and (c) how instructors and curriculum
designers can influence students to adopt instrumental help-seeking behavior in
online remote learning. Help-seeking behavior will be further facilitated by
enhancing existing online precalculus learning modules to include data-supported
prompts (e.g. intrusive advising, automated reminders, instructional videos on
help-seeking behavior). Participation in the study will be aided by an
intentional recruitment strategy and fee waivers for the online course to 210
total students (70 per year) to ensure a statistically significant number of
students participate in this exploratory research project. This project aims to
achieve a short-term outcome of 80% of students successfully completing the
online curriculum with a grade of “Pass” (from a baseline of 70%) and a midterm
outcome of 80% of completers passing Calculus I with a C or better (from a
baseline of 73%).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of this three-year
project, the project team will use an iterative process to create and improve a
conceptual model about relationships between help-seeking behaviors, instructor
strategies, and short- and long-term outcomes for college students in STEM
fields. Although there is a robust body of research examining help-seeking
behaviors in elementary and high school students, there is a paucity of research
examining help-seeking behaviors of postsecondary students in online STEM
courses. Now that online learning has increased exponentially due to the
pandemic, students potentially have even more access to sources of help,
including instructor, peer, and anonymous online (automated) sources like
websites. The benefits of online computer-mediated help-seeking behaviors, such
as via email, are not yet clear. However, researchers have found that college
students enrolled in courses with online components experienced less help-
seeking threat than students in typical classrooms did, and they preferred to
seek help electronically. The current gap in the literature is how to influence
students to adopt positive help-seeking behavior deliberately in an online
higher education learning environment. The project will shed light onto this
highly relevant and understudied area. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.