* 2120417
* RCN-UBE: Bringing CRISPR-Cas9 technologies to the undergraduate classroom: an undergraduate instructors' network
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* Donna Pattison, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 11/30/2026
* USD 499,218.00

The CRISPR in the Classroom Network seeks to expand current undergraduate
laboratory curriculum to include CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technology. In the
last decade, CRISPR-Cas9 has become a mainstream technique in molecular biology,
and a basic understanding of the methodology is essential for our undergraduates
to enter research careers workforce-ready. However, as is the case with any new
technology, course instructors need access to training, professional development
opportunities, and support to bring CRISPR-Cas9 into their curricula, which is
not always readily available. This CRISPR in the Classroom network will provide
flexible, easily adapted curriculum and mentoring to instructors and start-up
kits to overcome the hurdles associated with learning and testing new curriculum
in class. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the program include the
development of a national network of biology educators at both two- and four-
year institutions dedicated to the development and implementation of laboratory
activities centered on experiential-based work with CRISPR-Cas9 and the creation
of an online repository of CRISPR-Cas9 based modules across multiple model
systems through the NSF-Supported Quantitative Undergraduate Biology Education
and Synthesis (QUBES) Hub. A series of workshops will be offered to instructors,
postdoctoral fellows, and graduate students to provide the necessary training
and mentoring needed to be comfortable implementing CRISPR-Cas9 into the
curriculum. As instructors modify the curriculum to fit their institutions and
resources, the QUBES site will provide a central, searchable location to share
their work where other laboratory instructors can find modules and a community
of support as they work to ensure their undergraduate curriculum is on the
cutting-edge of science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the
challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call
to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/). This project is also supported
by the NSF HSI and and IUSE:EHR programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.