* 2120441
* RAPID: Impact of Hurricanes Eta and Iota on Lake Yojoa
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Edward Hall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robyn Smyth
* 10/31/2023
* USD 235,115.00

Global change is rapidly altering many tropical ecosystems with little
understanding of how those changes impact the characteristics of those
ecosystems and the services they provide. An important force in this change is
the increase in hurricane frequency and intensity. In November of 2020, two
hurricanes (Eta and Iota) moved from the Caribbean basin to across the Honduran
mainland in quick succession. Each hurricane generated massive rainfall as it
downgraded to a tropical storm and flooded the Sula Valley in north-central
Honduras. Lake Yojoa, located in north central Honduras, the only natural lake
in Honduras, has been home to human populations for &gt; 4000 years, and as
such, carries an important sense of place for many Hondurans. Addressing
challenges of global freshwater sustainability requires an intimate
understanding of ecosystems from across the globe. This RAPID will assess how
the increasingly frequent massive rainfall events caused by the recent
hurricanes impacts tropical aquatic ecosystems by altering the physical dynamics
and water chemistry of tropical lakes and the watersheds that sustain
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID represents a unique opportunity to close
knowledge gaps at the intersection of three deficits in the current
understanding of freshwater ecosystems. First, tropical lakes that experience
stratification and mixus are understudied compared to their temperate
counterparts. Second, lake ecosystems are rarely considered in the context of
the watersheds within which they reside. Third, in order to fully understand the
impact of global change on aquatic ecosystems, time-series data that can
distinguish between intra-annual and inter-annual variability are necessary.
This project addresses the impact of two large hurricanes on a monomictic
tropical lake in Central America (Lake Yojoa) and its watershed. In doing so, it
provides the opportunity to a) advance our understanding of the biogeochemistry
of tropical monomictic lakes, b) identify key linkages between watershed-
derived-allochthonous nutrient delivery and internal lake biogeochemical
dynamics and c) identify the impact of hurricanes on tropical watersheds and the
lakes they contain. By rapidly deploying a lake and watershed sampling design
and comparing contemporary dynamics to analyses conducted previous to the
hurricanes, this RAPID will advance our understanding of these important
knowledge gaps within the context of the current understanding of tropical
freshwater ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.