* 2120510
* Multi-Scalar, Multi-Stakeholder Environmental Governance of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances(PFAS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Phil Brown, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 498,925.00

PFAS (per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances) are one of the most significant
contamination crises of the century, impacting the drinking water of an
estimated 200 million U.S. residents and inspiring multiple epidemiological,
toxicological, exposure, and fate and transport studies as well as action by
dozens of grassroots organizations, regulation at the state and federal level,
and class action lawsuits. PFAS pose significant risks to human health and the
environment because of their extremely high environmental persistence,
bioaccumulation, and documented toxic effects at low doses. In response to a
legacy of limited federal governance of PFAS, there is unprecedented state and
local action, and presently there is a renewal of federal action. A growing
number of states have established regulatory limits on PFAS in drinking water,
placed restrictions on PFAS use in various products, set up blood and water
testing projects, funded remediation activities, and carried out public
education campaigns. This research will aid the public in learning about the
wide range of governance actions on PFAS by studying how these governance
activities are taking place both at multiple scales and across multiple
stakeholder groups. It will help government agencies understand factors involved
in PFAS governance. It will inform state agencies of the realm of other
regulatory and non-regulatory actions, and enable them to seek and act upon the
resources they need. The publicly available PFAS Governance Database created
through this research will allow for broader public and academic understanding
of the issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use in-depth interviews,
observations, and analysis of governance documents to investigate the variety of
regulatory and non-regulatory (monitoring, funding, remediation) approaches at
federal, state, and local levels taken across the U.S., including the option of
inaction. The resulting PFAS Governance Database will facilitate analysis of the
diffusion and growth of governance responses across space and time. The project
will further investigate the governance activities of scientists, elected
officials, lawyers and court systems, labor groups, corporations, trade groups,
activists, and peri-governmental groups such as standard-setting organizations.
The project will also identify barriers to coordination and collaboration across
governance scales and stakeholders, such as variation in expertise, agency
willingness to act, and budgetary constraints. By examining how these
differences impact public health protections, the research will identify
barriers to meaningful public health protection and equitable involvement in
governance activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.