* 2120400
* CCRI: NEW: CLASSNET: Community Labeling and Sharing of Security and Networking Test datasets
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* John Heidemann, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Community Labeling and Sharing of Security and Networking Test datasets
(CLASSNET) project will provide new, labeled, rich and diverse datasets to the
research community to support network and security research. The project will
develop a framework for collaborative, community-driven enrichment and labeling
of data, enabling use of these datasets for machine learning (ML) in networking
and security. Furthermore, the CLASSNET project will make data available to
researchers through multiple methods, ensuring privacy of data while enabling
flexible data computation. The project will also generate diverse continuous
(constantly, automatically updated) and curated (selected by human) datasets for
research use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CLASSNET project will innovate in dimensions
of data labeling, data distribution and data sources. In data labeling, the
CLASSNET collaborative framework will provide a low-friction framework for
sharing annotations among researchers. The framework will incentivize labeling
with feedback mechanisms and user credits, and support bulk, automatic,
algorithmic labeling. In data distribution, CLASSNET will support multiple ways
of data access, ranging from downloading anonymized data to processing data in
the cloud, on provider machines or via the code-to-data approach. Finally,
CLASSNET data sources will provide new, diverse, continuous, and curated
datasets that are useful for network and security research, including traffic
packets and flows, network telescope data, Domain Name System (DNS) data and
Internet topology data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The immediate impact of this
project will include new types of labeled, curated and continuous datasets that
enable new security, networking, and ML research and education, impacting a
large community. The broader impact of this data will be to foster research and
education, which will make the Internet safer, more stable, and more secure, and
will increase the community's knowledge about the Internet. With the Internet's
importance for tele-work, tele-medicine, remote learning, e-commerce and
e-government, these improvements will have a broad societal impact. In addition,
CLASSNET datasets will support data-driven exercises for graduate and
undergraduate education, and new PhD research. CLASSNET project's innovations in
multiple pathways to data access, combined with The automated and incentivized
enrichment framework, will improve the state-of-the-art for responsible data
sharing in related disciplines of information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website will be
https://ant.isi.edu/classnet/. The website will remain operational after the
project completes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.