* 2120529
* Collaborative Research: A Comprehensive Dynamic Search Framework for Asynchronous Multi-Objective Multi-Agent Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Howard Choset, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2024
* USD 494,711.00

Natural disasters are causing significant economic and human losses more than
ever. The increase in frequency and intensity of these wide-scale disasters
places additional strains on rescue workers in their heroic struggle to save
lives and mitigate the impacts on health and the economy. As such, rescue
workers must make critical decisions at high tempo. In these scenarios,
information is key, and obtaining such information, as quickly as possible,
saves lives. Therefore, this project develops search methods that can direct
multiple heterogeneous agents to efficiently search and acquire information.
This multi-agent planning is not just a problem in Humanitarian Assistance
Disaster Relief (HADR) missions, but also in customized manufacturing, critical
infrastructure management, pandemic response, automated construction of field
hospitals, and post-disaster forensics. Since lives are on the line, the
approaches used must not only find feasible paths that maximize the likelihood
of finding life, but also finds “best” possible solutions within a given
response time. Therefore, this project seeks to create a comprehensive framework
to address a wide family of multi-agent multi-objective planning problems
operating under several logistic constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project investigates how to couple, partially
decouple, or completely decouple the coordinated planning of the agent's
trajectories, and therefore defer planning until absolutely needed. As such, the
work develops formal guarantees, either in terms of completeness and optimality
properties, or approximation bounds, for the sub-optimal solutions obtained for
various generalizations of the multi-agent problem. The performance of the
approaches will be corroborated through large-scale simulations, and experiments
on real robots. As part of the experimental process, this project will also
define relevant metrics against which the new methods will be measured. This
project will aim to substantiate that deferred planning, until necessary, offers
computational, as well as path quality, and efficacy, benefits for several
important generalizations of multi-agent path
finding&lt;br/&gt;problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed
and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.