* 2120858
* I-Corps:  Network-based artificial intelligence (AI) model that will enable rapid and detailed diagnosis and treatment recommendations for advanced cardiac disease patients
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Martin Cadeiras, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of digital interventions to detect and deliver early treatment
recommendations for advanced cardiac disease. Through the use of artificial
intelligence, it is possible address one of the most pressing healthcare burdens
in the United States by detecting trajectories of chronic heart disease early.
As a result, this technology would enable multiple applications including, but
not limited to, reductions in healthcare-related costs, chronic disease burden,
specialist care gaps, and time to treatment. This proposed technology may
deliver a new era of software as a digital therapeutic, an area traditionally
reserved for non-chronic conditions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a software platform using neural network models
that leverage the use of biomarkers coupled with clinical vitals. Combining
molecular and clinical data applied through natural experimentation, has made it
is possible to understand the state changes of heart disease. Through the use of
deep neural network learning, the proposed project goal is to make algorithms
think and understand as humans by replicating the human brain connection and
focusing on learning state changes rather than task-specific algorithms.
Previous work on molecular profiling paired with clinical data within the realm
of heart transplantation has yielded promising results in creating new sub-
diagnosis as well as new artificial intelligence-guided therapy optimization
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.