* 2120235
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning: InfraStructure for Photorealistic Image and Environment Synthesis (I-SPIES)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Nicholas Gans, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 12,916.00

Numerous Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) research
communities leverage datasets comprised of visual images or 3D virtual
environments to conduct research in computer vision, robotics, multimedia
systems, virtual reality, and mixed reality. Many of these datasets consist of
either images previously captured with cameras and other optical sensors, or
synthetic images previously rendered from 3D virtual environments. The static
nature of these datasets limits their usefulness and potential applications.
Recently, some researchers have provided datasets and tools for synthesizing new
images from 3D virtual environments using customizable virtual camera positions,
which broadens their research applications. However, many of these datasets
consist of lower-fidelity indoor virtual environments that yield non-
photorealistic images. Furthermore, such datasets are missing outdoor virtual
environments, and tools for sharing custom camera positions within the research
community are not currently available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning
project prepares to address the limitations of prior datasets by investigating
the feasibility of using high-quality terrestrial laser scanners to capture and
create high-fidelity, photorealistic virtual environments of real-world
locations, both indoor and outdoor. This will be coupled with surveys of the
relevant CISE research communities through workshops held at top academic
conferences. This project will result in the development of two preliminary
datasets, one indoor and one outdoor, using the proposed laser-scanner
methodology, and the identification of community needs, priorities, and support
for the proposed InfraStructure for Photorealistic Images and Environment
Synthesis (I-SPIES). Undergraduate students will be engaged in the development
of the preliminary datasets through the University of Central Floridaâ€™s EXCEL
STEM program, a former NSF STEP program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.