* 2120411
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: Open AI Cellular (OAIC): Prototyping Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Control and Testing Systems for Cellular Communications Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,015,947.00

This collaborative project brings together investigators from Mississippi State
University (MSU) and Virginia Tech (VT) to develop a software infrastructure
that spurs research and development on artificial intelligence (AI)-enabled
cellular radio networks. The main contribution is Open AI Cellular (OAIC), the
first fully open-source software architecture, library, and toolset that
encompass both the AI controllers (OAIC-C) as well as an AI testing framework
(OAIC-T) for enabling research on 6G Open Radio Access Networks. This project
puts the U.S. in the leading position of research, development, and testing of
AI-enhanced cellular networks, initiated and organized by a group of academics
and their collaborators and maintained by the wireless research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project (1) specifies the methodology along with the
technical requirements, a reference architecture and design to facilitate
collaborative software development; (2) designs and develops the fundamental
OAIC-C software library for common software-defined radio (SDR) platforms; (3)
facilitates systematic and exhaustive testing with the OAIC-T framework on
community wireless research testbeds that are accessible to researchers; (4)
develops verification tools and resources to facilitate rapid prototyping and
testing as well as offers a variety of user services, such as mailing lists,
code repositories, and learning material; and (5) implements a variety of
community engagement and outreach processes, including the organization of
workshops to engage with and leverage the community for long-term maintenance
and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OAIC enhances lecture material by
introducing hands-on laboratory sessions at MSU, VT, and collaborating
universities. Industry, standardization bodies, and regulators are regularly
informed about OAIC resources and projects, which can be leveraged for
determining important standardization and regulatory decisions related to 6G.
Other US agencies will be able to leverage OAIC and the community around it to
develop AI-enhanced cellular technology and systems for purposes such as
transportation and smart grid applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The code
repositories, documentation, and other material are maintained by the OAIC team
with contributions from the research community. The project website
(https://sites.google.com/msstate.edu/oaic) consolidates the OAIC project
information and provides links to all project deliverables and related
resources. The project repository/website maintenance is planned for several
years beyond the initial project timeline through the community ecosystem and
follow-up projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.