* 2120735
* RAPID: Return Migrants, Violent Electoral Politics and Electoral Integrity
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Clarisa Perez-Armendariz, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 08/31/2022
* USD 48,434.00

Electoral violence before, during, and after elections is common in middle-
income democracies that produce large numbers of international migrants who
retain social, political, and economic ties with those countries from abroad.
This project addresses whether return migrants can strengthen electoral
integrity and competition in countries at risk of electoral violence by
examining candidates who run for mayor in Mexico after living as immigrants in
the United States. Mexican mayoral candidates and their family members face
significant risks of being murdered or violently attacked; yet, as many as 30
percent of elected mayors previously lived in the US. The project examines
whether return-migrant candidates have access to resources and capacities that
enhance resilience against violence and the ability to accommodate violent
actors, advancing knowledge relevant to policies on migration management and the
reduction of electoral violence's negative repercussions on democratic
competition and electoral integrity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine return
migrants in the context of violent elections, this project surveys a national
sample of approximately 1,100 mayoral candidates during the two months leading
up to Mexico's 2021 election. Respondents are drawn from a list of 2,100
candidates developed using a stratified sampling design that involves a random
selection from each Mexican state's official candidate registry with an
oversampling from municipalities with higher migration. Survey questions address
personal migration experiences and access to migration-driven resources and
capacities, including cross-border networks, migration-generated wealth,
experiences with crime and criminal justice in the United States, and facilities
for crossing the US-Mexico border. Candidates are also asked about other factors
that influence candidates' choices to run for office, such as political
socialization within Mexico, party affiliation, personal attributes, and socio-
economic status. The survey data are merged with publicly available municipal-
level data for analysis. As the first large-n survey in the world that examines
candidates' migration experiences extensively, the project provides
methodological lessons for future surveys in other countries affected by
migration to the US and electoral violence, including El Salvador, Honduras,
Nicaragua, and Guatemala.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.