* 2120701
* MCA: Fabrication of Structural Organic Supercapacitors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tse Nga Ng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 09/30/2024
* USD 380,033.00

Energy storage devices that offer fast charging and long lifetime are essential
for powering wireless electronics in our daily lives. This award supports
fundamental research on energy storage technologies based on structural
supercapacitors, which will potentially provide high peak power for rapid
charging and extend device lifetime to minimize maintenance costs. Structural
supercapacitors are multi-functional devices that integrates mechanical and
electrochemical functions, reducing weight and maximizing the use of structural
space to increase the available energy capacity. However, there are knowledge
gaps on how to design and fabricate this class of devices. This project will
contribute new knowledge related to electrodeposition processing that enables
precise tuning of materials and device structures to attain unprecedented energy
density and mechanical strength in a new generation of structural
supercapacitors. The research and outreach activities will engage under-
represented students and foster the training and development of a future diverse
workforce that works towards energy sustainability, promoting our national
welfare and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
precisely create hierarchical composites and attain the desired mechanical and
electrochemical attributes by building on uniquely stable redox polymers and
scalable electrodeposition techniques. The research team will establish
systematic design principles for the cell subcomponents (electrodes and
electrolytes) and, when the cell is put together, examine the entire structure
by ultrasound diagnostics to understand interfacial interactions and evaluate
the cell multifunctional efficiency. Non-destructive, low-cost ultrasound
techniques will directly probe the device mechanical properties and reveal their
changes over time, particularly to identify chemical versus structural
degradation mechanisms that must be mitigated to achieve long cycle life and
highly durable systems. This project merges the fields of electrochemical
storage with material mechanics in convergence research, to deliver structure-
processing-property relationships for organic structural supercapacitors and a
blueprint for practical fabrication processes compatible with manufacturing in
the future. The project will also allow the principal investigator to enhance
her research program through partnerships with investigators at other
institutions, building expertise to address the challenges of fabricating
structural energy storage devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.