* 2120115
* Understanding Social Dynamics Through Coevolving Latent Space Networks With Attractors
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Kolaczyk, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 449,985.00

This research project will develop a general class of coevolving network models.
In social systems, interactions frequently influence individual behavior and
beliefs which can, in turn, impact interactions. Specific variants of this type
of coevolutionary phenomenon include opinion dynamics, voter behavior,
observational learning, herding or flocking, and polarization. Network-based
models are natural for representing such phenomena, and relevant work can be
found in both the mathematical and statistical literatures (among others).
However, coevolving network models are substantially less well-developed than
models for networks of other types (e.g., static networks) and they are more
complex to analyze and understand. This project will develop a model class that
integrates central elements of the mathematical and statistical coevolving
network modeling literatures. The models will be used to examine polarization in
two online social network data sets, Twitter for Congress and Reddit. The
project will involve a collaboration between statistical, mathematical,
political, and computational social scientists. Graduate students will receive
cross-disciplinary training in these areas. Publicly available software will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will develop a general new
class of coevolving latent space network with attractors (CLSNA) models for
social systems. The development of the CLSNA model class will result in a new
type of causal modeling framework, explicitly combining dynamical systems
modeling from mathematics with hierarchical modeling and inference from
statistics. The former will allow the investigators to incorporate
mathematically precise notions of social dynamics, like attraction and
repulsion. The latter will permit computationally tractable and theoretically
supported methods for statistical inference. In this project, the investigators
will: (i) develop the modeling and statistical inference methodology for CLSNA
models, with an emphasis on flocking and polarization; (ii) study the resulting
behaviors allowed by this class, through a combination of both numerical and
mathematical techniques; and (iii) assess empirically in online social media
data the nature and extent of specific coevolutionary behaviors using these
models. The models to be developed will be general and quite broadly applicable.
The investigators, however, plan to focus initial applications on the context of
affective polarization using online social network data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.