* 2120721
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Responsible Critical Elements: Transforming Earth Resource Development for a Carbon-Neutral Future
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Roderick Eggert, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,076,386.00

This Growing Convergence Research project addresses the grand challenge of
rising demand for “critical minerals” essential to the energy transition.
Policymakers in the United States and worldwide have called for net-zero carbon
emissions by 2050 to slow the rate of global warming, but the transition to
renewable energy and zero-carbon will be metal and mineral intensive. Demand is
forecasted to increase by nearly 500% for some of the elements required for
renewable energy and energy storage, such as cobalt, gallium, germanium, indium,
tellurium, and vanadium. Although new approaches to generate supply of critical
minerals are likely to secure resources and economic benefits, they also carry
potential for significant environmental and social impacts, unevenly distributed
across landscapes and communities. This project seeks ways to disrupt the
historical pattern of environmental injustices inflicted on marginalized
communities during earth resource development, by identifying approaches to
responsibly secure the domestic supply of critical
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work brings together cultural anthropology,
environmental sociology, mineral economics, natural resources and energy policy,
economic geology, mining engineering, civil and geological engineering, mineral
processing and extractive metallurgy, environmental engineering, and
environmental conservation and management. Through convergence among the
paradigms of resource efficiency, sustainable development, and environmental
justice, the team will evaluate three scenarios: 1) new mines targeting a
critical element as the main commodity; 2) byproduct recovery of critical
elements from existing mining operations; and 3) critical element recovery from
historic mine wastes. For each scenario, researchers will elucidate the
characteristics and material flows of critical elements, the required mining and
metallurgical recovery processes, and the environmental, social, and economic
implications of production. They will apply their convergent approach in the
classroom to prepare a new generation of leaders, and will use this approach to
bring together community stakeholders, the extractive industries, governmental
agencies, and policymakers to transform earth resource development. This
proposal is co-funded by the division of Earth Sciences, Petrology &amp;
Geochemistry Program and Geobiology &amp; Low-Temperature Geochemistry
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.