* 2120677
* MCA: A Meta-analytic approach to resolving mechanisms of plant-soil-herbivore interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Jennifer Krumins, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 241,421.00

Plants and their associated soils are in a close bidirectional relationship, and
this relationship is affected by organisms such as herbivores that consume
plants. Feeding by herbivores may influence the numbers and species of plants
present in the ecosystem. However, consistent relationships between feeding by
herbivores does and the composition or functioning of the soil community have
not yet been described. The resolution of this paradox is a fascinating
ecological question because indirect effects among organisms are tricky to
resolve, but it is also important from a human perspective due to the potential
implications to soil properties. For example, changes in soil functioning can
influence agricultural success or carbon storage for climate mitigation. In
addition, human demographic patterns and shifts in land use have markedly
changed the distribution of wild herbivores and livestock, making this a more
urgent problem. Therefore, the need to define the role of herbivory on soils and
their functioning is profound. This research will tease apart and define the
effect of herbivory on soil community composition and functioning as it occurs
across varied environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions among herbivores,
plants, and soils are driven by gradients of multi-variate factors, both biotic
and abiotic, and establishing controlled and repeatable experiments to capture
these factors is expensive and challenging. Modern and diverse data sets from
prior manipulative and observational herbivore experiments are abundant.
However, when considered in isolation, individual experiments typically reveal
inconsistent and weak responses in the soil. This research will compile and
analyze a large number of experimental and observational data sets, thus
revealing the full continuum of biotic and abiotic influences of herbivores on
the soil. Specifically, the methods will include a regression based and multi-
variate meta-analytic approach. In so doing, the following research goals will
be addressed: First, meta-analytic regression will capture non-linear or
indirect effects of herbivory on soil functioning. Second, multivariate
herbivore effects will be explored with respect to both abiotic environmental
variables and community level interaction variables, i.e. nutrient flux via
dung, trampling or seed dispersal. In partnership with a world expert in meta-
analysis, this research will gather diverse data sets to resolve the most
elusive mechanisms explaining the link between herbivory and soil ecosystem
functioning. The outcome of this work will be a substantial and publicly
available database in addition to student training and numerous scientific
publications and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.