* 2120001
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Broadening Career Pathways in Food, Energy, and Water Systems with and within Native American Communities (Native FEWS Alliance)
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Carrie Billy, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2026
* USD 3,377,549.00

The Native FEWS (Food, Energy, Water Systems) Alliance is focused on innovative
research and community partnerships linking two interconnected challenges: a
crisis in access to food, energy, and water in Indigenous communities; and
limited educational and career pathways available to Indigenous populations to
address these needs. The disproportionate number of Indigenous people who have
being negatively impacted by climate change, the on-going COVID-19 pandemic, and
pollution on tribal lands demonstrate the urgent need for effective solutions.
Currently, there are limited institutional pathways for Native Americans and
other underrepresented students to pursue environmental careers. The University
of California at Berkeley, University of Arizona and American Indian Higher
Education Consortium will work with over 20 partners to significantly broaden
the opportunities for participation and the ecosystem of research and practice
training by and for Native Americans and other underrepresented student groups.
A focus will be on students who possess, and those who seek, the necessary
training and preparation to address these critical challenges. Through the
application of culturally-relevant approaches (successfully developed and
evaluated by partners at all levels of the educational continuum), the Alliance
will develop curricula and mentoring guides, offer workshops, adapt and adopt
best practices, and share results. These activities will enable institutions
across the country to access Native FEWS educational and mentoring materials.
Broadening participation will produce greater diversity of thought and generate
culturally relevant sustainable solutions that are applicable to local
communities yet can be used as a basis for applications more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mainstream science and technology programs have to
date been ineffective in responding to Indigenous challenges at the nexus of
food, energy, water systems (FEWS), and do not adequately serve or engage
Indigenous communities. The result is a deepening of social alienation and
professional marginalization of Indigenous youth. The Native FEWS Alliance will
integrate place-based approaches to teaching and diversity with applied research
and Indigenous knowledges to transform FEWS education to be more relevant to
Indigenous communities. The implementation plan is designed to produce more
successful recruitment, matriculation, retention, and degree attainment
outcomes. By bringing together the resources, expertise and experiences of
multiple educational institutions and stakeholders who all share a proven track
record in widening pathways for Indigenous students, the Alliance will develop a
Networked Improvement Community to achieve the following interrelated goals:
Address urgent FEWS challenges in Indigenous communities; Co-develop integrated,
Indigenous, place-based FEWS curricula, mentoring, and practice experiences;
Transform institutional science and technology fields to be relevant and
accessible to Indigenous communities; and Recruit, retain and graduate
Indigenous students to pursue higher education and careers in FEWS and bring
their knowledge back to their communities. Alliance initiatives will be
rigorously evaluated and disseminated, contributing new knowledge to the
research base of effective practices in recruiting, teaching, and mentoring
Native American students and professionals, and in building ethical, effective
co-designed partnerships. The forms of dissemination will include publications,
case studies, curricula, guidebooks, webinars, podcasts and multimedia resources
for Indigenous stakeholders and to educate the wider sustainability science
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is funded by NSF
Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented
Discoverers in Engineering and Science (NSF INCLUDES), a comprehensive national
initiative to enhance U.S. leadership in discoveries and innovations by focusing
on diversity, inclusion and broadening participation in STEM at scale and co-
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.