* 2120386
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: ENS: Boa 2.0: Enhancing Infrastructure for Studying Software and its Evolution at a Large Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tien Nguyen, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 448,168.00

In todayâ€™s software-centric world, ultra-large-scale software repositories, e.g.
GitHub, with hundreds of thousands of projects each, are the new library of
Alexandria. They contain an enormous corpus of software and information about
software. Scientists and engineers alike are interested in analyzing this wealth
of information both for curiosity as well as for testing important research
hypotheses. However, the current barrier to entry is prohibitive and only a few
with well-established infrastructure and deep expertise can attempt such ultra-
large-scale analysis. Necessary expertise includes: programmatically accessing
version control systems, data storage and retrieval, data mining, and
parallelization. The need to have expertise in these four different areas
significantly increases the cost of scientific research that attempts to answer
research questions involving ultra-large-scale software repositories. As a
result, experiments are often not replicable, and reusability of experimental
infrastructure low. Furthermore, data associated and produced by such
experiments is often lost and becomes inaccessible and obsolete, because there
is no systematic curation. Last but not least, building analysis infrastructure
to process ultra-large-scale data efficiently can be very hard.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue to enhance the CISE research
infrastructure called Boa to aid and assist with such research. This next
version of Boa will be called Boa 2.0 and it will continue to be globally
disseminated. The project will further develop the programming language also
called Boa, that can hide the details of programmatically accessing version
control systems, data storage and retrieval, data mining, and parallelization
from the scientists and engineers and allow them to focus on the program logic.
The project will also enhance the data mining infrastructure for Boa, and a
BIGDATA repository containing millions of open source project for analyzing
ultra-large-scale software repositories to help with such experiments. The
project will integrate Boa 2.0 with the Center for Open Science Open Science
Framework (OSF) to improve reproducibility and with the national computing
resource XSEDE to improve scalability. The broader impacts of Boa 2.0 stem from
its potential to enable developers, designers and researchers to build
intuitive, multi-modal, user-centric, scientific applications that can aid and
enable scientific research on individual, social, legal, policy, and technical
aspects of open source software development. This advance will primarily be
achieved by significantly lowering the barrier to entry and thus enabling a
larger and more ambitious line of data-intensive scientific discovery in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.