* 2120299
* NSF-BSF: The biomechanics of long-distance flight in large beetles: Do smaller individuals fly better?
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Roi Gurka, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 09/30/2025
* USD 258,344.00

Insects have a tremendous effect on the world’s agriculture and forests. Their
main dispersal mechanism is by flight, and some insects are capable of prolonged
flights enabling them to disperse distances of tens of miles in a single flight.
This study will examine how larval growth conditions leads to variation in the
body size of adult beetles and how this variation in body mass affects their
dispersal capabilities and endurance for prolonged flights. The merit of the
proposed work is its aim at understanding the relationship between the unsteady
aerodynamics of insects during flight and their energy expenditure. Cutting edge
tools will be used to measure and model the unsteady aerodynamics and flight
energetics associated with flapping flight at an insect size scale. The insights
from the study are expected to shed light on the factors contributing to
dispersal of pest insects between infected areas, allowing design of science-
based management programs for forests and parks. It will also provide guidelines
for the design requirements for efficient flapping unmanned aerial vehicles with
improved prolonged flight capabilities. The work is interdisciplinary (Biology,
Engineering) and will foster a synergistic international collaboration between
Israeli and US undergraduate and graduate students. The results of the study
will be disseminated to the scientific community in peer-reviewed journals and
scientific conferences and to the general public through social media, websites
and outreach programs in both countries. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
physiological and aerodynamic mechanisms improving flight endurance in insects
are unclear due to limited understanding of the complex aerodynamic interaction
between them and the wind during forward flapping flight. The proposed research
will examine the flight behavior, aerodynamics, and energetics of the mango stem
borer (Batocera rufomaculata), focusing on how intraspecific variation in body
mass affects the ability to disperse large distances by flight. B. rufomaculata
is a large tree-boring beetle with larvae developing inside the stem of fig
trees. Nutrient-deprived larvae developing inside dead host trees emerge as
smaller adults with improved long-distance flight capabilities compared to
larger adults emerging from live host trees. The study hypothesizes that smaller
beetles are more efficient long-distance flyers due to favorable scaling of
aerodynamics and flapping kinematics. To test this hypothesis, the beetles will
be tethered in a wind tunnel to fly at their preferred flight speed, in a set-up
allowing correlation of their flapping kinematics (using high-speed cameras),
the forces they produce during flight (using force transducers), and the flow
fields formed in their unsteady wake (using particle image velocimetry, PIV)
while measuring their metabolic energy expenditure using a technique based on a
13C isotope. These data will be complemented with numerical simulations of the
beetle in forward flapping flight, providing benchmarks for the fluid-beetle
interaction characteristics. Finally, the flight of beetles in the field will be
tracked using radio telemetry, and the allometry of flight-related traits will
be evaluated. The results are expected to reveal the processes determining the
relationship between larval development and insect flight
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.