* 2120495
* RCN-UBE: Sustainable, Transformative Engagement across a Multi-Institution and Multidisciplinary STEM Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Michael Pullin, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,680.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing new opportunities
for faculty members to transform undergraduate biology education. A group of
institutions (the “Network”) on New York’s Long Island seeks to show that
multiple levels of transformation can occur through collaborations among
biology, chemistry, and math faculty at two- and four-year institutions. First,
the Network’s focus on the first two years of undergraduate biology education
will make a biology degree more attainable. Second, the multidisciplinary
approach extends the of the project impacts to other STEM disciplines. And
third, the multi-institution collaborations support student transfer from two-
to four-year institutions. It is anticipated that student academic success and
retention will increase which, in turn, will help meet the need for a larger and
more diverse STEM workforce. The Network will focus on the important and pivotal
role faculty members play in restructuring undergraduate biology
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Sustainable, Transformative, Engagement
across a Multi-Institution and Multi-disciplinary STEM (STEM) Network is
grounded in three theoretical frameworks to develop faculty as change agents:
Communities of Transformation, Systems Design for Organizational Change, and
Emergent Outcomes for the Diffusion of STEM Innovations. The Network’s
structured group approach (i.e., interdisciplinary, and interinstitutional
working groups, institutional groups, and whole Network) and work across
multiple levels (individual classroom behaviors, curricular-level collaboration
across disciplines and institutions, and institutionalization of innovations)
create high potential to impact undergraduate biology education and advance
knowledge about processes and structures that promote institutional
transformation. The Network will be using quantitative and qualitative metrics
to understand the critical elements of the Network and provide an iterative
feedback and adjustment loop. The project benefits society by empowering faculty
to transform current classroom and institutional structures to create a more
equitable, inclusive STEM learning experience. This project is being jointly
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological
Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division
of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges
posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.