* 2120085
* Effects of experimental warming, disturbances, and species interactions on tropical tree community demography
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Tana Wood, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 334,985.00

Tropical forests are the most diverse ecosystems in the world with some forests
having hundreds of tree species per hectare. The maintenance of this diversity
is believed to depend upon complex interactions among species. However, the
relationships and interactions among species can be altered by climate change
and disturbances such as hurricanes that disrupt resource conditions that govern
seedling and sapling interactions in the forest understory. This project will
combine a shade house experiment with novel molecular approaches to study how
adult trees influence the interactions among seedlings of species on the forest
floor beneath their canopies. In addition to disentangling how disturbances and
warming may shift the strength and direction of relationships among species,
this project thus investigates how plants can control plant-plant interactions
by secreting specific molecules from their root tips. These secretions influence
which micro-organisms become common and these micro-organisms in turn influence
seedling success (either positively by promoting beneficial microbes, or
negatively by promoting pathogenic microbes). Specifically, seedlings of canopy
trees will be grown in pots at different densities in a shaded greenhouse under
a range of growing conditions to simulate global warming and changes in canopy
cover (light) that occur with hurricane removal of the adult tree canopy. They
will be grown in different combinations of density and with different
combinations of the field based micro-organisms that typically associate with
the roots of different species of adult trees. The outcome of this work will
help us to better predict whether tropical forests will maintain their high
level of diversity as the worldâ€™s climate continues to change and how changes in
light associated with canopy removal during hurricanes or cyclones can change
species relationships. In addition to the scientific benefits, this project will
offer educational and research opportunities to under-represented students. The
study site has an established successful internship program, where recently
graduated university students, primarily from Puerto Rico, are provided the
opportunity to participate in research. They will be offered the opportunity for
internships with the project and gain research experience from it. The team will
also collaborate with a non-profit organization in Puerto Rico to coordinate
field trips for elementary and middle school students to visit the research site
and learn about the project. Overall, this work will contribute to the
scientific and broader community understanding of what tropical forests might
look like in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The maintenance of
tropical forest diversity is hypothesized to rely on complex species
interactions such as mutualism, predation/pathogen attack, and competition, that
regulate seedling dynamics and tree species coexistence. These diversity
maintaining processes could be fundamentally altered under projected changes in
climate and disturbance regime, yet we have little understanding of how these
factors will act independently or in concert to affect biological diversity in
tropical forests. This project builds and expands upon an existing infrared
warming experiment (Tropical Response to Altered Climate Experiment, TRACE).
Based upon preliminary data, the team hypothesizes that the strength and
direction of density dependence changes with warming and disturbances because of
modifications in species interactions such as associations with mycorrhizal
fungi (H1), and that plants can in part control these changes through root
exudates (H2). This 2-year project combines a shade house experiment with -omic
approaches to evaluate how changes in light, density, microclimate and microbes
influence density dependence in different forest species. Specifically,
seedlings from tree species will be grown in pots subjected to two soil source
treatments (e.g. soil from warming versus control plots at the tRACE site), four
microbial treatments (no mycorrhizal fungi, no pathogens, no microbes, control),
three densities (low, medium, high), and two light treatments (low and high).
Broader impacts of the study will fall into three main foci 1) provide research
and educational opportunities in science, technology, engineering and math
(STEM) with an emphasis on diversity and inclusion, 2) community outreach and
education, and 3) generate research that will provide insight into the future of
tropical forested ecosystems in a changing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.