* 2120102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Demographic Patterns of Human Frailty
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 09/30/2022
* USD 25,194.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Differences in morbidity and mortality are influenced
by genetic, hormonal, behavioral, and environmental mechanisms. In nearly all
living human populations, females experience longer lifespans and lower
mortality risks, but perhaps unexpectedly, greater morbidities at some ages
compared to males. This doctoral dissertation research explores sex
differentials in mortality risk (i.e., frailty) to advance knowledge about the
advent and nature of the culturally-dependent female mortality advantage.
Analyses of skeletal collections from past populations are used to examine
temporal and contextual information on past biological and social factors that
increased mortality risks and affected demographic trends. Anthropological work
on the production of health disparities in the past can aid in the management of
modern public health challenges, including the production of current
differential health outcomes. Additionally, the research highlights the
connection between context-specific gender formations and physiological well-
being. The project also supports student scientific training and public science
education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project examines
the relationship between gendered experiences and physiological outcomes by
examining skeletal markers of morbidity, mortality, developmental stress, and
pubertal timing, using estimated sex as a proxy for gender. The researchers
investigate the antiquity of the modern female mortality advantage (i.e., did
females live longer, but have poorer overall health?) by elucidating the
biocultural and environmental factors involved in the production of sex-based
survival advantages. The project uses demographic data (age and sex) and markers
of skeletal stress to examine sex differentials in mortality risk across time
periods and regions and assess pubertal timing to better understand sex
disparities in standards of living. The project utilizes statistical models
(hazards analysis) suited to paleodemographic data, in conjunction with skeletal
and contextual evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.