* 2120194
* RAPID: The Impact of COVID on American Education in 2021: Continued Evidence from the Understanding America Study
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Anna Saavedra, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 02/28/2022
* USD 198,148.00

The COVID-19 epidemic has been a tremendous disruption to the education of U.S.
students and their families, and evidence suggests that this disruption has been
unequally felt across households by income and race/ethnicity. While other
ongoing data collection efforts focus on understanding this disruption from the
perspective of students or educators, less is known about the impact of COVID-19
on children’s prek-12 educational experiences as reported by their parents,
especially in STEM subjects. This study will build upon the team's prior
research from early in the pandemic. Researchers will continue to collect data
from families and aims to understand parents’ perspectives on the educational
impacts of COVID-19 by leveraging a nationally representative, longitudinal
study, the Understanding America Study (UAS). The study will track educational
experiences during the Spring and Summer of 2021 and into the 2021-22 school
year. The team will analyze outcomes overall and for key demographic groups of
interest as students and teachers return to in-person instruction during 2021.
This RAPID project allows critically important data to continue to be collected
and contribute to continued understanding of the impacts of and responses to the
pandemic by American families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since March of 2020, the
UAS has been tracking the educational impacts of COVID-19 for a nationally
representative sample of approximately 1,400 households with preK-12 children.
Early results focused on quantifying the digital divide and documenting the
receipt of important educational services--like free meals and special education
services--after COVID-19 began. This project will support the continued targeted
administration of UAS questions to parents about students’ learning experiences
and engagement, overall and in STEM subjects, data analysis, and dissemination
of results to key stakeholder groups. Findings will be reported overall and
across key demographic groups including ethnicity, disability, urbanicity, and
socioeconomic status. This project will also produce targeted research briefs
addressing pressing policy questions aimed at supporting intervention strategies
in states, districts, and schools moving forward. Widespread dissemination will
take place through existing networks and in collaboration with other research
projects focused on understanding the COVID-19 crisis. All cross-sectional and
longitudinal UAS data files will be publicly available shortly after conclusion
of administration so that other researchers can explore the correlates of, and
outcomes associated with, COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award is
made by the DRK-12 program in the Division of Research on Learning. The
Discovery Research PreK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics by
preK-12 students and teachers, through the research and development of new
innovations and approaches. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for the
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.