* 2120033
* GP-UP: RUI: ENHANCING UNDERREPRESENTED MINORITY PARTICIPATION IN STEM AND THE APPLIED GEOSCIENCES THROUGH INTEGRATED EXPERIENTIAL ACTIVITIES
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* J. Brian Mahoney, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society is facing significant
environmental challenges, including climate change, water scarcity and
contamination, resource depletion, major changes in global energy production,
and the long-term ecological impact of population growth. Mitigation of these
issues requires a diverse, globally-integrated professional workforce with a
strong background in applied geosciences. To meet the need for more
geoscientists, the field must broaden its search for future geoscientists by
purposefully recruiting individuals from historically excluded groups. The
primary objective of this program is to recruit, train and foster career success
among individuals from these groups in western Wisconsin and Minnesota. This
program establishes a progressive, multi-phase intentional educational pathway
designed to maximize student engagement and retention in the geosciences through
high-impact practices, hands-on learning, and dedicated mentorship. The bridge
program is a week-long Summer Institute in Applied Geoscience based at the
University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire that will use inquiry-based activities in the
natural setting of the Upper Midwest to introduce prospective undergraduate
students to the relevance of the earth sciences and potential geoscience
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program has the potential for long-term,
significant enhancement in the diversity of the Department of Geology and the
University through the establishment of pipelines between UW-Eau Claire and
regional high schools serving students from historically excluded populations.
The proposed pathway entails 1) recruitment of high school juniors into a summer
bridge program; 2) matriculation to UW- Eau Claire; 3) participation in a
Foundational Research Experience immediately prior to their 1st year of college;
4) a college experience characterized by intentional peer and faculty mentoring
and high-impact practices, and 5) career development. The project will directly
involve at least five Department faculty and staff, including an Early Career
female geoscientist, eighteen (18) undergraduate students, and a number of UW-
Eau Claire co-curricular staff over a three-year period. This team will work
with ~54 high school students and ~9 high school science teachers from western
Wisconsin and eastern Minnesota during the project. Importantly, the strong
equity, diversity, and inclusivity framework at UW-Eau Claire will be leveraged
to continue this outreach program beyond the life of the
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.