* 2120015
* GP-UP: Geosciences Students Excelling in Real, Vital Investigations with Community Engagement (GEO SERVICE)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Hargrave, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,874.00

This project is jointly funded by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to
educational and workforce needs, the Geosciences Students Excelling in Real,
Vital Investigations with Community Engagement (GEO SERVICE) program aims to
increase the number of undergraduates pursuing a geoscience major at the
University of Louisiana at Lafayette by engaging students in career-relevant,
community-focused, extracurricular service- learning experiences. Many key
issues affect the recruiting of geoscience majors, including a lack of student
exposure during high school to geoscience-career related experiences and
pathways. GEO SERVICE will develop a bridge program for high school students to
engage into early service-learning experiences designed to address questions
relevant to the students as well as to their communities and regions. The
project activities involve accessing and analyzing diverse datasets applied to
answer specific questions about natural and/or human induced changes that affect
local and regional communities, such as coastal wetland loss and flooding
occurring in Louisiana. The project is designed to focus on undergraduate
research experiences, leading to engagement and sustained student interest in
STEM careers. The collaboration between undergraduate and graduate students,
University faculty, and community mentors promotes the development of skills
needed in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEO SERVICE project is an
effort to address the future STEM and geosciences workforce needs. The goal of
the GEO SERVICE program is to increase and retain the number of undergraduates
pursuing a geoscience major. The GEO SERVICE program partners undergraduate
students with faculty, graduate students, and community mentors in a program
that includes learning geosciences content relevant to addressing environmental
challenges, while engaged in broadly mentored, research-based, community-focused
Service Learning Projects (SLPs). Each SLP will comprise research, data
gathering, and problem solving, followed by preparation of final reports and
visual presentations for an Earth as Art exhibition. These activities described
above will meet the following objectives: 1) Recruit and sustain pre-college and
early college students into undergraduate geoscience programs. 2) Establish new
projects that integrate undergraduate research experiences with community-
focused service learning for collaborative cohorts of geoscience students, with
mentoring by faculty, peers, and professionals. 3) Demonstrate career
opportunities through applied research addressing real-world problems. 4)
Provide students with experience designing projects, analyzing data, using
sophisticated career-relevant geospatial technology, and preparing effective
presentations. 5) Improve the understanding of geosciences information among
diverse communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.