* 2120878
* RUI: Characterizing DNA target search using single molecule methods
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Allen Price, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2024
* USD 378,754.00

This project will investigate how proteins find specific locations in DNA. Since
there are over three billion base pairs in the human genome, this is akin to
finding a needle in a haystack. A variety of methods will be employed to
investigate how proteins combine sliding, hoping and jumping along DNA into a
search strategy. In one method, the time taken by the protein to find its target
site will be measured. In another, the motion of individual proteins during
search will be tracked in real time. Stretching or coiling the DNA during the
search process will demonstrate how the different conformations of DNA in the
cell affect the search. By varying the composition of the solution containing
DNA and proteins, the effects of different cellular components can be
determined. In another investigation, how so called "off-target" sites (sites
that are similar to the target site and typically only vary by one or two base
pairs) slow or perhaps even speed up the search will be studied. The laboratory
work will be carried out by undergraduate students and concepts from this
research will be included in courses taught by the principal investigator. In
addition, the research team will hold summer day camps for students from
elementary and middle schools in Boston, where these students will be exposed to
research and the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate search strategies of DNA binding proteins using single molecule
methods. The model system chosen, restriction endonucleases, form part of the
bacterial innate immune response and cleave foreign DNA at specific sites 4-8
base pairs in length. In one technique, micro beads tethered with DNA will be
used to measure the exact time of cleavage of individual DNA molecules. Using
this method, hundreds of DNAs can be measured in a single experiment to yield
high resolution kinetic data. A second technique will use fluorescence to track
the motion of individual proteins during search. One area of investigation will
characterize the roles of sliding, hopping and jumping. The use of DNA
roadblocks will distinguish between sliding, which will be blocked, and hopping,
which can bypass roadblocks. Varying the conformation of DNA during single
molecule imaging can test for the presence of enhanced jumping during coiling.
Another area concerns off-target binding sites, which can slow target search,
but also serve as reservoirs that can play a role in genetic regulation by
transcription factors. By inclusion of star sites (non-cognate sites differing
by a single base pair) in DNA, quantitative models of how the position and
number of such sites affect search rates can be tested. A final area involves
the role of macromolecular crowding. By introducing crowding agents, the effects
both on target search rates (in bead tethering experiments) and on linear
diffusion along DNA (in single molecule fluorescence tracking) can be addressed.
Broader impacts of this project include training of undergraduate students,
developing modules on tethered DNA for undergraduate courses, as well as a
summer day camp for elementary and middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.