* 2120350
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: Nation-wide Community-based Mobile Edge Sensing and Computing Testbeds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jerry Cheng, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 09/30/2024
* USD 220,000.00

The advancement of mobile sensing devices and mobile computing technologies have
triggered new research opportunities in mobile edge sensing and computing,
including activity recognition, wellbeing monitoring, user authentication, human
dynamics tracking, etc. However, research in mobile edge sensing and computing
suffers from labor-intensive training, unrealistic experimental environments,
heavy environmental interferences in practical scenarios. In addition, different
research groups usually conduct small-scale experiments separately, which makes
it difficult to share the research results and data among groups in the same
community. The U.S. mobile edge sensing and computing community demands an
experimental infrastructure to share data/models nationwide and perform
practical and repeatable experiments. The goal of this project is to build a
large-scale, mobile edge sensing and computing infrastructure to provide
practical experimental environments, rich user tools and services, and
data/model sharing. Based on the proposed infrastructure, individual research
groups can be connected to conduct large-scale research with low efforts. Many
interdisciplinary communities can also be brought together, conducting research
via the proposed infrastructure, including deep learning-based hardware design,
smart healthcare, AR/VR, human flow monitoring, smart home, and smart city. The
research results can benefit interdisciplinary curriculums with new research
topics and tasks for undergraduate/graduate and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research infrastructure includes
three organically connected functionalities to provide repeatable experimental
environments, facilitate data/model-sharing, and join separated research groups
on a national scale. In particular, this project develops mobile sensing
functionalities for supporting compelling research in low-effort large-scale
sensing data collection, robot-enabled experimenting, and privacy-preserved
learning on mobile edge devices. Furthermore, this project develops an edge
computing functionality integrating remote-operated mobile edge devices and
mobile development kits to support research in software and hardware co-design
and on-device AI learning for low-cost mobile devices. In addition, a novel data
and model sharing functionality is developed to support a broad spectrum of
mobile edge sensing and computing research areas. A uniform web portal is
provided to allow users to use these functionalities remotely. The proposed
infrastructure provides an essential hardware and software foundation that
enables cutting-edge research in CISE research focuses, including mobile edge
sensing, hardware and software co-design, and distributed computing with
sharable large-scale data from practical environments. The outcome from this
project, including the unique integrated functionalities, powerful tools and
services, and comprehensive datasets, further enhances the research
collaboration of many research groups in academia, industry, and government
across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.