* 2120429
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: World Of Code (WoC): The development of curated code resource to support research in software engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jian Huang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 504,000.00

This project will create public research infrastructure centered around
achieving a curated collection of source-code and version control history data
approximating the entirety of open-source software (OSS). Real-world data from
open-source software development has catalyzed progress in software engineering
research in the last two decades. Despite the OSS version control data being
public and detailed (with actions of developers and versions of the source
code), the sheer scale and the need for curation (collection, contextualization,
correction, augmentation, and integration) make such data unsuitable for
research. The data are spread across many platforms, embedded in many tools and
formats, and spread across tens of millions of repositories. Moreover, the
difficulty of curating data across the entire OSS ecosystem, beyond the
capabilities of individual research groups, also leaves many important research
questions unanswered. Individual OSS projects depend on each other and share
source code and developers among them. This creates tremendous risks, for
example the spread of vulnerable source code and the ripple effects of volunteer
maintainers disengaging. The team will create nearly complete, fully curated,
and extensively cross-referenced version control data that will enable the
research community to measure and understand the dynamics of OSS ecosystems and,
thus, help identify and manage risk to OSS in particular and to society in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use input from the software
engineering community to create a research infrastructure that contains: 1)
regularly updated and cross-referenced source-code and version history resource
approximating the entirety of OSS; 2) data curation capabilities, e.g., identity
disambiguation and extraction of dependencies; 3) easy-to-use web services and
applications to support common research tasks; 4) training: tutorials,
mentoring, hackathons and seminars to help use the resource effectively and
efficiently; 5) a community of researchers, developers, and companies who
maintain, guide, enhance, and operate this infrastructure. This will enable
answers to an entirely new set of research questions concerning OSS network
structure defined by technical dependencies, code sharing, and knowledge flows.
It will also provide accessible means for stratified sampling from the OSS
universe of code, improving the generality of research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.