* 2120106
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Histories of Stress: A Life Course Approach
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Sharon DeWitte, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 10/31/2023
* USD 22,753.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). A life course framework views biological well-being as
more than just a consequence of an individual’s immediate environment. This
doctoral dissertation project analyzes how urban growth and climate change
affected human biology in the past by examining both the timing and pattern of
physiological stress responses that manifest across a lifespan. The project
represents a large scale bioarchaeological integration of radiogrammetry methods
with markers of skeletal stress. The examination of biological impacts of urban
growth and climate change in the past provide a baseline for human experiences
with stress reaction and disease processes prior to modern medical intervention
and vaccination protocols. The results have the potential to inform modern
public health research and policy in an increasingly urban world facing new
climatic challenges. The project supports undergraduate and graduate training
and a number of K-12 and public science outreach efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project collects bioarchaeological data from two
archaeological sites to test two conceptual life course models related to human
biological well-being. The critical period model draws a link between early life
exposures and later adult health while accumulation of risk considers how
continuous and later stress exposures compound into differential patterns of
health. Non-specific markers of skeletal stress that occur during different
development and growth periods, as well as independent markers of infection, and
radiographs are collected for individuals representing multiple time periods in
the historic past. Statistical models are used to explore the co-variance of
stress markers and how patterns of stress exposure at different times result in
differential morbidity and mortality profiles. A life course perspective
combined with paleodemographic analyses offers new perspectives on changing
health dynamics in light of the demographic, climatic, and social changes
occurring over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.