* 2120361
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning: A Multilayer Network (MLN) Community Infrastructure for Data, Interaction, Visualization, and Software (MLN-DIVE)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kamesh Madduri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

A multilayer network (MLN) is a powerful and expressive mathematical tool for
modeling and analyzing social, economic, biological, and technological systems.
Informally, a multilayer network is a collection of related graphs. Applications
of multilayer networks include understanding social networks, economic systems,
online marketplaces, and detecting vulnerabilities in cyber-physical systems.
While this research area is rapidly growing, there is a dearth of a community
infrastructure for researchers, developers, and end users to share, participate,
and use latest tools and algorithms. This planning project will collect
community infrastructure requirements for supporting the MLN community. It will
also develop preliminary visualization and drill down analysis
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a formally established network
decoupling approach to perform various aggregate analysis (community,
centrality, substructure detection, etc.) using individual layers and composing
them. This approach has also been shown to be efficient compared to the same
analysis without using the decoupling approach. Network decoupling seeks to
address issues that are critical for multilayer analysis, such as reducing
information loss and preserving structural and semantic
information.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this planning project is to provide
meaningful and appropriate analysis tools that are grounded in theory to a broad
range of applications from different domains. The focus is on facilitating the
mainstream use of multilayer network analysis in data analysis, research and
teaching. GUI-based dashboards and drill down analysis will be developed for
broader usage of the tools developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project brings together investigators from The University of Texas at Arlington
(UTA), University of North Texas (UNT), and Pennsylvania State University (PSU)
to develop efficient and scalable algorithms/approaches, to provide a portal for
accessing data sets and computations on MLNs, and an interchange for the
community to participate and discuss infrastructure needs on a broader
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.