* 2120581
* Collaborative Research: Composite Avalanche Nanoantenna Room-Temperature Infrared Photodetectors (CANTRIP)
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Corey Shemelya, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Many of us have become familiar with infrared (IR) imaging during the COVID-19
pandemic as a method to rapidly screen for people with fevers. However, IR
imaging is also useful for other medical diagnosis, astronomy, law enforcement,
military vision systems, inspection of mechanical/electrical components, secure
communications, energy/environmental assessments, and many more situations.
Despite these broad applications, IR imagers are expensive and generally require
internal cooling systems. This work would develop a new class of thermal imager
with the potential to be cheaper, more energy efficient, and operable with
additional functionalities not presently available using existing technology. A
breakthrough in this area will enable thermal imaging to become part of everyday
life. In this work, the investigators will create hybrid detectors that
integrate nanoscale antennas with photodetectors, which should enable increased
functionality while also reducing system cost and complexity compared to the
present state of the art systems. Both investigators have a long history of
outreach of integrating their research with the broader community; and through
this work, they plan to initiate new outreach efforts about the interaction of
light, materials, and structures to show students of a variety of ages and
backgrounds the excitement of “viewing the invisible.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to develop a fundamentally new mechanism for room temperature,
long wavelength infrared (LWIR) photodetection using a combination of
nanoantenna arrays and avalanche diode technologies. We will advance the state
of photodetection by combining: a) active photonic design, b) antenna array
theory, and c) customized semiconductor materials/devices. With later
development (e.g. microlens arrays for achieve high fill factors) these
photodetectors could become the new dominant paradigm replacing the existing,
costly imagers. Our solution combines photodetection technologies and
anisotropic nanoantenna designs to create a first-in-class, hybrid
photodetection system. This novel combination relies on the theoretical
foundation of active frequency selective systems and those of highly sensitive
avalanche photodiodes. To achieve this foundation, the challenges associated
with a hybrid semiconductor/metallic nanoantenna modeling must be investigated
as, with only a few exceptions, the need to integrate optical responses with
semiconductor carrier mobility has been a largely overlooked area. Although,
many of the associated interactions have been successfully modeled
independently, there have been significant hurdles in producing full-wave
simulation which integrate electromagnetic excitations with semiconductor
carrier mobilities and charge distributions. Our models will incorporate
localized carrier injection and transport modeling to develop an avalanche diode
growth profile including semiconductor choice, bandgap, doping profile, and
layer thickness. The interplay of these parameters is fundamentally different
than traditional photodiode material systems will be analyzed to understand the
nanostructure/semiconductor interactions at a fundamental. Since the choice of
material system is an important one for this project to succeed, the project
will consider GaAs based avalanche diodes, as well as InP and/or GaP due to the
versatility of the III-V heterojunction materials system enabling adaptability
as new challenges arise. The molecular beam epitaxy systems employed in this
work are capable of intermixing any of the common III-V elements (Al, Ga, In, Tl
and P, As, Sb, Bi) to achieve a wide range of potential material properties. As
such, parameters such as the localized carrier injection can be adjusted using
semiconductor growth profiles and doping concentrations to achieve the desired
induced photocurrent. Through the thorough analysis of modeling, anisotropic
antenna design, and unique semiconductor growth profiles, this work provides a
novel path to understanding a revolutionary electromagnetic imaging
architecture. Specifically, we are using an IR signal to excite an anisotropic
nanoantenna which will stimulate the avalanche process in an integrated
semiconductor junction. The resulting room-temperature photodetectors will
minimize thermal noise, increase functionality, and be a first-in-class-
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.