* 2120688
* Determining the Effect of Airway Deformation on Pulmonary Air-Particle Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Yu Feng, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 265,359.00

Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the fourth leading cause of death
in America, causes severe breathing difficulty due to airway stiffening, loss of
airway deformation capability, and airway blockage induced by inflammation.
Inhalation of therapeutic micro particles is the standard COPD drug treatment,
but it has a long-standing delivery barrier to achieving desired therapeutic
outcomes because of airway constriction. Specifically, less than 25% of the
particles can reach the distal airways, with most of the particles depositing in
the upper airway. The project will use a computational fluid dynamics code to
better understand the role of disease-specific airway deformation kinematics on
pulmonary air-particle flow dynamics. By modulating particle size, hygroscopic
growth, and inspiratory flow conditions, an optimal delivery approach will be
sought to control the pulmonary air-particle transport and achieve targeted
particle delivery to distal airways. The project also entails outreach
components to popularize the concepts of “in silico pulmonary healthcare” and
increase STEM engagement of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to simulate and quantify the influence of COPD-specific
airway deformation kinematics on (a) altering the vortex structures in the upper
airway and the relaminarization in the lung airway tree and (b) subsequently
altering the particle mixing effects and particle delivery efficiency in small
airways. The project will develop a new computation-based elastic whole-lung
modeling framework to capture the disease-specific airway deformation kinematics
simultaneously with the air-particle flow predictions in the whole lung. The
project will (i) develop, calibrate, and validate the elastic whole-lung model
to capture the airway deformation kinematics for severe COPD lung condition;
(ii) quantify the effect of disease-specific airway deformation kinematics on
pulmonary air-particle transport dynamics and deposition; and (iii) quantify the
effects of particle characteristics and breathing pattern on air-particle
transport and deposition mechanisms and delivery efficiency in distal airways.
The research will advance our knowledge of whole-lung flow dynamics on how
disease-specific airway deformation kinematics can influence the pulmonary
airflow and inhaled particle transport, distribution, and deposition. The new
elastic whole-lung modeling framework and enhanced understanding of the disease-
specific pulmonary air-particle transport dynamics will help achieve
personalized inhalation therapy optimization for improved therapeutic outcomes
with reduced side effects. This project is jointly funded by Fluid Dynamics
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.