* 2120888
* MCA: Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Enhance the Creativity of the STEM Professional Workforce by Transforming Education for Neurodiverse Learners
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Arash Esmaili Zaghi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2024
* USD 459,224.00

This project is funded by the Mid-Career Advancement program that supports
opportunities for scientists and engineers to substantively enhance their
research program through synergistic and mutually beneficial partnerships. This
MCA project embraces a transformative approach to address the critical national
need for a creative professional workforce by increasing the participation of
neurodiverse students in STEM disciplines. Scientific and technological
breakthroughs are crucial to address the large-scale, complex, and multifaceted
challenges facing our nation. The unparalleled talents and unique abilities of
neurodiverse students present a distinctive opportunity for our nation to
address these difficulties. However, the excessive reliance of our STEM
education on textual content and the linguistic complexities of STEM texts may
disengage and discourage neurodiverse individuals, such as those with dyslexia.
This project capitalizes on the unique knowledge and expertise gained from
multiple previously NSF-funded projects and a strong multidisciplinary research
team with expertise in neurocognitive science, neuroimaging, STEM education,
dyslexia, and artificial intelligence (AI). This bold, convergent research
builds on the latest advancements in AI as well as opportunities provided by
neuroimaging technologies to advance a scalable, personalizable text
simplification tool for middle school students with dyslexia. This project will
be at the forefront of the shift towards personalized assistive tools to enhance
the participation of neurodiverse students in STEM education. The project has
the potential to significantly enhance the learning of middle school students
with dyslexia, who despite their unique talents in spatial visualization and
divergent thinking, remain highly underrepresented in STEM fields. Though this
project is focused on individuals with dyslexia, the proposed framework may be
further broadened to include other groups, like students with Autism, and
English learners (ELs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes three
integrated activities to advance knowledge and generate critical data for the
development of a personalized assistive tool for students with dyslexia. This
project aims to: 1) adapt large pretrained natural language processing (NLP)
models for STEM text simplification tasks, 2) develop a large dataset of
feedback from students with dyslexia and use reinforcement learning (RL) to
customize the model for this population, and 3) use features of
electroencephalogram (EEG) data to measure neurocognitive functions related to
reading comprehension to personalize the model. The student feedback dataset and
individual EEGs collected during the reading tasks may significantly benefit
future research in dyslexia, neurocognitive sciences, STEM education, and
machine learning. The outcomes of the study may encourage the advancement of
personalized learning using brain data. The research partnership formed through
this project facilitates the development of large-scale multidisciplinary
studies aimed at enhancing the academic success of neurodiverse students. An
industry collaborator will be involved early in the project to ensure a broad
dissemination of the assistive tool and project outcomes. This project is
expected to enhance the well-being of an academically and socially vulnerable
group of students by dismantling barriers to participation. The approach of this
project may significantly advance the development of personalized assistive
learning technologies and present new opportunities for unique students to
succeed in our traditional education system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.