* 2120122
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the dynamic interaction between pyrogenic carbon and extracellular enzymes and its impacts on organic matter cycling in fire-impacted environments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrew Zimmerman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 128,542.00

Fires, whether occurring naturally or caused by human activities, are a
pervasive disturbance to many ecosystems and the global carbon (C) cycle. Fires
convert tremendous amounts of biomass into CO2 and pyrogenic carbon (PyC) that
accumulates in soils. Because of its abundance and unique physicochemical
properties, PyC may participate in many soil biogeochemical processes that
control the cycling of important elements and soil health. However, it remains
poorly understood how PyC is decomposed in soil and how PyC may affect the soil
microbial community – the main driver of soil organic matter (SOM)
decomposition. Because microbial decomposition of SOM is catalyzed by enzymes
released by microbes (exoenzymes), this project will study how PyC interacts
with exoenzymes, and which enzymes are capable of degrading PyC. Results from
this work will fundamentally advance the current understanding of the cycling of
PyC and its contribution to the global C cycle. Two graduate students and
several undergraduate students from the collaborating institutions will gain
interdisciplinary training in biogeochemistry, enzymology, and analytical
chemistry. In collaboration with local schools and museums, the team will
develop K-12 and community outreach activities to increase general public’s
awareness of the role of fires in climate and soil
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposed
project is to explore the roles of PyC in microbial-mediated SOM degradation,
particularly its direct impacts on exoenzyme functioning in soils. The role of
PyC as an adsorptive surface in soil will first be evaluated, considering its
overall large specific surface area and adsorption capacity. Mechanisms of
interaction between representative exoenzymes and PyC generated under different
combustion conditions and of different weathering histories will be explored,
and key properties of PyC and enzymes controlling the interaction will be
identified. Then the impacts of PyC adsorption on enzyme activity will be
determined using sensitive calorimetric analyses. Although microbes are known to
be capable of degrading and utilizing PyC as a carbon source, the degradation
process and effects of abiotic weathering are not clear. Therefore, the rate and
structural transformation of PyC degradation by enzymes, particularly those that
degrade aromatic structures, will be determined. This work will apply a holistic
approach to detail the chemistry of solid and dissolved PyC, using a suite of
spectroscopic techniques. By delineating the interfacial behaviors and
functionality of exoenzymes and the interplay between abiotic and biotic
weathering processes in controlling PyC stability, knowledge generated from this
work will fundamentally advance our understanding of SOM cycling in fire-
impacted environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.