* 2120545
* Making Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Resonate With Students: Integrating Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Into the Undergraduate Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Colin Abernethy, Sarah Lawrence College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 213,295.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing undergraduate
science curricula through development of interdisciplinary course materials that
implement evidence-based teaching practices. Through support from the NSF IUSE:
EHR Program Engaged Student Learning track, this project will address the need
for more varied and relevant laboratory and research offerings in the
undergraduate science curriculum to strengthen learning about nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR). NMR is an important tool in the modern STEM workforce that
provides a foundation for more in-depth explorations in a variety of scientific
disciplines - ranging from pharmacology to quantum computing. Despite the
prevalence of NMR as an essential research tool, there has historically been
unequitable access to this important piece of laboratory equipment due to its
high cost and maintenance requirements. The recent development of inexpensive
benchtop NMR instruments and freely available online simulations offer great
opportunities for predominantly undergraduate institutions to provide their
students with widely-applicable research skills. Unfortunately, there is no set
of curricular materials that covers the full spectrum of NMR in a
multidisciplinary fashion nor addresses all levels of the undergraduate
curriculum. Moreover, few materials make broad use of research-based science
pedagogy or can be used with or without access to a particular NMR apparatus.
This project will fill this curricular gap by establishing an interdisciplinary
and cross-institutional team to develop, assess, and disseminate curricular
material that integrates NMR into the undergraduate science
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals guide this project. First is to
develop interdisciplinary curricular materials that make use of current
pedagogical best practices for an engaged and inclusive science learning
environment. Second is to provide students with class-based undergraduate
laboratory experiences that introduce research skills and emulate experimental
research in a lab. Third is to ensure curricular materials are designed to be
easily adapted and adopted for use in a wide array of educational environments.
To accomplish these goals, the project team will utilize its expertise in using
active learning models such as investigative science learning environment
(ISLE), process-oriented guided inquiry learning (POGIL), and peer-led team
learning (PLTL). The curricular materials will be developed with the help of
undergraduate students at both Sarah Lawrence College and City College of New
York and then vetted by an advisory board of NMR and science education
specialists. The project will be evaluated using established education research
techniques - including student surveys, in-class recordings, and student focus
group interviews conducted by an external evaluator. The project team will
publish their research findings in peer-reviewed journals and present their work
at national and regional scientific meetings. The developed curricular materials
will be primarily disseminated through open-sourced, electronic documents with
instructors’ manual and online course materials. These documents will be made
available via a customized webpage as well as several online repositories for
sharing educational resources. Along with the impacts of this work on enhancing
the undergraduate science curriculum, this project will positively impact the
science education research community by advancing knowledge and understanding
the best practices and student outcomes resulting from the implementation of an
interdisciplinary course-based undergraduate research experience in different
institutional settings. With the overarching goal of retaining and preparing a
thriving and diverse STEM workforce, this project will benefit both society and
the STEM education community. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.