* 2120374
* Effect of Pore Pressure Rate on Rate and State Frictional Slip In Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Rudnicki, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 224,245.00

Injection of fluid into the Earth’s crust can cause earthquakes. Such risks
exist in the context of geothermal stimulation, energy storage and recovery, and
carbon sequestration. A dramatic example is the rapid increase of earthquakes in
the central US. Understanding induced seismicity is critical to assess and
mitigate the risks. Yet, it is challenging because of the complex geology of
field sites and uncertainty on material properties. Laboratory experiments
provide essential information about how injecting fluids may trigger
earthquakes. Here, the researchers use theoretical analysis and numerical
simulations to study the effects of fluid pressurization on rock frictional
slip. Comparing simulations with experimental observations, they examine how
pore pressure changes affect fault sliding. Computer simulations allow testing
parameters at conditions unattainable in the laboratory. Here, they are used to
extrapolate experimental results to the time and scales of field observations.
The project also supports the training of graduate and undergraduate students at
Northwestern University (IL). Its outcomes improve the assessment of hazards
associated with induced seismicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
project examines the effects of imposed rate of pore pressure change on the
stability of rate and state frictional slip. The work is motivated by recent
experiments that impose pressure at different rates. These show that the slip
velocity and shear stress drop of accelerated slip events correlate with pore
pressure rate rather than the magnitude of the pore pressure. Numerical
simulations for a simple spring – slider model assuming sliding is governed by
rate and state friction - show that the pressure rate can control the frequency
of rapid slip events. Refinement of the model indicates how the features of slip
events observed in the laboratory depend on frictional parameters, rate of
loading, rate and magnitude of pore pressure increase, and diffusivity. This
work provides a fundamental basis for understanding the effects of pore pressure
rate accompanying injection of fluids in laboratory tests and at field
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.