* 2120005
* CAREER:   Higher Brauer Groups and Topological Azumaya Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2021,11/30/2022
* David Antieau, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2022
* USD 36,389.00

This award is focused on algebraic geometry and algebraic topology, two areas of
modern mathematics. Algebraic geometry has ancient origins with many connections
to real-world problems. Its goal is to understand the geometry of solutions sets
of polynomial equations, equations of central importance in various disciplines,
such as theoretical physics, cryptography, and number theory. Algebraic topology
on the other hand developed more recently, in the 19th century, and aims to
study a general notion of shape, less rigid than the idea of shape studied in
geometry. It has found striking applications in the last decade, for instance to
robotics and to the analysis of large data sets, and a recent revolution in the
foundations of algebraic topology has broadened its applicability to other
fields of pure mathematics. The proposal of the PI will bring the considerable
machinery and insight of algebraic topology to bear on several well-known
questions and conjectures in algebraic geometry. Some of these questions will be
investigated jointly with students as part of undergraduate research projects in
the Mathematical Computing Laboratory at UIC, which the PI founded in 2015 with
David Dumas and Jan Verschelde. This integration will provide valuable
opportunities for students to engage in research and impact ongoing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work on several projects at the
border of algebraic geometry and algebraic topology. Three projects aim to use
various topological methods to understand the Brauer group and Azumaya algebras
as well as the role of higher algebraic structures in algebraic geometry. (1)
The PI will study (higher) algebraic representatives of étale cohomology
classes, generalizing the connection between the Picard and Brauer groups and
low-degree cohomology groups. (2) The PI will explore separate applications of
motivic homotopy theory and persistent homology to the period-index conjecture
with the aim of finding algebraic counterexamples to the conjecture. (3) The PI
will explore the Hochschild-Kostant-Rosenberg theorem in characteristic p,
specifically focusing on the question of whether or not the local-global
spectral sequence for Hochschild homology degenerates at the E_2-page for smooth
projective surfaces in characteristic 2.