* 2120640
* Collaborative Research: Nano-Engineered Superwood for Resilient Foundation Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Qinglin Wu, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 118,200.00

Timber piles are a renewable and low-cost foundation system. With the
development of steel and concrete piles, the use of timber piles has steadily
declined as timber piles have low stiffness and strength, limiting their
applications to lightly loaded structures. This project aims to develop a high
stiffness and strength, durable, and cost-effective superwood pile foundation
system for heavily loaded and resilient civil infrastructure. Recent research on
wood-based nanomaterials has led to a high-performance structural material known
as superwood, which is desirable for advanced applications in the fields of
civil, automotive, aerospace, and manufacturing engineering. This research will
use experimental and modeling techniques and life-cycle analysis to engineer and
verify the superwood pile foundation system through collaboration between
geotechnical and wood composite engineering researchers. The research team will
engage underrepresented minority middle and high school students in research of
foundation and wood composite engineering via existing Louisiana State
University (LSU) outreach programs. The project will also contribute to the
training and education of undergraduate and graduate students at
LSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superwood is a densified wood material produced by
partially delignifying natural wood and subsequent densification through hot-
pressing. Superwood production is potentially sustainable and cost-effective as
it avoids energy-intensive manufacturing processes associated with Portland
cement and steel. The strength and elastic modulus of superwood are not only
superior to those of natural wood, but could also exceed those of concrete.
Superwood also has excellent durability against moisture-induced decay and
insects such as termites with minimal strength reduction. The remarkable
properties of superwood are expected to enable superwood piles to (1) mitigate
the disadvantages of current timber piles (e.g., low structural capacity,
vulnerability to damage during hard-driving, and susceptibility to decay) and
(2) to exceed the performance of timber and concrete piles for both service and
strength limit states. The objectives of this research are to (1) optimize
processing conditions for producing superwood piles in relation to their
mechanical properties and durability performance including decay and termite
resistances, (2) investigate the soil-pile interaction behavior of superwood
piles through laboratory experiments, (3) develop numerical models to predict
the responses of superwood piles under different soil and loading conditions,
and (4) assess the cost and environmental impacts of superwood piles by
performing life-cycle analysis. This research will promote further development
of superwood in geotechnical engineering, including ground improvements,
retaining walls, and support of excavation structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.