* 2120895
* MCA: Quantitative understanding of heritable epigenetic changes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Antony Jose, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,487.00

Interactions with the environment in one generation of an organism can cause
effects that last for many generations even without changes in DNA sequence.
Being able to predict what genes will be affected in this way can enable a
better understanding of hereditary diseases and suggest approaches for
evaluating environmental exposures that can have lasting effects. By focusing on
how single genes respond across generations in a model nematode, this project
develops predictions for heritable change that can be tested using experimental
measurements while involving undergraduate and graduate students in the
research. Undergraduate students learn to represent and explore ideas through
simulations. Graduate students learn to think, with simulations, about how to
constrain possible inferences from their experiments before publishing their
work. The enhanced quantitative reasoning imparted through the research and
broader efforts prepares the upcoming workforce for an increasingly data-rich
world. This award enables the PI, who is an experimentalist, to acquire
expertise in modeling and theory development in biology.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a unified theory of heritable epigenetic
changes. It integrates experimental measurements with mathematical description
and quantitative simulations by focusing on the changes that occur in the
expression of single genes across generations in the nematode C. elegans. Since
different sequence contexts prevent or promote heritable changes in RNA-mediated
control of gene expression, the project measures differences in small RNAs,
mRNAs, and other key regulators for six different contexts when the same coding
sequence is targeted for RNA silencing. Quantitative measurements are used to
constrain simulations that predict the nature and duration of transgenerational
epigenetic change. In parallel, analytical descriptions of the regulatory
relationships that can promote or hinder heritable epigenetic change are pursued
to achieve deeper understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.