* 2120567
* RCN-UBE Incubator: Building an interdisciplinary regional network to expose under-represented students to biological research in its community context
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Bryan Bayles, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 74,208.00

Research has shown that under-served students typically have few opportunities
to engage in high-impact research activities and that first-generation college
students want their learning to be connected to their home communities. When
educators attempt to improve upon undergraduate research opportunities they
frequently focus on placing only select students in one-on-one faculty mentored
research and fail to link the research to the students’ daily lives. All
students should have an opportunity to participate in research in ways that make
explicit connections between the content, process, and application of research,
or they risk not being able to see the relevance of biological science to their
own lives. This RNC-UBE incubator network will remove these barriers by
developing course-based opportunities for students to engage with real-life data
sets provided by regional organizations whose work is informed by biological
research. Therefore, all students taking introductory biology courses will build
research skills within a socially meaningful and applied community context.
Furthermore, by participating in the course-based research modules developed by
this regional network, students will gain a greater understanding of job market
diversity as it pertains to skills gained during biological research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This network brings together educators from different
universities, community colleges, as well as research scientists from an urban
health department, a nationally recognized primate research center, and a major
regional river authority tasked with ecological stewardship. The network members
will participate in workshops designed to develop course-based undergraduate
research experiences (CUREs) which will be implemented as pilot modules in
introductory biology courses. Workshops will also identify alignment of modules
with core curriculum learning objectives, community partner needs, and potential
barriers to implementation. During the pilot CURE modules students will collect
and analyze data sets on the prevalence and disparities of heritable genetic
disorders, diabetes, cancer or environmental threats to the community, many of
which disproportionately burden the network’s predominately Hispanic population.
This RCN-UBE Incubator will increase collaborative research among students,
academia, industry, and community civic services and thus enhance the diversity
of the future STEM workforce. Students participating in the modules will develop
skills in science communication by sharing their results with public groups,
family members and network representatives. The impact of the network will
extend beyond students and faculty to include members of the community who might
otherwise have limited exposure to scientific research, thereby nurturing
positive attitudes towards biological research and increased engagement and
support of family members with their children’s STEM education. &lt;br/&gt;This
project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their
efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate
Biology Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/). This
project is also supported by the NSF HSI and IUSE:EHR
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.