* 2120366
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying Human Forcing of Legacy Sediment and Metal Contamination Dynamics on the Yunnan Plateau of Southwestern China
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Aubrey Hillman, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2022
* USD 45,790.00

Globally, metal contamination from past human activities hinders human
management of environmental systems, particularly soils (agriculture) and
aquatic systems (drinking water). One of the universal challenges in the
management of these historical contaminants is that they can be transported by
both the wind and in water (generally attached to sediments in water).
Clarification of the relative importance of these transport pathways is
fundamental to the successful management of contaminated soils and prevention of
future soil degradation worldwide. In many cases, there are substantial delays
in the water-sediment pathway, and these delays create challenges in risk
evaluation of recent contamination. Further, more recent activities such as
urbanization can remobilize historical contamination. This project focuses on
the Yunnan region of China, a region with multiple historical periods of metal
extraction and purification. Reconstruction of the long history of interactions
between the airborne and waterborne contaminant transport in the Yunnan allows
examination of the environmental implications of substantial global metal
contamination that has occurred with the industrial revolution and the influence
of land use changes on contaminant mobilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to develop a longer-term perspective of sediment dynamics in
southwestern China and assess the timing, magnitude, rate, and source of metal
accumulation in lake environments. In particular, the project links three goals:
1) Quantitatively estimate the amount of metal contaminants stored in watershed
soils and attribute their source using geochemical mixing models; 2) Identify
the controls on erosion, transport, accumulation, and redistribution of these
metal contaminants, particularly human controls by examination of historical
events recorded in sediments; and 3) Document the influences of natural climate
variability versus human activity on metal accumulation in lake systems. When
combined, these goals provide the means to measure the risks of contamination
stored in the landscape to all modern human systems and enhance our
understanding of how cumulative watershed impacts influence our Earth
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Geomorphology and
Land-use Dynamics Program, the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research, and the Office of International Science and Engineering.