* 2120084
* BII: Uncovering mechanisms of amphibian resilience to global change from molecules to landscapes
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Cheryl Briggs, University of Pittsburgh
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,973,184.00

Paramount to predicting the future of biodiversity is knowing when and how
living systems are resilient to (i.e., can recover from) anthropogenic
disturbances. The focus of this Biology Integration Institute is on
understanding resilience to a key global threat: emerging infectious diseases.
The team will develop a new framework to measure resilience across multiple
scales, stressors, and systems, and apply it to a case study involving a fungal
disease linked to global amphibian declines. Building on past research in four
complementary systems, the team will address four questions: (1) How does the
history of disturbance differ across systems? (2) How have changes at different
levels of biological organization shaped overall system responses? (3) What are
the mechanisms contributing to resilience and are they shared across systems?
(4) How is resilience modulated by multiple interacting stressors? The framework
and findings will be applicable to hundreds of amphibian species facing disease-
related stressors and, more broadly, for understanding the resilience of
biological systems to myriad global change threats. The Institute’s training
activities will reach and connect high school through postdoctoral scholars
using authentic biology research experiences that foster cross-disciplinary
understanding, serve large numbers of students with a focus on underrepresented
groups, and promote persistence in STEM. Outreach activities will reach
students, teachers, members of the public, and wildlife managers with messages
about biodiversity, resilience, and global change. Together, the institute’s
activities will showcase the power of an integrative, team science approach for
addressing some of the biggest and most challenging questions in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this Biology Integration Institute
(BII) is on understanding resilience in the context of global change.
Resilience, or the ability to recover after a perturbation, is an emergent
property of living systems. Progress toward a mechanistic understanding has been
stymied by the lack of a common currency and framework that is applicable across
scales, among systems, and in response to different stressors. The team’s
activities will address these knowledge gaps by developing a flexible resilience
framework and applying it to a detailed case study involving a key global change
threat to biodiversity: emerging infectious diseases (EIDs). Leveraging past
research, the team aims to uncover mechanisms of resilience to chytridiomycosis,
an EID of amphibians caused by a fungal pathogen, in four complementary systems
by answering four key questions: (1) How does the history of disturbance differ
across systems? (2) How have changes at different levels of biological
organization shaped overall system responses? (3) What are the mechanisms
contributing to resilience and are they shared across systems? (4) How is
resilience modulated by multiple interacting stressors? The Institute’s training
and outreach programs will feed back into the research. Training activities will
reach and connect high school through postdoctoral scholars from across the
country through authentic biology research experiences that foster cross-
disciplinary understanding, serve large numbers of students with a focus on
underrepresented groups, and promote persistence in STEM. Outreach activities
will reach students and teachers, members of the public, and wildlife managers
with messages about global change and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.