* 2120609
* RCN-UBE: Biological and Environmental Data Education Network: Preparing Instructors to Integrate Data Science into Undergraduate Biology and Environmental Science Curricula
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Matthew Aiello-Lammens, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2026
* USD 499,354.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building and supporting an
engaged community of college instructors trained in integrating data science
skills across introductory biology and environmental science curricula. Students
need foundational and repeated exposure to data science skills that are
necessary for success in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math fields and
beyond. However, there are barriers to incorporating data science skills into
established biology and environmental science curricula, including a knowledge
gap between the skills students need and the training faculty have, curricula
that are already perceived as overcrowded, confusion over what the key skills
are, and a lack of confidence in teaching these skills. The BEDE (Biological and
Environmental Data Education) Network will address the unmet need for data
science skills and overcome barriers through professional development
opportunities for biology and environmental science instructors. The BEDE
Network will develop and deliver data science skills- and pedagogy-focused
workshops to instructors, develop and disseminate guides for integrating these
skills into biology and environmental science courses to instructors and
departments, and will foster a collaborative community of educators via a
combination of virtual and in-person meetings and asynchronous online
interaction and resource sharing. These activities align with the NSF IUSE
intention to enhance and improve undergraduate STEM education in the US to
prepare students for a competitive workforce that increasingly requires data
science skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BEDE Network will conduct activities in
four main areas: (1) convene annual network meetings, (2) develop and deliver
“train the teacher” and “train the trainer” workshops, (3) design and publish a
curriculum guide, and (4) establish an active and diverse community of
practicing educators that are incorporating key data science skills into their
undergraduate biology and/or environmental science courses. Six main data
science areas will be covered in the activities (data management, data analysis,
data visualization, programming, modeling, and reproducibility), with ethical
frameworks applied to each to anticipate and address potential challenges that
may arise during classroom activities. Each activity area will include regular
assessments conducted both internally and externally including annual
evaluations, pre/post surveys, and reflections. The BEDE Network will be an
inclusive and diverse community drawing educators from multiple institution
types, career paths, and career stages, and will be designed to last beyond the
5-year term of the RCN-UBE grant. By specifically focusing on undergraduate
instructors, the BEDE Network will be able to train educators who in turn are
positioned to benefit a broad population of students including STEM majors and
non-majors, and from groups that are currently underrepresented in the sciences.
This more inclusive group of students will learn and use data science skills in
their courses that will prepare them for success in the “Big Data” world we are
living in, no matter what their chosen career will be. This project is being
jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of
Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.