* 2120262
* NSF-BSF: FET: Small: Redundancy for Storage in the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Emina Soljanin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The IoT revolution is driven by a surge of applications based on intelligent
edge devices, such as smart cities and homes, autonomous vehicles, online video
gaming, virtual and augmented reality, and machine learning. The edge devices
generate large amounts of data and are the end-point executing user-facing
applications. The back-end of these systems is a central service where data is
continuously collected, aggregated, and analyzed, and a significant part of the
logic is executed. Unfortunately, traditional cloud services cannot provide
performance guarantees that these latency-critical applications require, mainly
due to round-trip times which can take several hundreds of milliseconds. Thus,
such applications will likely rely on Edge services--an emerging technology
tightly coupled with 5G cellular networks. Edge solutions are envisioned to
provide storage and compute infrastructure at interoperating edge nodes located
at geographical locations near the users, such as the base of cellular network
towers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on enabling unstable edge
nodes to collectively provide a reliable storage service for unpredictable user
demands. Towards this goal, redundant storage schemes for edge systems will be
designed and evaluated. The schemes will then be implemented and validated in a
system-level platform that combines a physical test-bed and large-scale
simulations. The project's primary goal is to characterize the schemes' system-
level costs and benefits and leverage this understanding to design an edge
service that will be readily applicable to real settings. This research
amalgamates system-level design and optimization with mathematical analysis and
thus will stimulate students' interest in both practice and theory associated
with modern computing environments. In addition, this research will help improve
the efficiency and robustness of edge computing, thus avoiding routing traffic
to data centers. Such Edge services will reduce energy consumption, alleviate
some of the load on the Internet backbone, and thus accelerate the development
and adaptation of critical IoT applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.