* 2120678
* RCN-UBE: Transforming Ecology Education to Four Dimensional Network
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Teresa Mourad, Ecological Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 10/31/2025
* USD 499,700.00

The Transforming Ecology Education network, spearheaded by the Ecological
Society of America, seeks to catalyze the adaptation and adoption of the Four-
Dimensional Ecology Education Framework (4DEE). The 4DEE framework presents an
updated approach to ecology education that incorporates traditional ecology
practices in a framework of important big ideas, human interactions with the
environment, and cross-cutting themes to equip future generations with the
knowledge and skills needed to anticipate and respond to a changing world.
Informing the Transforming Ecology Education network are several theories and
best practices including 1) mentoring that connects faculty across the wide-
ranging field of ecology, 2) strategies that promote faculty motivation and
practice over a sustained period, and 3) fostering connections across members of
the network. The network will foster inclusive practices for diverse student
populations to engage in ecology and leverage connections to other relevant
networks that will accelerate adoption. As the network grows, our combined
efforts will lead us closer to our aspirational vision of a diverse and
ecologically literate workforce and citizenry capable of contributing to the
scientific study, management, and informed dialogue about our changing
ecological systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Transforming Ecology Education
(TEE) network presents an opportunity to explore the unique role of a
disciplinary society in encouraging innovation and motivating a network of core
volunteer leaders and distributed faculty in multiple institutions and across
multiple networks. By utilizing a network approach to foster curricular change,
TEE seeks to understand 1) how the structure and power of networks can catalyze
and accelerate innovation when championed by a disciplinary society, 2) how
resources, expertise, and networks are utilized or leveraged, and 3) how network
relationships and interactions can be sustained over time. The strategic work
with program directors and coordinators will provide insight on how the scope
and sequence of ecology / environmental science units in general biology courses
may be aligned with 4DEE and thus, impacting many more faculty and students. The
TEE will include educational researchers working with ecologists on pedagogical
research activities which will be of wide benefit for TEE and the education
community. The TEE work will be disseminated via open-sourced materials and
events involving other disciplinary societies to impact faculty in other
biological disciplines. This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate
for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.