* 2120593
* EAGER: High-throughput discovery of microbial genes conferring improved root colonization.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Maggie Wagner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 149,858.00

Plant roots are surrounded by billions of microscopic organisms called bacteria.
These bacteria help the plant obtain nutrients and grow. Because of how
important bacteria are, many people are interested in developing fertilizers
containing bacteria to help plants grow better. However, it has become clear
that while some bacteria, when added to a growing plant, can help them grow
under artificial laboratory conditions, hardly any bacteria can help a plant
grow when applied under realistic conditions. We would like to understand why
some bacteria are able to help plants grow, while some bacteria cannot. To do
this, we will study the genes that growth-promoting bacteria have, and determine
whether these genes can convert a non-growth-promoting bacteria into a growth-
promoting one. This work will be performed in corn, and will train one graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beneficial microorganisms can greatly improve crop
plant performance, motivating their use as seed inoculants. However, exogenous
microbes are often outcompeted in the field, which limits their utility and
reveals fundamental gaps in our understanding of root colonization. The
rationale for this proposal is that the genes that are most important for
colonizing the root are largely unknown. Recent work using comparative genomics
and knockout mutants has provided the first insights into the genes involved in
root colonization. However, a complete picture of colonization must include how
to enhance it, an understanding that is not currently available. Since root
colonization is multifaceted (encompassing interactions with other microbes, the
host, and abiotic soil conditions) it is expected that a diversity of microbial
and plant genes will impact root colonization. To parse this complexity, we will
use a functional metagenomics approach to screen for genes conferring improved
colonization maize under three different nutrient conditions. This work will
therefore advance our understanding of root colonization and our ability to
identify microbes that exert beneficial effects for prolonged
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.