* 2120223
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Leveraging Intensive Time Series of Accelerometer Data to Assess Impulsivity and Inattention in Preschool Children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Gershoff, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 17,982.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This doctoral dissertation research project will
develop and examine the validity of a sensor-based approach for assessing
children's impulsive and inattentive behaviors. Understanding children's
impulsive and inattentive behaviors is important because, even early in life,
they predict later academic achievement and outcomes as diverse as employment,
mental health, and substance use in adulthood. However, current methods to
assess these important behaviors in real-world contexts are limited because they
are subjective, imprecise, and resource intensive. This project will develop an
objective, precise method of assessment with low-participant burden and the
ability to assess behavior continually throughout the day. The approach
developed in this project will be of value to applied researchers from a variety
of fields, including education, pediatrics, and developmental and clinical
psychology. Code and de-identified data from the project will be made available
to the broader community. The investigators will recruit and mentor
undergraduate research assistants from the diverse student body at the
University of Texas at Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
develop and examine the validity of using wearable accelerometer devices to
assess children's impulsive and inattentive behaviors in their preschool
classrooms. Preschool-aged children will wear accelerometer devices while at
school for one week. The devices will record data each second, capturing complex
patterns of movement as children engage in classroom activities. Accelerometers
are an ideal choice of sensor because children's impulsivity and inattention
involve physical movement, such as getting up from one's chair, that will
register as movement on the accelerometers. The analyses will use confirmatory
and exploratory machine learning techniques to identify patterns in the
intensive accelerometer data that index impulsivity or inattention. Analyses
will go beyond the commonly used summaries of movement from accelerometers and
instead take advantage of the rich patterns of movement that such summaries
discard. The investigators will validate the accelerometer approach against
existing measures of children's impulsivity and inattention. These results of
this project will facilitate applied research and enhance our understanding of
children's behavior in their real-world environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.