* 2120540
* Generative Diffusion of Artificial Intelligence Innovation: An Innovation Ecological Approach
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Youngjin Yoo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 350,773.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is arguably one of the most significant
technological innovations as it reshapes the way we think about work,
organizing, and competitions. As AI's role in organizing and innovations
continues to expand, we must understand how AI technology evolves as it
continues to get diffused throughout different industries. In this study, the
investigator conceptualizes AI innovation as a dynamic emergent outcome of
ongoing and dynamic interactions among constituent technological components
independently designed and developed by heterogeneous actors in the AI
innovation ecology. By doing so, the investigator explores how the meaning of AI
innovation evolves as the boundary of AI's innovation ecology continues to shift
and expand. Through a comprehensive historical analysis of contemporary AI
innovation, the project helps us understand exactly how AI has evolved and will
likely evolve in the future. The project identifies potential weak links in the
AI innovation ecology for continuing development of AI innovation to direct
future investments and research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
is using a multi-method with two distinct but interrelated research activities.
First, the investigator is conducting a qualitative analysis of the AI
innovation's emergent evolution, leveraging archival data about the development
of current AI innovation from news articles on AI, related enabling technology
components, and its applications. Second, the investigator is conducting
computational analyses to understand how to understand the generative diffusion
of AI innovations over time through different fields by analyzing (a) publicly
available documents, including mainstream news, academic research publications,
and (b) open-source projects in GitHub platform that use open-source AI
frameworks. Specifically, the investigator is leveraging recent computational
tools, namely the Relational Graph Convolutional Networks method, in studying
the evolution of innovation ecology. These analyses aim to identify the dynamic
patterns by which AI innovation is evolving and moving
through.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.