* 2120746
* Engineering for US All-E4USA: A National Pilot High School Engineering Course and Database
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Carl White, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,715,128.00

The aim of the Engineering for US All (e4usa): A National Pilot Program for High
School Engineering Course and Database project is to demystify and democratize
engineering through a program targeting high school students and teachers that
will by nature benefit society and advance the desire for a more diverse future
engineering workforce. The program expands the pool of teachers capable of
teaching engineering and the number of students considering further education
and/or a career in engineering. The knowledge taught by empowered teachers will
provide a broader understanding of engineering intended to excite an interest in
pursuing additional engineering education. Specific efforts to collaborate with
a diverse group of schools (urban, suburban, rural, private, public, parochial,
single gender, etc.) will ensure that this program reaches those who have
previously been unable to offer engineering and/or traditionally
underrepresented in engineering. Partnerships with post-secondary institutions
will also create and facilitate pathways for students to explore possible
engineering careers. Scaling and sustaining e4usa will allow the project to
address the desired societal outcome of a more educated citizenry and increased
numbers and diversity of students joining the future engineering workforce.
Continued support for e4usa will establish the program as major contributor in
the field of engineering and technological literacy, while bringing engineering
truly to all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering for US All (e4usa): A National
Pilot Program for High School Engineering Course and Database’s primary goal is
to demystify and democratize the learning and practice of engineering by
engaging high school students and teachers in a project-based engineering
curriculum. e4usa will increase engineering literacy for all and expand
opportunities for those traditionally underserved and underrepresented in
engineering to pursue careers as engineers. Current NSF funding has led to the
creation of the e4usa curriculum, teacher professional learning (e.g.,
professional development workshops and community of practice), and additional
supporting resources (e.g., MyDesign®). This first of its kind program presents
the engineering field using four big ideas: 1) discover engineering, 2)
engineering in society, 3) engineering professional skills, and 4) engineering
design. This Design and Development grant is intended to support efforts to
scale, study, and sustain e4usa over the next three years. School settings will
be broadened by expanding the reach of e4usa to 50 teachers and approximately
5,000 students nationwide. Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) capturing
participating student and teacher data will continue and expand to include five
in-depth case studies. Knowledge gained will inform central components of e4usa
intended to improve developed resources, expand partnerships, garner insights
into the impacts of e4usa, and increase pathways for credit and placement These
insights, in conjunction with the creation of an oversight and advocacy agency,
will provide the foundation for e4usa becoming a self-sustaining, independent
entity supported by key partners like
TeachEngineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.