* 2120117
* BII: Regional OneHealth Aerobiome Discovery Network (BROADN)
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jan Leach, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 7,234,775.00

This project will explore fundamental details about microbes that live in the
air, the aerobiome. The health of humans, other animals, and plants depends upon
vast communities of microorganisms that colonize living surfaces. The same is
true in soil and water, where microorganisms influence the health and
productivity of those environments. In contrast, microbial life found in the
atmosphere is understudied, even though we know that microorganisms can move
through the air, serving vital ecological functions as well as providing disease
transmission pathways. For example, many pathogens of animals and plants are
spread via the air, and certain bacteria that are found in clouds are capable of
influencing precipitation patterns. Key knowledge gaps about the aerobiome
remain due to the technical challenges associated with studying this system. The
interdisciplinary team constituting the Biology Integration Institute: Regional
OneHealth Aerobiome Discovery Network (BROADN) will study how airborne microbial
populations are altered by seasonality, weather patterns, and environmental
stresses such as drought, intensive agriculture, and fire. This project will
also investigate how microbes move between the land surface and the atmosphere,
and what properties allow some organisms to survive in the atmosphere.
Collaboration with regional partners, including a First Forward Institution
serving rural first-generation students and a Hispanic Serving Institution will
involve students in sample collection and analyses, revealing the fascinating
unseen biology of the air. These and other educational programs will break down
disciplinary barriers to educate the next generation of biologists and will
share insights about the aerobiome to K-12 students and the public. The new
understanding of the life cycles of microbes in the atmospheres is anticipated
to lead to innovative solutions to key challenges such as the spread of
pathogens, drought adaptation, and loss of terrestrial biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;BROADN will partner with the Global Atmospheric Microbiome Project
(GAMP), the NSF-sponsored National Ecological Observation Network (NEON), and
the Joint Genome Institute (JGI) to organize rigorous atmospheric sampling of
aerobiome states and fluxes, and to conduct bioinformatics analysis of the
genetically diverse taxa that exist in the aerobiome. Focused regional aerobiome
samples will be collected over time at different altitudes and coupled with
detailed laboratory analyses and meteorological measurements. Environmental
chambers will be used for specific hypothesis testing. Data generated will
provide the basis for discoveries of aerobiome structure and function, with the
resulting insight used to parameterize models that relate aerobiome dynamics to
terrestrial ecosystem properties. Bioinformatics and transcriptomic analysis
coupled with mathematical modeling will reveal the microbial composition of the
aerobiome; its response to changes in weather patterns, anthropogenic
disturbances, and physical forces; the characteristics that lead to lofting,
transport, and survival of microbes; and the metabolic activity and genomic
attributes of aerosolized microbes. Moreover, BROADN will provide international
leadership in this emerging area, and set global standards for measurement and
assessment of the aerobiome. This project will develop essential understanding
to drive solutions to airborne transport of animal and plant pathogens, and to
understand the ecological role of the aerobiome in preserving ecosystem
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.