* 2120559
* Collaborative Research: Characterization of Transport Properties and Microstructures of Battery Electrolytes via In Situ Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Tao Li, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,788.00

With the support from the Electrochemical Systems program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, the
investigators will develop innovative in situ techniques to characterize the
liquid electrolyte for rechargeable batteries. Rechargeable batteries are one of
the most popular energy storage devices for electronic products, electric
vehicles, and grid energy storage. The next generation of rechargeable batteries
requires excellent performance in terms of fast charging and safety. This work
will provide universal methods to characterize the transport property and
microstructure of the electrolyte crucial to battery performance. The
investigators will incorporate the battery research into their teaching
curricula for undergraduate and graduate students, encourage students from
underrepresented groups in STEM to participate in the research, and broaden the
impact of the research through outreach activities, e.g., workshops with local
school teachers on K-12 science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objectives of this work are to develop a variety of universal in situ techniques
to characterize the transport property and microstructure of battery
electrolytes, including in situ probe beam deflection (PBD), in situ small-angle
X-ray scattering (SAXS), ohmic microscopy, and microelectrode array.
Specifically, in situ PBD will be employed to measure the transference number
and diffusivity in the framework of concentrated solution theory. It only
requires one experiment to determine the transference number and diffusivity of
the electrolyte, while traditional methods will require the combination of three
or four electrochemical experiments. In situ PBD can also monitor the ionic
concentration profile of the electrolyte in an operating battery. In situ SAXS
will be used to characterize the microscopic structure of the concentrated
electrolyte and monitor the variation of ion pairs and/or aggregates induced by
the electric field. Ohmic Microscopy will be utilized to measure the
conductivity and monitor the variation of electrolyte conductivity resulting
from the charge separation induced by the strong electric field. A
microelectrode array will be used to measure the ionic concentration and
diffusivity of the electrolyte simultaneously. The other complementary
techniques, including Raman spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulation, will
provide a molecular-level understanding of the correlation between the
microstructure and transport property.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.