* 2120574
* Tracking Past Ice Sheets with North American River Drainage Basin Captures Induced by Glacial Isostatic Adjustment
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tamara Pico, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,359.00

This team of investigators will build a framework to test past ice sheet
geometries using shifts in river drainage basin boundaries induced by glacial
isostatic adjustment, as recorded by sediment provenance. They will simulate
topographic change over North America using a state-of-the-art gravitationally
self-consistent glacial isostatic adjustment model. They will perform
calculations using two differing potential ice sheet loading histories over the
last ice age. Using these predictions, they will calculate how drainage basin
boundaries changed over the last ice age (120-0 ka) for major North American
river systems. To model sediment provenance variations, they will superimpose a
North American bedrock age map onto the predicted maps of drainage basin shifts
due to glacial isostatic adjustment. Finally, they can predict how glacial
isostatic adjustment shifts the age distribution of detrital grains (sediment
provenance) drained into major North American Rivers over the ice age.
Ultimately these predictions can be compared to existing and future sediment
provenance records to identify likely past ice sheet size and geometry. This
project will support an early-career principal investigator from an
underrepresented group. She will develop innovative teaching tools for making
legible the roots of geoscience culture in scientific racism and imperialism.
These tools will be incorporated into courses taught at UC Santa Cruz. The
project will support a PhD student and their enrollment in the Science &amp;
Justice Training Program. Here the student will learn how science is implicated
in the co-production of social inequities. The principal investigator will
participate in outreach to middle school students in the Alaska Native Science
&amp; Engineering Program and will mentor summer undergraduate students through
the UC-HBCU Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary work,
spanning geophysics, geomorphology, and sedimentology, will improve our
understanding of past continental ice sheets and associated climate change. The
research will expand the current toolset for inferring past ice sheets, setting
a foundation for an unprecedented, novel method aimed at ice-sheet
reconstruction over multiple glacial cycles. By robustly testing the influence
of glacial isostatic adjustment on drainage basin shifts recorded in sediment
provenance, the team will demonstrate the plausibility of drainage basin
evolution as a potential new constraint on past ice sheets. This finding would
enable ice-age researchers to transcend challenges imposed by the erosional
nature of ice sheets, which destroy geologic evidence of past ice margins as
they advance. Instead, it should be possible to infer the geographic extent and
thickness of past ice sheets deeper in time, over many glacial cycles, and this
approach is limited only by the age of sedimentary deposits, which can span
millions of years. Furthermore, quantifying the influence of glacial isostatic
adjustment on river drainage basins will improve our understanding of landscape
evolution on ice age timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.