* 2120125
* I-Corps: Nanocellulose Filaments for Thermal Management in Apparel Fabrics
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Jihua Gou, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of nanocellulose filaments for a variety of thermal management
applications. With high thermal conductivity, the filaments (threads) may be
used to develop thermally conductive functional apparel fabrics potentially used
for athleisure and industrial apparel brands. Currently, end-consumers such as
athletes, workout enthusiasts, fire fighters, and soldiers suffer from
insufficient thermoregulation of apparel fabrics. The demand for printed circuit
board products has increased exponentially due to the rapid development of
higher performance computers and smart electronic devices. The filaments also
may be integrated into the manufacturing process of printed circuit boards with
capabilities of directional cooling. The societal impact of this filament
technology is its sustainability. Currently, 60% of materials in textiles are
derived from petro-chemicals. However, the proposed technology is mainly
converted from sustainable plant biomass so the starting material is more
sustainably sourced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of nanocellulose filaments with high thermal conductivity. The
proposed technology consists of cellulose nanofibers and boron nitride nanotubes
that are uniformly dispersed through the microfluidizer process. The filaments
are fabricated via wet spinning of the suspension of cellulose nanofibers and
boron nitride nanotubes in a coagulation bath. The high thermal conductivity of
the filaments is attributed to high intrinsic thermal conductivities of boron
nitride nanotubes and cellulose nanofibers as well as low interfacial thermal
resistance due to the strong interaction between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.