* 2121464
* MCA: Functional genomics of spatial memory
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sabrina Burmeister, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 382,770.00

Spatial memory is a specialized form of learned navigation characteristic of
animals with large, complex brains. The underlying neural circuitry for the
“brain’s GPS” has been identified but we lack a complete picture of how this
ability evolves. The green-and-black poison frog is the only amphibian known to
be capable of spatial memory, creating a unique opportunity to identify genes
that enable the evolution of spatial memory by comparing species that vary in
memory abilities. To this end, this award will allow the investigator to develop
skills that they will use to discover the genetic mechanisms of spatial memory
in poison frogs. By comparing species, they will determine the genes that confer
the capacity to form spatial memories. In addition, the investigator will
partner with the Museum of Life and Science in Durham NC to broaden
participation in science and to increase public awareness of science. Together,
the Museum and the investigator will host interactive sessions for museum
visitors based on the proposed research and create an interpretive panel to
accompany the Museum's Poison Frog Exhibit that highlights the cognitive
abilities of poison frogs and gives insight into the underlying research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite an intense focus on genomics over the last
25 years, we still lack the ability to predict an organism's phenotype from
knowledge of its genome and environment. This award will provide the
investigator with a toolset in genomics that they will use to create a model for
the functional genomics of spatial memory. By integrating genomics into her
research, the investigator will leverage what is known about poison frog
cognition to create a model for functional genomics of a complex cognitive
trait. To do so, the investigator will partner with Dr. Erich Jarvis at
Rockefeller University to acquire foundational skills in three areas: 1)
sequencing and annotation of genomes of non-model organisms; 2) identifying gene
networks activated by specific experiences; and 3) comparing gene networks
across species. The investigator will use these skills to produce a high-
quality, annotated genome of Dendrobates auratus, identify memory-associated
gene networks expressed in the hippocampus of D. auratus, and test the link
between spatial ecology and spatial memory-associated gene networks across
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.