* 2121848
* University of Hawaii - University of Washington PREM: Materials Research and Education Consortium (MRE-C)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Gamelin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 821,563.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non -Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;The University of Hawaii at Manoa (UH), located on the island
of Oahu, Hawaii, has a diverse student population that includes Native Hawaiians
and other Pacific Islanders (NHPI, 18.9 %), and women (61.8 %). With this
Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) Seed award, the
University of Hawaii and the University of Washington's (UW) NSF funded
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) aim to utilize this
diversity in UH’s student popularion to create a pathway to recruit, retain, and
ensure degree attainment by over 10 student STEM participants, mostly from
underrepresented minority groups. The PREM Seed implements a multifaceted and
integrated approach to recruitment of student participants, using on/off-campus
diversity resources and a new PREM website. The UH-UW synergistic partnership
emphasizes student mentoring (M), unique on/off campus outreach (O), energy and
space materials research (R), and materials science education (E) [MORE]. This
PREM Seed also enables foundational UH-UW collaborations that engage diverse
student participants in research at the frontiers of the world’s greatest
materials research challenges. The research and education initiatives encompass:
strong student dual-mentoring by both UH and UW senior participants, including
individualized professional development plans; annual in-person faculty/student
summer research exchanges, complimented by regular virtual exchanges; UH-UW co-
development of teaching materials; joint seminars; and an annual student
symposium. The partnership directly impacts research and education output at UH
by increasing the number of students prepared for opportunities in materials
research and assisting in elevating UH’s standing in materials science
education. The PREM Seed develops a sustainable pipeline to increase
participation of underrepresented minority graduate students at UW. In addition,
the PREM Seed outreach effort to K-12 schools drives sustainable long-term
growth for underrepresented groups participation in STEM, and it enhances
visibility and public appreciation of materials science. The UH-UW PREM Seed
success metrics include joint publications, presentations, and
retention/graduation rates of PREM Seed students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;The UH-UW MRSEC PREM will
develop foundational knowledge about advanced nano-to-macroscale defect-bearing
and doped materials (boron compounds, chalcopyrites, layered quantum materials,
and proton-irradiated solids) and the properties controlling their unique
behaviors, and it investigates their use for future energy and space
technologies. The PREM capitalizes on synergistic expertise and exceptional
resources in materials syntheses and characterization available at UH and the UW
MRSEC to create close interdisciplinary research collaborations emphasizing the
education and training of a diversified next generation of scientists and
engineers. The research on defect-bearing and doped materials is organized into
four thrusts aligned with UW’s MRSEC IRGs on Defects in Nanostructures and
Layered Quantum Materials: 1) Dopant control in boron compounds for tailored gas
sorption; 2) Defect modeling, characterization, and engineering in ordered
vacancy compound chalcopyrites for photovoltaic applications; 3) Role of
hydrogen in the chemistry of proton-irradiated solids; 4) Strain control of
electronic and magnetic properties of solid materials. This research will lead
to new materials and understanding of new phenomena critical for solving
emerging needs in energy storage and durable space technologies. The PREM
research and education activities are designed to maximize preparation of
student participants for solving emerging materials
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.