* 2121074
* CompCog: Noisy-channel processing in human language understanding
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Roger Levy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,787.00

Every day we understand hundreds of sentences that we have never encountered and
we produce hundreds more. This success is remarkable given the noisy
environments in which language takes place, the errors speakers make, and
limitations of our memory and attention. The present project develops and tests
a theory of robust language understanding. The investigators combine tools of
information theory, natural language processing, linguistics, and experimental
psychology to provide a mathematically formalized model of human language
comprehension as probabilistic inference over a “noisy channel”. The project
contributes to our basic scientific understanding of human language and the
human mind, while strengthening bridges between psycholinguistics and
contemporary artificial intelligence research. The work has wide-ranging long-
term potential to enhance our understanding of healthy cognitive performance and
development in the area of language and to identify and guide treatments for
developmental and acquired language disorders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
program of research, the investigators develop a computationally and
algorithmically precise theory of how human understanding of sentences unfolds
moment-by-moment. This incremental noisy-channel theory is implemented using
state-of-the-art symbolic and neural network-based approaches to modeling
language from artificial intelligence and natural language processing. A key
component includes an account of how the distributional statistics of language
shape noisy memory representations used during real-time language processing.
Distinctive empirical predictions regarding robustness to errors in the
linguistic input and regarding when and how the proposed mechanisms influence
comprehension, allow this approach to be evaluated relative to alternative
psycholinguistic theories. The predictions are tested using controlled
behavioral experiments on how native speakers process and interpret linguistic
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.