* 2121242
* Power Engineering Education for the Next-Generation Smart Grid Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jie Li, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interests by enhancing power engineering
education to meet the nation’s needs for a highly qualified next-generation
Smart Grid workforce. As one of the nation’s most critical infrastructures, the
electric power grid is undergoing a fundamental revolution in its physical
structure, management policy, and business operation, ultimately leading towards
a Smart Grid ─ an enabling engine for the nation’s economy, environment, and
future. However, achieving the Smart Grid mission is hampered by a growing
shortage of qualified power and energy engineers, as well as the lack of a
comprehensive education system to support workforce training. The model approach
developed by this project will help provide effective power engineering
education to qualified graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
project is to explore a viable and sustainable approach to enhance power
engineering education to meet the needs of the power industry. This objective
will be achieved via a suite of research and development activities which will
retool the Electrical and Computer Engineering curricula, and will create a
pathway for students interested in careers working on Smart Grids. Recent
advances in relevant disciplines serving the Smart Grid mission will be
investigated and new course modules will be developed, continuously updated, and
integrated into existing program curricula. Furthermore, to close the loop, a
multi-entry point pathway towards power engineering will be established which
will offer students in different years of the program clearly defined course
sequences. An advisory committee powered by collaborators from key sectors of
the power and energy industry will oversee the proposed research. The research
and development activities conducted, the lessons learned, the challenges
addressed, and the knowledge generated from this project will be disseminated
via multiple channels to peer institutions with similar strong interests in
educating the next-generation Smart Grid workforce, as well as to educators of
other disciplines facing similar education challenges. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.