* 2121832
* Acquisition of Inductively-Coupled Plasma Optical Emission and X-Ray Fluorescence Spectrometers for Geoscience Research at North Dakota State University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Bernhardt Saini-Eidukat, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 202,374.00

This award provides funds to purchase two new analytical instruments, an
Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometer (ICP-OES) and an X-ray
Fluorescence Spectrometer (XRF), for geoscience research at North Dakota State
University (NDSU). The instruments will support studies of the chemical
properties of North Dakota’s natural resources, focusing on water, rock,
sediment, and soil. In addition to providing funding for the new instruments,
the award will support an outreach program involving students and faculty at
NDSU and Tribal Colleges in North Dakota. The program will involve research
experiences for students interested in understanding water and soil quality in
North Dakota, and is designed to broaden participation in geoscience research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of an ICP-OES and XRF will expand the
analytical capabilities of the Department of Geosciences at NDSU, which
emphasizes field and laboratory-based research with undergraduate and graduate
students. Faculty researchers in the department will use the instruments to
support research in a variety of geoscience disciplines, including Quaternary
glaciation and climate change, soil and water-quality changes in oil-and-gas
producing regions in North Dakota, and chemical processes in involving rare
Earth elements and metals in natural waters. Additionally, the ICP-OES and XRF
will enable new research in soil science, chemistry, and natural resource
management at NDSU, and will significantly augment ongoing, collaborative
research between NDSU faculty and colleagues at neighboring institutions in
Minnesota and Montana. This award received co-funding from the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) office at
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.