* 2121164
* GCR: Reprogramming Biological Neural Networks with Field-Based Engineered Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kimberly Gokoffski, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,200,000.00

Despite enormous advances in recent years to develop neuroprosthetics to bypass
damaged areas of the Central Nervous System (CNS), these devices fail to halt
the progression of the underlying degenerative diseases for which they were
designed. Moreover, there are no effective therapies for many of the
neurodegenerative conditions that affect, for example, the eye or the brain, and
the humanitarian and economic impact of blinding diseases and dementia are
enormous, with underrepresented groups particularly impacted by these
conditions. The goal of this project is to enable restoration of function to the
CNS by therapies that promote the repair and regeneration of damaged neurons and
neural networks instead of bypassing damaged areas. To achieve this goal of
delaying vision loss and neural degeneration in dementia through devices this
team brings together engineers, surgeons, neuroscientists and big data/imaging
scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team will devise and optimize,
experimentally and computationally, the electrical stimulation waveform
characteristics needed to reprogram damaged neural network morphologies; create,
“first of its kind” complete mesoscale connectivity atlases of the global neural
networks exposed to electric fields and field gradients; develop predictive
multiscale computational models of neural activity in healthy, degenerated and
electrically stimulated neural networks; and design and engineer programmable
implantable electronic systems for the acute neurostimulation of the neural
tissue. The utility of the tools developed in the proposed effort will be
enhanced by end-users providing design input, thus facilitating fully
integrated, mutually beneficial, sustained convergent collaborations that are
needed to develop the therapeutic opportunities of the next
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.