* 2121957
* CISE-ANR: FET: Small: Hybrid Stochastic Tunnel Junction Circuits for Optimization and Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Daniel Lathrop, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 497,329.00

Neuroscience research shows that pervasive randomness in brains is fundamental
to their stability and computational ability. This observation inspires
probabilistic models that are useful for a variety of learning and optimization
tasks. Conventional computers are not well suited to solving such problems
because they are fundamentally deterministic. In this work, the researchers
propose to develop probabilistic unit cells by augmenting commercial computer
chips with thermally unstable magnetic devices that naturally exhibit
probabilistic behavior. Distributed networks of such devices will enable
emulating and accelerating powerful stochastic computational models.
&lt;br/&gt;Reverse engineering the brain is one of the major challenges of the
21st century. Such an endeavor will undoubtedly affect the way computation is
understood. This proposal, inspired by a probabilistic interpretation of neural
activity will develop a hybrid probabilistic technology as a prototype to
efficiently transfer this insight into a tangible technology and then to the
broader community. The research will require contributions of a diverse
international team from a variety of fields such as material science, device
physics, electrical engineering, and computer science. The results of this
research will be disseminated in the form of publications, presentations, short
pedagogical YouTube videos in various languages, and lab tours for the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscience research shows that
pervasive randomness in brains is fundamental to their stability and
computational ability. This observation inspires probabilistic models that are
useful for a variety of learning and optimization tasks. Conventional computers
are not well suited to solving such problems because they are fundamentally
deterministic. In this work, the researchers propose to develop probabilistic
unit cells by augmenting commercial computer chips with thermally unstable
magnetic devices that naturally exhibit probabilistic behavior. Distributed
networks of such devices will enable emulating and accelerating powerful
stochastic computational models. &lt;br/&gt;Reverse engineering the brain is one
of the major challenges of the 21st century. Such an endeavor will undoubtedly
affect the way computation is understood. This proposal, inspired by a
probabilistic interpretation of neural activity will develop a hybrid
probabilistic technology as a prototype to efficiently transfer this insight
into a tangible technology and then to the broader community. The research will
require contributions of a diverse international team from a variety of fields
such as material science, device physics, electrical engineering, and computer
science. The results of this research will be disseminated in the form of
publications, presentations, short pedagogical YouTube videos in various
languages, and lab tours for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.