* 2121950
* ADVANCE Partnership: Kindling Inter-university Networks for Diverse (KIND) Engineering Faculty Advancement in the California State University System
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Cynthia Jackson-Elmoore, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,249,922.00

The ADVANCE Partnership project called the “Kindling Inter-university Networks
for Diverse Engineering Faculty Advancement in the California State University
(CSU) System project (KIND)” will bring together four CSU campuses—CSU, Fresno;
CSU, Los Angeles; San Jose State University; and California Polytechnic
University, San Luis Obispo—to establish a system-wide program to develop,
deliver, and test systemic interventions that support the hiring, retention, and
promotion of women in the CSU engineering professoriate. The KIND project
partners with the NSF INCLUDES ASPIRE Institutional Change Network, which uses a
data driven self-assessment to identify inequities in faculty recruitment,
retention, and advancement to support systemic change. The goal of this project
is to bring about organizational changes to address systemic gender inequities
that impact faculty on the CSU engineering faculty, particularly women from
racial and ethnic groups that are underrepresented in science and engineering in
the US (women of color), and women that were born and/or trained in science and
engineering outside of the US (foreign-born/foreign-trained (FB/FT) faculty).
This work is significant as it will help to understand and address systemic
gender equity issues that are similar and different for FB/FT faculty and for
domestic racially and ethnically diverse faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KIND
project will 1) create a secured dashboard containing currently unavailable
demographic data related to faculty hiring, retention, and promotion in
engineering colleges across the CSU system; 2) use the dashboard to review
current policies/practices to identify barriers in the recruitment and retention
of women faculty with attention to faculty of color and foreign-born/foreign-
trained faculty, and to propose new policies/practices, and 3) create the first
CSU-wide Inter-Campus Networking and Mentoring Program for engineering faculty.
This work has the potential to impact a significant number of current and future
engineering students as the CSU system enrolls and trains one out of every
fifteen engineering students in the U.S. In the CSU system about 25% of
engineering students are of Hispanic origin, 20% are women, and 16% are Asian.
The KIND project will advance understanding of research, practices, and policies
that bring about systemic changes to support equity for all diverse groups in
the CSU engineering professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program
is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational
barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and
the organizational culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide
support for projects that scale-up evidence based systemic change strategies to
enhance gender equity for STEM faculty regionally or nationally. This project is
also supported by the NSF Directorate for Engineering's Broadening Participation
in Engineering (BPE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.