* 2121986
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: SAI: Participatory Design for Water Quality Monitoring of Highly Decentralized Water Infrastructure Systems
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Alicia Cooperman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 104,684.00

In this project, an iterative, collaborative framework for monitoring point of
use water treatment in under­served communities is tested. This framework blends
local expertise on social dynamics and water issues with project expertise in
governance, water treatment, and systems modeling. This framework is co-
developed with communities where residents rely on a combination of trucked­ and
bottled water. Aging pipes and treatment facilities, droughts exacerbated, and
contamination of water supplies all challenge America’s drinking water
infrastructure. Water typically is treated at central facilities and then piped
to users, but recent technological advances could enable water treatment at the
point of use (e.g., a house). In theory, this approach can make water systems
more resilient to extremes, reduce the need for pipes and pumping, help water
systems scale up or down as populations change, and filter contaminants that
existing plants cannot treat cost-effectively. However, point of use water
treatment also shifts the burden of maintaining water treatment infrastructure,
monitoring water quality, and governing water systems onto end users, creating
new vulnerabilities for water infrastructure systems. In this project, an
iterative, collaborative frame­work to stress test strategies for water quality
monitoring in decentralized water treatment systems is developed to address this
challenge. This research contributes to answering important questions for 21st
century water infrastructure, including: (1) Under what biophysical and social
conditions are decentralized water systems effective and likely to succeed? (2)
What is the appropriate scale for decentralized water systems in small
communities? (3) What are the barriers to water access in the US rural
context?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project an iterative, collaborative
frame­work to stress test strategies for water quality monitoring in
decentralized water treatment systems is developed. The stress test integrates
potential challenges identified by community members and leaders in focus groups
with water quality sampling and mathematical modeling of water systems. The
project is carried out through a series of iterative activities: qualitative
interviews, field water quality observations, water system design, first round
of focus groups, water security assessment, quantitative surveys and conjoint
experiment, revised water system design, and a second round of focus groups.
This project concerning participatory design for water quality monitoring
extends observational research on water systems and social dynamics by actively
engaging the community in collaborative focus groups about the current water
system and potential future water systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.