* 2121941
* ADVANCE Partnership: New Jersey Equity in Commercialization Collective (NJECC)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Treena Livingston, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 12/31/2022
* USD 665,625.00

The New Jersey Equity in Commercialization Collective (NJECC) will address
gender equity issues in academic technology commercialization (patenting,
licensing, and startup creation) by focusing on the elimination of systemic
institutional and entrepreneurial eco-system barriers. Key barriers to equity
and inclusion in STEM commercialization and entrepreneurship include systemic
cultural perceptions, training and reward structures, and patenting/ technology
transfer activities at academic institutions. It is important to recognize and
redress these inequities, not only as a matter of fairness but also because the
lack of diversity in entrepreneurship diminishes the diversity of new ideas and
hurts US technological innovation and economic competitiveness. To achieve
systemic change in this area, the project will leverage a robust partnership of
organizations across the state of New Jersey. The NJECC will be led by New
Jersey Institute of Technology in collaboration with the NJ Commission on
Science, Innovation and Technology; NJEdge (NJ’s non-profit technology services
provider and member-driven consortium); New Jersey City University; Princeton
University; Rowan University; Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey; Seton
Hall University; Stevens Institute of Technology; and St. Peters University.
Working together, the NJECC project partners will aim to significantly increase
the diversity of STEM faculty researchers who participate in New Jersey’s
entrepreneurship and innovation ecosystem. In turn, developing innovation
pathways for new and diverse innovators will foster economic growth and the
availability of new products and services that are important to
society.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The NJECC project will include two main
initiatives: (1) training for Gatekeepers (academic Tech Transfer, Venture
Development and Entrepreneurial offices) on methods to reduce barriers that
hinder the participation of women and underrepresented minorities in
commercialization activities and (2) the establishment of NJ statewide inclusive
network development programs (showcases and conferences). In addition, NJECC
will link these planned activities with the NJIT NSF-funded CyberCorps @
Scholarship for Service grant, the Secure Computing Initiative, to increase
diversity and innovation in the crucial area of cybersecurity. Over the course
of the project, these initiatives will aim to generate sustainable, intentional
strategies for increasing the diversity of the academic innovator
pool—strategies that then can be institutionalized across the state and beyond.
The NJECC will aim to significantly reduce key barriers to equity and inclusion
in STEM commercialization and entrepreneurship and will significantly increase
the diversity of NJ STEM faculty researchers who participate in New Jersey’s
entrepreneurship and innovation ecosystem. The collaboration will also extend
the existing infrastructures and resources of the less-resourced institutions
through access to the resources of the other participating institutions. In
addition, this project will aim to stimulate the ongoing collection of patenting
and invention disclosure data, disaggregated by gender, race/ethnicity, and
other identity dimensions. The NJECC team will use a variety of channels to
disseminate project findings and strategies for systemic change, including but
not limited to 1) print, digital, and social media; 2) national/regional
conference presentations (NSF events, AUTM, UEDA, EdgeCon) and 3) relevant
academic journals and resource libraries (TechTransfer Tactics, ARC
Network).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for projects
that scale-up evidence based systemic change strategies to enhance gender equity
for STEM faculty regionally or nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.