* 2121503
* Collaborative Research: Using Tutorial-Based Active E-Learning to Broaden Participation and Enhance Scientific Computing Skills in a Seismology Context
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Brudzinski, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2024
* USD 262,507.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving computational
thinking and scientific computing skills of advanced undergraduate students. It
will do so by developing a large-enrollment, asynchronous, open access, online
computational workshop. Such training is important to ensure that future
scientists develop the knowledge and skills they need to tackle computer- and
data-intensive scientific problems of national importance, such as climate
change. This project will provide more than 1200 advanced undergraduates with
computational training in a seismological context. The training will build on
and refine a pilot tutorial-based, active e-learning experience called the
Seismology Skill Building Workshop. The project also aims to generate a more
successful, inclusive, and satisfying online learning experience that can be
exported to other STEM disciplines. Because the workshop offers advanced
coursework online without fees or prerequisites, it is likely to increase the
participation of diverse undergraduates and other learners in computing. In
fact, based on data from the pilot workshop, this project will reach many
students from communities that have been disproportionately impacted by the
COVID-19 pandemic. Through its research efforts, the project intends to increase
understanding about how diverse groups of students engage with and benefit from
the tutorial-based active e-learning approach. By identifying workshop features
that attract diverse audiences and promote retention, learning, and
satisfaction, the project can also define a framework that other STEM
communities can use to develop similar technical training
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A preliminary Seismology Skill Building Workshop
was offered in 2020 by the Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology, an
NSF-funded university consortium that operates the seismology community data and
equipment facility. The pilot workshop was launched in response to the COVID-19
pandemic and reached more than 700 students, many more than anticipated and with
higher diversity than typical in-person computing courses. Through the pilot
workshop, the project team identified challenges and gathered data about
workshop effectiveness. This project will investigate the resulting research
questions, which are important within and beyond seismology: 1) To what extent
does this online scientific computing training model enhance participant
learning and behavior? 2) What are the key influences on retention and
performance for advanced undergraduates in the online scientific computing
training model and can new interventions improve efficacy? 3) To what degree do
the elements of the tutorial-based active e-learning approach contribute to
learning? 4) How can the value of the Seismology Skill Building Workshop and its
positioning within the seismology learning ecosystem be optimized to ensure
sustainability? These questions will be addressed through a multi-year, mixed
methods research investigation that includes development of instruments for
summative assessment of computational thinking and programming within a
disciplinary context, improved characterization of assignment question types to
examine performance trends, and correlation analysis of participant activity and
performance data. Expert reviews of the curriculum and community focus groups
will be conducted to ensure sustainability of the Seismology Skill Building
Workshop. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This project is
in the Engaged Student Learning track, through which the IUSE program supports
the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.