* 2121952
* NSF-BSF: Small: AF: Towards a Unified Theory of Spanners
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Hung Le, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,998.00

Graphs are abstract objects that model entities, represented by vertices, and
relationships between them, represented by edges. Graphs are found in numerous
applications, such as the Internet, social networks, transportation networks,
wireless and sensor networks, and they are often massive in size. Accordingly,
coping with massive graphs is a pressing challenge of the current time. A
principled approach for dealing with massive graphs is to compress big input
graphs into compact subgraphs, called spanners, that approximate all pairwise
distances to within some user-defined error parameter. The compactness, coupled
with distance-preserving properties, make spanners useful in various application
domains, such as distributed computing, approximation algorithms, wireless
network design, logistics and planning. This project aims to develop new
algorithms for constructing spanners that achieve optimal trade-offs between the
most fundamental compactness measures and the distance error parameter. Along
with the scientific goals, the investigator includes an education plan that
takes advantage of the practical relevance of this project to attract and train
graduate and undergraduate students with diverse backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two directions. The first
direction seeks to improve the state-of-the-art spanner constructions via a
unified framework, applicable to a wide range of settings. Specifically, the
investigator aims at identifying common technical and conceptual barriers
arising in multiple settings and computational models, and developing general
tools and techniques to address these barriers. This will provide theoretical
tools to connect and transfer results from one setting to another. The second
direction focuses on achieving truly optimal tradeoffs between the distance
error parameter and the most fundamental compactness measures, including the
number of edges and/or total edge length, for various graph families. Moreover,
as part of this research, the investigator is identifying graph families that
share similar sets of structural properties, focusing on graph families that are
important for practical applications, and then developing techniques that
exploit such structural properties to provide better spanner constructions for
these applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.