* 2121144
* Essential Workers in the US Food System
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Seth Holmes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 07/31/2024
* USD 271,188.00

COVID-19 led to massive disruptions in food systems as food laborers were
infected, shutting down plants, disrupting supply chains, and ultimately causing
food shortages. In part to avoid such problems, workers involved in food systems
were deemed essential and provided incentives and support to maintain their
labor. Attempts to support essential laborers depend critically on the content
of support and the obstacles faced by laborers in remaining active. Yet little
is known about how such support and the experiences of such support have
differed according to the individual characteristics of food system laborers,
and according to where their labor was applied within the food system. This
research bridges theory from the anthropology of work, economic anthropology,
and the political economy of food systems to understand how these differences in
individual contexts shaped supports and hurdles to maintaining food system labor
supplies. In addition to providing support for U.S. doctoral students, the work
will be disseminated widely to academic and non-academic audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work addresses this focus with three specific aims.
First, the investigators ask how different kinds of workers are integrated into
the labor market. Next, they query how workers’ economic and biological risks
have been shaped by the pandemic. Finally, they ask how risks are managed with
the goal of keeping the food supply chain working. The work focuses on three
nodes of the food system, all supported by laborers with different social and
economic characteristics: farm work; meatpacking; and grocery retail. Using both
survey research and ethnographic research methods, the project investigates what
being an essential worker means in each node, and how being essential interacts
with varying identity and individual characteristics. The project will inform
understanding of economic and social vulnerabilities as they unfolded during the
pandemic to create generalizable insights that will fuel theoretical and
methodological innovation surrounding the operation of food systems to find ways
to improve their stability and supporting safety for food system
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.