* 2121980
* ADVANCE Adaptation: CSU STEPS for Gender Equity: Advancing Structures through Evidence-based Practices for Gender Equity
* EDU,EES
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Emily Fischer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,312.00

Colorado State University will tackle the significant nation-wide problem of
inequity among faculty members in Science, Technology, Math and Engineering
(STEM) disciplines. Specifically, this project aims to improve equity in
recruitment, retention and promotion, with a focus on gender equity that
recognizes the other types of cultural, ethnic, physical, and economic
backgrounds people have. The work thus targets improved diversity in STEM
disciplines. This problem is important because more diverse workforces are more
effective at solving problems, and in a more just society, university faculty
composition would reflect availability of doctoral graduates without bias. This
problem has not already been solved because inequities are complex and embedded
into the history of US society and academia. It is not intractable, however, and
through carefully executing projects, Colorado State aims to improve equity
across the STEM faculty. To address inequities, the project team aims to adapt a
number of evidence-based best practices to particular situations at Colorado
State. The project targets four major changes. 1) A revised approach to
recruiting new faculty. 2) Improved unit climates through training allies to
intervene when they notice inequities. 3) Improved performance review processes
with training and support for review committees. 4) Enhanced leadership through
education in equity who are both empowered to and accountable for making change.
The expected outcomes of the project activities are improved climate and culture
for all, and improved recruitment and retention leading to greater equity and
diversity in STEM units across campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of ADVANCE Adaptation: CSU STEPS for Gender Equity: Advancing Structures through
Evidence-based Practices for Gender Equity is to transform university and unit
structures and culture to improve climate and gender equity on STEM faculties,
with an intersectional focus on women with identities that historically have
been marginalized. The specific aims are as follows: 1) enhance recruitment, 2)
improve retention through training Promotion and Tenure Committees, creating a
cadre of equity-minded Allies, and collecting qualitative data to understand
departures and retentions, and 3) support and train unit leaders in equity
efforts. Thus, the scope of the project encompasses equity across all phases of
faculty careers and on into leadership. The research methods include
quantitative and qualitative approaches to evaluate success in providing
participants with new skills, in improving department climate, and in retention
outcomes. Expected results include an increase in equitable recruitment and
retention, improved climate, and a better understanding of the specific barriers
faculty face. The project aims to contribute to research literature in
organizational change and equity. Outcomes and findings will be disseminated at
conferences, in academic publications, and in articles and talks for broad
audiences. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a
focus on the identification and elimination of organizational barriers that
impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic
institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies,
processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE
"Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-
based strategies to academic, non-profit institution of higher education as well
as non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.