* 2121931
* EAGER: SAI: Community Perceptions of Flood Mitigation Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hanadi Rifai, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,504.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific research has shown that
disadvantaged communities suffer disproportionately when it comes to natural
disasters. These neighborhoods typically experience more extreme effects from
natural disasters and longer recovery periods. Proposed solutions to these
problems are often fraught with difficulties, including limited budgets, appeals
to local industry, and even resistance from the local community. The goal of
this research is to better understand how communities make sense of their own
risk to natural disasters and the solutions that have been proposed to improve
outcomes in these disasters. Specifically, this project focuses on flood risk
and proposed flood mitigation strategies in areas frequently experiencing
catastrophic flood events. Flood mitigation strategies are often contentious as
many of the proposals surrounding flood mitigation efforts imply a set of
“winners” and “losers,” whereby flood mitigation in one area may imply an
increased risk of flooding in another area. These strategies may also imply a
loss of homes or businesses in the process of redevelopment in flood-prone
areas. Moreover, oftentimes the ways in which the public makes sense of their
risk differs from the perspectives of local planners and engineers. This points
to the need for community input and a better understanding of community opinions
when planning flood mitigation strategies, both in long-term planning, as well
as emergency protocols. This project provides a better understanding of how
community perceptions of flood mitigation strategies could better inform local
policy and implementation of flood mitigation efforts. It also makes a
scientific contribution to the research on social vulnerability and disaster
broadly. Importantly, this research identifies the gap that exists between
perception and function of infrastructure, which may lead to stronger future
resilience in the face of natural disaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extant research
has examined social vulnerability to climate disasters, demonstrating that poor
and minority communities have greater exposure to the negative effects of such
events. However, little research has attempted to understand how objective risk
of disaster relates to perceptions of risk and how communities make sense of
public mitigation strategies. This project combines these perspectives to
examine how neighborhood perceptions of risk and mitigation relate to the
physical infrastructure, the natural environment, and proposed plans to mitigate
risk. Specifically, the project examines how these perceptions relate to flood
risk and the flood mitigation infrastructure in Houston, Texas. The research
involves collection of survey data on residents of the Houston area related to
their perceptions of flood risk and opinions on proposed flood mitigation
strategies. These perceptions are overlayed onto data collected on objective
indicators of environmental quality and infrastructure to help identify where
there may be a mismatch between public perception and the function of built
environments, which will lead to stronger future infrastructure. The primary
goal of this project is to provide actionable research that will improve
disaster mitigation strategies. By incorporating both human understandings of
risk, as well as engineering perspectives on proposed solutions, this research
advances efforts to mitigate disasters in an equitable manner that engages the
community. Most immediately, this work informs local and national efforts to
mitigate the devastation of persistent flood events and may serve as a model for
how to better understand and contextualize community understandings of flood
risk and mitigation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.