* 2121643
* Optical Bound States and Non-linearity in Geometrically-Modulated Dielectric Nanowires
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* James Cahoon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 545,613.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of light with spherical or
cylindrical particles of microscopic size has frequently been used to understand
the general principles of how light interacts with matter of different sizes and
shapes. For example, microscopic particles that are comparable to or smaller
than the wavelength of light can give rise to surprisingly strong light
scattering and absorption. Recently, it has become possible to make microscopic
particles with shapes that go beyond simple cylinders to instead have periodic
modulations in their size. Under the right conditions, these geometric
modulations cause the particles to interact with light in a new way, giving rise
to what is termed an “optical bound state in the continuum,” or BIC. This
project uses a combination of theory, computation, synthesis, and measurement to
understand how the geometry of microscopic particles can be used to control the
properties of BICs. BICs are exciting because they dramatically increase the
extent to which light interacts with particles. In some cases, the interaction
is sufficiently strong to cause the particles to convert red or infrared light
into blue or ultraviolet light, a “non-linear” effect. The results of this
project provide the general principles for controlling BICs in geometrically-
modulated particles, thus providing the fundamental principles for controlling
light over a broad range of colors at a microscopic scale. The research effort
involves undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in a project that
bridges the interface between chemistry, physics, and engineering—providing
breadth of experience in nanomaterial synthesis, microfabrication, spectroscopy,
microscopy, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;In cylindrical dielectric particles, Mie resonances can
cause surprisingly strong light scattering and light absorption, and the
importance and interplay of Mie resonances, leaky-mode resonances, and guided
modes in these structures has previously been studied. A relatively new class of
resonance, the BIC, has been identified and can theoretically trap light for an
infinite time in an ideal system. This project studies the fundamental light
scattering, light absorption, and nonlinear properties of BICs in dielectric
cylinders with nanoscale lateral size. The silicon structures are synthesized by
a bottom-up vapor-liquid-solid process using in situ dopant modulation combined
with wet-chemical etching to create precisely-defined morphology. Periodic
modulation of the diameter of a dielectric cylinder is shown to introduce a
range of BICs of different order, polarization, and symmetry type. Spectroscopic
measurements on single NWs of controlled geometry are compared to theoretical
models, providing validation of theoretical predictions. The capacity of BICs in
silicon NWs to enable nonlinear effects by doubling or tripling the frequency of
incoming light is also evaluated. Overall, the proposed study reveals the
fundamental characteristics of BICs in dielectric cylinders and highlights
important practical applications of these BIC modes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.