* 2121426
* Allosteric effects in the complexes between Ras proteins and Raf
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Carla Mattos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 994,983.00

This project focuses on discerning the molecular mechanisms through which key
proteins that regulate cell proliferation, Ras and Raf, attain different
biological functions through natural variants that affect details of their
interactions with each other. The research is founded on earlier discoveries
where the interaction between Ras and Raf promotes dimerization of the complex
and small variations in the proteins result in changes in biochemical outcomes.
This project challenges current dogma for signaling and regulation associated
with cell proliferation, with the potential of transforming fundamental
understanding of how the system works at the molecular level. This project will
provide training for underrepresented minorities in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ras GTPases, HRas, KRas and NRas control cell
proliferation via the Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK pathway (MAPK pathway) through a process
in which Ras dimerization is required, but not mechanistically understood. The
homologous GTPase Rap1A also interacts with Raf, but its biological outcome
varies depending on specific Raf isoforms. The Ras Binding Domain of Raf (Raf-
RBD) promotes Ras dimerization resulting in strong allosteric linkages between
the two extreme ends of the dimer (85 Å apart) and most recently solved the
crystal structure of Ras in complex with both RBD and the Cysteine Rich Domain
(CRD) of Raf. The surfaces on Ras contacted by the CRD both in the monomer and
in the dimer are regions of isoform specific residue differences in the Ras
GTPases, suggesting a mechanism through which these differences could impact
MAPK signaling. This project will test the hypothesis that residue differences
in key regions of allosteric connections in Ras and Rap, across their complexes
with Raf lead to refinement of allosteric modulations particular to each
GTPase/Raf pair, with implications to regulation and signaling. This hypothesis
will be tested using a series of biophysical and biochemical approaches. This
project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.