* 2121122
* Modeling the dynamics of belief formation: Towards a computational understanding of the timing and accuracy of probability judgments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Timothy Pleskac, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 692,123.00

The next time you need a forecast, stop and ask yourself if you could wait for
it. Chances are, especially in this age of accelerations we live in, you want
that forecast now. Not in a few minutes. Not in an hour. Certainly not after the
forecaster can collect more information. You want it now. You want the best
estimate based on the information they have right then. This demand implies that
accurate and timely forecasts are valued. How does time pressure impact
subjective probability judgments (SPs), how do they change over time, and how
much of a trade-off is there between accurate forecasts and timely ones? It is
hard to answer these questions because extant theories of SPs have focused on
accuracy. Most of them are silent about how SPs evolve as they are constructed
with the forecaster's information. This project seeks to answer these questions
using computational modeling and behavioral experiments to map the time course
of SPs. First, the computational model predicts the SPs people generate in
response to questions such as "What is the probability that the University of
Kansas men's basketball team will win this year's tournament‚Äù and predicts the
time it takes people to generate the judgment. Second, a set of empirical
studies advance understanding of how people generate the judgments and how time
pressure impacts them. The computational framework developed in this project
informs the design of prediction polls in terms of number of questions, time
pressure, and incentive structures. The project also serves to train students in
computational modeling and advance STEM education as the PI integrates data
science training within the liberal arts and science curriculum. Developing
methods to model response times and judgments create opportunities to expand
algorithms' predictive power and provide a channel for social and behavioral
scientists to play an active role in developing the field of data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to provide a dynamic account of
how people generate subjective probability (SP) forecasts. This proposal has
three aims. The first aim is to develop a computational model of belief
formation and the dynamics of SPs that result from this process (Modeling the
Dynamics of SPs Aim). Such a model enables to predict SPs, how they change over
the briefest of time intervals as people construct a belief and predict how time
pressure impacts SPs. But, modeling the dynamics of SPs requires a mechanistic
understanding of how belief evolves. To this end, the second aim empirically
tests a set of consistency principles of contemporary theories of SPs (Tests of
Consistency Principles Aim). These principles state that the evidence or support
people recruit about a hypothesis is independent of the alternative hypotheses.
Analogous assumptions have been made in the domain of preference, and violations
are well established via so-called context effects. These context effects have
been diagnostic in identifying the cognitive architecture underlying the
construction of preference. Data suggest this may also be the case for the
construction of belief. This project rigorously tests these effects across time.
Using the computational model of SPs the project also examines the optimal
policy for trading off speed and accuracy as forecasters report their SPs over a
series of to-be-predicted events. Together, the project empirically-validates a
computational framework of SPs that help isolate mechanisms that may inhibit
people from giving accurate and timely forecasts; and develop interventions to
improve the efficiency of obtaining SPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.