* 2121648
* Adaptation: Adapting Successful Practices to foster an Inclusive, Respectful, and Equitable Environment (ASPIRE2)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Adams, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University of Texas at Dallas (UT Dallas) will be Adapting Successful
Practices to foster an Inclusive, Respectful, and Equitable Environment
(ASPIRE2) to significantly and systematically transform the campus in ways that
will expand and enrich the diversity of its faculty in STEM fields and beyond.
Through the ASPIRE2 Project, UT Dallas will adapt and implement successful
activities to foster a more inclusive campus climate, recruit more women in STEM
fields, (including women of color and women from underrepresented minority
groups), and aid in the retention of all women faculty, in STEM and across
campus. The goal of the project is help UT Dallas, a major research university,
better reflect and represent the world in terms of gender and racial diversity.
By doing so, UT Dallas can better serve its community, state and country,
helping solve the national crisis of the disproportionate lack of tenured-system
women, especially in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the
ASPIRE2 Project are expected to bring about structural and cultural
transformation and tackle persistent problems in innovative and intersectional
ways. The ASPIRE2 activities include: Climate (training for deans,
department/program heads, and faculty will be conducted; a department/program
head council will be formed; an Advocates and Allies Program will be developed;
a biennial climate survey will be administered; and equity dashboards for the
University and individual schools will be instituted), Identification and
Recruitment (Activities include future faculty career development workshops,
paying careful attention to the composition of and training for search
committees, and providing faculty liaisons to search committees), and Retention
and Advancement (strengthening the existing faculty mentoring program, creating
a Women in STEM employee resource group, and augmenting existing workshops for
faculty promotion and tenure). This project will enhance the climate on the UT
Dallas campus while broadening the participation and success among women
faculty, particularly women of color and women from underrepresented minority
groups. Building on existing efforts, UT DALLAS is well-poised to create a more
welcoming and inclusive environment by adapting previously vetted initiatives
and strengthening the relationships across campus between administrators,
faculty, and staff through the ASPIRE2 activities. Increasing faculty diversity
will fuel new research collaborations while enriching teaching, learning and the
overall student experience. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender
equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of organizational
barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of diverse faculty
in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist
in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational culture and climate.
ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of
evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.