* 2121486
* Institutionalizing Undergraduate Research to Advance Systemic Change and Equity at Washington Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* M. Gita Bangera, Bellevue College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing a model for
democratizing access to undergraduate research for community college students
across the state of Washington. The project goal is to expand the collective
capacity of Washington Community and Technical Colleges (CTC)s to provide
undergraduate research experiences as a high-impact practice for educational
equity and broadening participation and retention in STEM. This project will
seek to answer the question, “How can CTCs create the collective structures,
processes, capacities, and resources needed to provide expanded and sustained
undergraduate research opportunities across the Washington State CTC system to
improve STEM education and equitably serve CTC students?” The project team will
form a statewide community of practice (COP) of Washington CTC faculty and
administrators. This COP will investigate, inventory, and strategize how to form
a statewide consortium for equitable access to undergraduate research (UGR) that
serves students and faculty of all 34 of Washington State’s CTCs. Engaging CTCs
in systemic STEM education reform is vital to the success of broadening
participation in STEM and improving educational outcomes for diverse STEM
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to 1) develop a
distributed leadership structure that will function as a Leadership COP to
manage and facilitate this capacity building process, 2) investigate systemic
barriers, challenges, and opportunities for expanding UGR experiences, and
educational equity at the institutional level and state-wide, 3) develop a
shared vision and strategic plan for the future state of the undergraduate
research consortium, 4) form a statewide pedagogical COP to build instructional
capacity for faculty to develop and implement course-based undergraduate
research experiences, and 5) build institutional and statewide executive
leadership support for the formation and institutionalization of an
undergraduate research consortium. The equity impact of undergraduate research
can only be harnessed when deployed at scale (across disciplines and
institutions), and when systemic change occurs at community colleges that serve
the majority of undergraduates, especially those from underrepresented groups.
Systemic change is not possible unless the environments and structures that
constrain innovation at departmental, institutional, and cross-institutional
scales are re-examined and changed. The state of Washington, with its existing
collaborative CTC structure and critical mass of CTCs conducting undergraduate
research, is poised to study and initiate the implementation of this systemic
change. This capacity building project has potential to demystify the challenges
and opportunities inherent in systemic change processes to improve STEM
education and educational equity. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.