* 2121559
* A Novel AI-Human Teaming Approach to Trust and Cooperation in AI-Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Ramona Houmanfar, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,620.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving the state-of-the-
art in cybersecurity education. The national cyberinfrastructure is vulnerable
to a wide range of cyberthreats and hazards. Cyberthreat intelligence data gives
insight into a cyberattack and provides an opportunity to become proactively
secure. Proactive cybersecurity has become dependent upon AI, making it
essential that cybersecurity practitioners gain an understanding of both
cybersecurity and AI. This project will combine research in AI, cybersecurity,
education, and behavior science to investigate evidence-based and knowledge-
generating approaches to cybersecurity education that emphasizes AI-human teams.
The investigators will study trust and cooperation in AI-human teams to generate
knowledge that will inform future educational efforts that lie at the
intersection of AI and cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance educational knowledge in the fields of AI, cybersecurity, and behavior
science through three objectives, resulting in 1) AI-Enabled Defense Simulation
Suite (AI-EDSimS), enabling hands-on learning for students and cybersecurity
professionals, 2) a new course on AI and Cybersecurity transforming
undergraduate education by integrating the two subjects with a focus on AI-human
teaming for proactive cybersecurity practice, and 3) new knowledge in AI-
Cybersecurity education as it relates to AI-human teaming, leading to improved
understanding of the role of trust and cooperation in AI-human teams. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.