* 2121737
* MCA: Understanding Logistics Through Multimodal Experiments in Ethnography
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Julie Chu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 374,395.00

Once seen as a mere add-on to manufacturing concerns in the market, logistics –
that is, the management of flows in goods, information and people - has
transformed into a more general condition of how things circulate through
everyday life. On the one hand, innovation in supply chain logistics has
revolutionized how goods are produced and consumed as well as how labor, land,
and infrastructures are organized to support an increasingly on-demand global
economy. On the other hand, logistical failures or interruptions – for example,
in the malfunctioning of web services for businesses or in the shortage of
medical supplies amid the COVID-19 pandemic – can spark various political and
economic crises over expected movements and just allocations. Such crises bring
public attention to the importance of logistics in shaping global flows and
interdependence. This project broadens the participation of underrepresented
groups in data science, and includes a built-in training component that
contributes to the improvement of student STEM education in critical fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances research on the growing social
impact of logistics as an indispensable way of organizing and understanding
contemporary relations of mobility, economy, security, and the environment.
Recognizing that the rise of logistics is integrally tied to ubiquitous
computing and its related digital networks of sensors, scanners, interfaces, and
infrastructures, the researcher will pursue a program of exploratory research
and training for developing new multimodal methods for better engaging and
representing the hidden computational and infrastructural designs that power
logistical worlds. Through training in digital coding and data visualization
with an expert and through a series of experimental field schools for advancing
collaborative research among an interdisciplinary set of scholars in key
logistical hotspots around the world, the project fosters creative synergies
between anthropology, computer science, and media arts while pursuing a
comparative study of how logistics shapes the various entangled flows of people,
things and data in global circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.