* 2121697
* Settlers, slaves, and merchants: the role of migrant networks in the economic development of the Americas
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jose-Antonio Espin-Sanchez, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 12/31/2024
* USD 291,000.00

Human capital is a term that refers to a person’s ability to produce value.
Regions with populations with high levels of human capital are richer today, but
what explains the differences in human capital between regions? Where people go
and where they live determine how much human capital different places in the
world have and in turn how wealthy or poor different regions are. Regional
wealth differences in the Americas depend not only on who lives there now, but
also on historical patterns of migration and human capital concentration during
colonial times. This project develops a large database of where voluntary and
involuntary (slaves) migrants went during colonial times. The database will
contain information about migrants’ origins, measures of their human capital
such as education and occupation, and map migration networks from Spain and
Africa to the Americas. The database will allow researchers and others to learn
what types of human capital were important and how the human capital of migrants
influenced long-term economic development in different regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create an open-source public database
that will be available for scholars to carry out research on migration from a
historical perspective in fields across the social sciences. The database will
include the origins and destinations of all migrants, their physical attributes,
and historical and contemporary socio-economic outcomes. Through a dedicated
bilingual (English and Spanish) website, this project will provide: (i) the
ability to examine data by regions over time in open-source friendly formats;
(ii) historical maps with information on the main regions of origin and
destination for migrants; (iii) short essays on migration flows, (iv) examples
of primary sources; and (v) relevant bibliography. With this comprehensive
database, researchers will be able to answer a large scope of questions about
economic development in the Americas from a multidisciplinary perspective.
Moreover, students and the public alike will be able to see first-hand the
extraordinary flow of people that shaped the modern multicultural societies
found all over the Americas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.