* 2121570
* Collaborative Research: Ice Forcing in Arc Magma Plumbing Systems (IF-AMPS)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Shaun Marcott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,511,770.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;A question at the frontier of Earth science
is: how do changes in the climate system on our planet's surface interact with
magma reservoirs housed within its interior? We will conduct a novel blend of
field observations, lab measurements, and numerical model simulations in an
integrated study of links between changes in glaciers and topography, and the
behavior of several active volcanoes in Chile during the last 50,000 years.
These volcanoes were partly covered by the 3,000 foot thick Patagonian ice sheet
until it melted rapidly beginning 18,000 years ago. This natural laboratory
offers unparalleled means to investigate how the rapid loss of ice impacted the
composition and rates of eruptions from these volcanoes. This project will
provide career-building experience for several PhD students. A volcano &amp; ice
Summer program will engage technical school students from underrepresented
groups in the US and Chile in field- and lab-based experiences, including
training in drone technology for data collection and geologic mapping. Our
collaborations with Chilean scientists and educators aim to: (1) enhance
knowledge of the growth rates and eruptive histories of several of the most
dangerous volcanoes in South America, thereby improving hazard assessment, (2)
generate new climate proxy data critical to calibrating our numerical model of
ice sheet retreat, and (3) train students from the communities living near these
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt; Utilizing new and existing geochronologic, geochemical,
glacial and erosion/deposition observations within the Andean Southern Volcanic
Zone, we aim to couple a suite of numerical models to test and refine three
hypotheses: (1) Over short timescales (&lt;100,000 year), the composition,
volume, and timing of eruptions are strongly influenced by climate-driven
changes in surface loading. These short-term responses modulate the long-term
(&gt;100,000 year) average eruptive characteristics, which are governed by
mantle melt flux, (2) Crustal stress changes associated with the local onset of
rapid deglaciation and erosion at 18,000 years ago promoted eruptions by
enhancing volatile exsolution that in turn pressurized stored magma and
propelled dike propagation to the surface, and (3) Responses to rapid unloading
will vary among volcanoes, reflecting contrasts in the composition, volatile
contents, and compressibility of stored magma, as well as the rate at which
crustal reservoirs are recharged from depth. This variability can be exploited
to reveal fundamental controls on the sensitivity of glaciated arcs to the
climate system. To investigate these hypotheses, we will pursue four objectives:
(1) Generate high-resolution records of cone growth, eruptive behavior, and
geochemical evolution of six volcanoes during the last ~50,000 years spanning
250 km along the subduction zone, (2) Build new records of ice retreat, and
landscape evolution owing to the erosion, transport, and deposition of sediment
adjacent to the six volcanoes, (3) Use the observed chemical and physical
patterns in the volcanic, climatic, and topographic records to constrain crustal
loading through time, and explore the effects of this forcing in numerical
models, and (4) Integrate findings to contextualize processes in continental
settings, and provide a framework for examining the sensitivity of arc volcanism
to external forcing elsewhere and across a spectrum of climate states throughout
Earth history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.