* 2121601
* Adaptation: Empower through Inclusivity: Developing Pathways to Success
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2024
* USD 999,963.00

An NSF ADVANCE adaptation award will allow the South Dakota School of Mines and
Technology (SDM) to initiate new programs and improve upon existing data
collection and personnel policy to enhance gender, racial, and ethnic diversity.
SDM is a PhD granting engineering science and technology university that is
geographically isolated, surrounded by counties in the region considered
frontier and remote (FAR) areas having populations of less than 7 people per
square mile. Its size (2700 students, 145 faculty), location, and STEM focus
provide challenges with respect to retention of a diverse faculty. Our intent
for this project will be to empower SDM faculty and research staff by shifting
from a culture of attrition to a culture of development and engaging the
majority populations of faculty at SDM to increase awareness of implicit biases,
promote pathways to success for all faculty, and improve campus culture and
climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through careful curation and adaptation of
successful ADVANCE initiatives, the project aims to enable a change in
institutional culture. The project design is rooted in an understanding of the
current climate and needs of the SDM faculty, including instructors and research
professionals. The merit of the project is that it engages top-down support for
programs that will have a marked impact on campus climate allowing for a
transition from a culture of attrition to a culture of development. To improve
retention of underrepresented groups, the project intends to include adaptation
of three proven programs: Advocates and Allies (NDSU), facilitated mentoring
circles (Murray State), and Mutual Mentoring (UMass). These programs are
structured to include feedback to improve policy, involve expert advisors and
evaluators, and are rooted in an enhanced plan for data collection and analysis.
This project aims to directly address the need to improve the participation of
women in STEM fields by providing programs to increase retention and career
advancement at a Science and Engineering Specialty School in an EPSCoR state
that serves a FAR region. Planned activities will not only benefit women tenure-
track faculty but will be made available to individuals in other career paths
(instructional and research staff), to all genders, and to all ethnicities/races
represented on campus. These efforts also will lead to improved educational
opportunities for students to learn with a diverse faculty with members fully
engaged in campus culture. Best practices from SDM efforts will be made
available to other institutions in the state, including the other five
institutions in the Board of Regents system, three tribal colleges/universities,
and two private universities. The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster
gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation" awards provide support for the
adaptation and adoption of evidence-based strategies to academic, non-profit
institutions of higher education as well as non-academic, non-profit
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.