* 2121989
* Adaptation: DU MERISTEM - Mobilizing Equity to Raise Inclusivity in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Anna Sher, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 12/31/2024
* USD 990,843.00

Despite the fact that the proportion of females earning STEM degrees is now
nearly equal to men, women account for less than a third of STEM faculty
positions in American universities-- and even fewer faculty with intersectional
identities. The University of Denver (DU) will address this problem with an
interdivisional coalition and initiative called the DU-MERISTEM (pronounced
“mer-ə-stem”). “Meristem” is a scientific term that refers to plant tissues with
rapidly reproducing cells responsible for growth, development, and healing.
Similarly, the DU programs will aim to promote the growth of the STEM leadership
to be able to guide cultural change and hiring, develop mentoring structures and
resources to ensure retention and promotion of marginalized groups, and work to
heal both individual and institutional wrongs through effective accountability
structures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of DU-MERISTEM are to 1)
improve hiring practices to increase diverse representation, 2) increase support
across the career trajectory, particularly ensuring that new hires have a
pathway to career success, and 3) make the climate more positive for women and
other diverse hires through changes to departmental cultures. To advance these
aims, DU-MERISTEM will use approaches based on ecological systems theory and
Kotter’s change models, which emphasize sustainability and the critical role of
leadership. Using this foundation, DU will develop and implement three programs
informed by successes at other schools: 1) DU-GROW, in which chairs and others
engaged in searches and promotion will receive special training in best
practices to foster diversity and equity; 2) DU-DEVELOP, a mentor training
program with a focus on helping new hires succeed; and 3) DU-HEAL, an
accountability structure for leadership and clear mechanisms to address
microaggressions and other conflicts, using specially trained “equity
advocates.” Together, these initiatives are intended to shift the culture in
such a way as to both increase numbers of women and other underrepresented
groups as well as create an environment in which they are supported and can
succeed. The products of the programs will not only help inform other similar
institutions but will also impact the corporate and non-profit organizational
space through DU’s Equity Labs, an immersive, experiential program based in DU’s
Graduate School of Social Work (GSSW).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.