* 2121277
* Multiphysics Enriched Mixed Reality for Integrated Geotechnical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Sarah Ferguson, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,910.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by design, implementation and
assessment of the impact of a series of innovative mixed reality games on
undergraduate students’ interest and success in geo-technical engineering.
Despite the critical role of geo-technical engineering in many global issues
today, comprehensive geo-technical education is missing from many civil
engineering curricula. Additionally, students have few opportunities to apply
geo-technical principles and very rarely choose to specialize in this important
sub-field. The project will be implemented across different institutional
settings. The use of the novel game-based learning environment (MERGE) as well
as integration of smart city design concept is a powerful way to enhance student
engagement. The mixed reality game infuses cyber-infrastructure learning
experiences and meta-cognitive skills into an attractive and motivating learning
environment. MERGE is expected to provide an integrated geo-technical learning
experience with visualization, collaboration and simulation tools to promote
metacognition for geo-technical design and problem solving.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MERGE seeks to create an interactive learning platform for
students to digitally explore multi-physical geo-technical phenomena. The
project will advance the current understanding of the role of mixed reality in
fostering student learning, the process of interactive visual exploration for
engineering design, and the interplay of meta-cognitive interventions and
problem-solving tactics. Research questions are clearly articulated to guide
investigations in the game-based learning environment which include the
examination of impact on student learning of geo-technical engineering concepts,
student experimental skills, cyber-infrastructure knowledge and ethical
decision-making. The use of a mixed method approach will permit the
triangulation of quantitative and qualitative findings. The cyber-features of
the game system will enable unlimited access outside the traditional classroom,
encouraging life-long learning for students to adapt to a continuously changing
world. The project will directly enhance geo-technical learning for students at
Rowan University and the University of the District of Columbia (an HBCU) and
prepare them for the future geo-technical engineering workforce. The project
will organize workshops for both local and national geo-technical educators to
disseminate project information and gather professional comments for future
improvements. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.