* 2121664
* Observing hydrocarbon particles and multiphase flows in submarine seeps - an integrated imaging system
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Binbin Wang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 512,542.00

The PI requests funding to develop an integrated imaging system that would
concurrently measure the characteristics of submarine seep bubbles/drops and the
“structure” of the surrounding ocean water. This work would produce models for
bubble fluxes and dispersal that can be useful to researchers working in many
different domains. It would contribute to a better understanding of the
influence of natural marine hydrocarbon seepage to the hydrosphere and
atmosphere is urgently needed to evaluate its importance and contribution,
especially these days when global warming and our changing environment is also
highly debated in public. This work provides well-structured educational
programs with clear methods of assessment. The instrument to be developed
through the proposed project has a high potential to foster international and
interdisciplinary collaboration, especially if implemented in a marine cabled
observatory array like OOI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the fundamental
challenges and the need of understanding the interaction between the natural
seep and its agitated water flow, this proposal is dedicated to developing an
innovative imaging system that would near-simultaneously measures the size of
drops/bubbles, appearance of the bubble surface, morphological behavior, rise
velocity, and discharge, and the three-dimensional velocity of water, turbulent
statistics, vortices in the bubble wake, and the characteristics length and time
scales in bubble-induced mixing. This new instrument would overcome some key
deficiencies in imaging systems currently available to the research community
studying submarine seeps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.