* 2121725
* Collaborative Research: Bidirectional Effects Between Parental Work-Family Conflict and Adolescent Psychosocial Adjustment
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2021,11/30/2021
* Christine Ohannessian, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 11/30/2021
* USD 4,402.00

Parents of adolescents often feel like it is hard to carry out their obligations
at work, while at the same time attending to matters at home. As a result of
this work-family conflict, a parent may experience low morale at work, stress,
and depression, all of which have profound effects on their work engagement and
productivity. Such tension between work and family may potentially impact the
home environment as well, including negative effects on how adolescent children
in the family think, feel, and behave. However, we know little about these
effects, and also whether a negative home environment may have similarly
negative effects on parents at work. Our project seeks to study work-family
conflict and its effects on the home environment (and vice versa) using
controlled laboratory methods, and methods that allow for the study of these
factors in "real-life" outside of the laboratory. By understanding the ways in
which work-family conflict and the home environment influence each other, we may
gain a better understanding of how to improve functioning in both work and home
domain, and thus increase parents' work engagement and productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many employees in the U.S. experience high demands to
fulfill obligations both at work and at home (Galinsky et al. 2009). The
incompatibility of heightened pressure from both work and home is referred to as
work-family conflict (Greenhaus &amp; Beutell, 1985), high levels of which place
employees at increased risk for a host of poor work and psychosocial outcomes
(e.g., job dissatisfaction, turnover, depression; Allen, 2012). Moreover, to the
extent that child care poses demands in the family domain (Bianchi &amp; Milkie,
2010), the children of employees are important stakeholders in the work-family
interface. Yet, the role of employees? children in absorbing the impact or being
a source of work-family conflict has received scant attention. Such issues are
particularly important to address in families with adolescents. Specifically,
work-family conflict creates contexts in which parents have fewer resources or
time to monitor their adolescents' whereabouts and activities, likely placing
adolescents at high risk for poor psychosocial outcomes (Smetana, 2008). In
fact, relative to younger children, adolescents are more likely to display
problem behaviors (e.g., depression and substance abuse) that increase parent-
adolescent conflict, which may affect parents' time and energy at work. Thus, we
propose to address research questions within families who have adolescent
children. Specifically, we propose two studies that test both directions of a
mediation model informed by the spillover hypothesis of life stressors (Staines,
1980). Based on prior work indicating that parent-adolescent conflict evidences
reciprocal relations with children's psychosocial adjustment (Burt et al.,
2005), we propose that the reciprocal relations between work-family conflict and
adolescent psychosocial maladjustment are mediated by parent-adolescent
conflict. Further, our team members have training in not only diverse social
science disciplines, but also diverse research settings. Accordingly, we propose
two studies that test the model described previously in both field and
laboratory settings, allowing each study's strengths to address the limitations
of the other study. First, we will test both directions of the above-mentioned
mediation model using daily diaries, completed by both parents and adolescents,
conducted over a two-week period to measure work-family conflict, parent-
adolescent conflict, parental work functioning, and adolescent psychosocial
functioning. Second, we will test the same theoretical model using a laboratory
design. Specifically, we will recruit family dyads with one full-time working
parent and one adolescent for a laboratory study. We will randomly assign each
full-time working parent and adolescent dyad to one of three levels of the
independent variable: (a) task induction of parental work stress and a low-
stress condition for the adolescent, (b) task induction of adolescent
psychosocial stress and a low-stress condition for the parent, and (c) both
parent and adolescent assigned to a low-stress condition. Next, we will
administer a controlled task meant to reflect parent-adolescent conflict (i.e.,
mediator variable), and we will objectively assess parent and adolescent
physiological flexibility (i.e., an index of emotional dysregulation) during
this task. We then will administer performance-based tasks of parental work
functioning and adolescent psychosocial functioning to test the impact of
parent-adolescent conflict on these domains, as well as the cross-domain,
indirect impacts of parental work stress and adolescent psychosocial stress. The
proposed project promises to improve our basic understanding of the spillover
between parents? work experiences and non-work family life.