* 2121152
* Taking CalcPlot3D to the Next Dimension: Creating 3D Printed Learning Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Paul Seeburger, Monroe Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2024
* USD 237,454.00

The project aims to serve the national need for STEM students to succeed in
calculus by enabling them to develop a deeper understanding of three-dimensional
(3D) concepts through hands-on, physical 3D explorations. Although visualizing
3D concepts on a screen can provide students with some insight, students often
still find this process challenging. Additional insight can be gained by
students through the use of guided hands-on interactions with physical
3D-printed models. The investigators for this collaborative project are faculty
at Monroe Community College (Lead), the University of Oklahoma, and the United
States Air Force Academy who will build on a previous CalcPlot3D collaborative
project (NSF#1524968-Lead) to develop, implement, and study guided learning
activities and innovative, pedagogically-designed, two-color 3D-printed models.
An additional component of the project will provide instructional resources,
including how-to videos, and scaffolded training for faculty to facilitate their
incorporation and creation of 3D models for use in the classroom. In conjunction
with these activities, project research will provide insights to determine and
inform how instructors leverage 3D models to enhance student visualization and
understanding of 3D problems and concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
have an interwoven dual emphasis, namely student learning and faculty
professional development. The underlying vision of the project is to develop
resources and determine best practices for (i) implementing activities using
3D-printed surfaces effectively in the classroom to enhance student interest,
intuition, visualization, learning, and understanding of 3D calculus problems
and concepts and (ii) providing professional development for faculty in this
realm. The project has five major goals. First is to expand the 3D printing
features in CalcPlot3D and investigate various print techniques and print media
to develop innovative, pedagogically useful 3D-printed surfaces and solids.
Second is to develop and class-test a series of learning activities - with
guided exploration questions, files to generate 3D models, and an instructor's
guide - using 3D-printed surfaces and solids. Third is to create a series of
how-to videos and online tutorials to teach faculty how to generate their own
3D-printed surfaces using CalcPlot3D. Fourth is to support student learning
activities and help studentsâ€™ visualization by explicitly connecting 3D-printed
models to CalcPlot3D digital images. Lastly, the investigators will conduct
educational research to determine the impact of these new materials and
approaches on student learning and how instructors with CalcPlot3D experience
make use of 3D-printed models in their multivariable calculus instruction. The
project team will disseminate project materials and findings through various
venues including conference exhibits and workshops. The determination of best
practices will converge through a multi-year, mixed methods research
investigation utilizing formative and summative feedback, and will include
development and testing classroom activities and materials and faculty
professional development resources. This dual investigative approach will
include correlation analysis of participant activity and performance data and a
study of how classroom instructors reflect on and employ use of the 3D-printed
models and learning activities based on those models. Ultimately, the project
will provide a free tool for teaching and learning 3D problems and concepts that
will extend to other STEM disciplines and courses beyond calculus. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.