* 2121391
* CPS: Medium: Aerial Co-Workers: Augmenting Physical and Cognitive Human Capabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Chen Feng, New York University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 890,936.00

This project studies the algorithmic foundations and methodological frameworks
to augment human capabilities via a novel form of physical and cognitive
collaboration between human and multi-agent robotic systems, creating Aerial Co-
Workers. These machines will actively collaborate with each other and with
humans and tackle the fundamental gaps related to human-MAV collaboration at
both physical and cognitive levels. The project is organized along two main
thrust areas: Physical Collaboration and Cognitive Collaboration. The first
thrust aims to significantly augment the physical ability of human workers by
taking advantage of physical collaboration between the operator and a network of
interconnected quadrotors, equipped with a set of flying hands", transporting
objects. This will produce novel scientific solutions for human-robot
collaborations to account for the complex legibility of the motions, and the
variability of the relative positions of the agents. The second thrust aims to
address two perception consensus problems to enable MAV-assisted augmented
reality (AR) to augment the cognitive ability of operator(s). The key is to
consistently collect, analyze, and display contextual information via multiple
MAVs for effective and natural human-robot visual interactions. Aerial Co-
Workers will get vantage viewpoints of the environment occluded from the humans
which can be customized and augmented directly in the workspace to facilitate
human actions via novel metric-semantic collaborative space
mapping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a strong societal impact as
a disruptive technology for industry as well as the construction market, which
is in urgent need of innovative solutions for enhancing the efficacy while
maximizing safety. The outcome will enable safer, faster, and simpler task
execution in scenarios including maintenance, inspection, transportation, and
search and rescue. The project will contribute to lowering the barriers for new
researchers in robotics, computer vision, and machine learning by making
hardware designs, algorithms, datasets, and code available on open-source
forums. The playful nature of AR tools and quadrotors employed in this project
will contribute to engaging K-12 and undergraduate
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.