* 2121909
* EAGER: SAI: Collaborative Research: Community-Driven Innovation for Resilient Bridges in Remote Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Guangqing Chi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 259,112.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bridges have become increasingly critical for
remote communities in northern latitudes. Residents frequently need to cross
rivers or lakes to hunt and gather traditional foods as well as access schools,
healthcare facilities, and other essential services that are typically available
in regional hubs. Travel by boat is common during warmer months, while frozen
water bodies serve as transportation corridors during winter. Temperatures in
these regions are increasing rapidly, causing rivers to freeze later, thaw
earlier, and form thinner ice. There have been concurrent increases in
snowmobile fatalities related to unstable and unpredictable ice. Reliable
bridges connect communities and provide safe transportation corridors to larger
settlements, which not only support indigenous subsistence livelihoods and
remote access to goods and services, but also reduce weather-related deaths and
injuries. This project aims to understand the importance of bridges for the
well-being of remote communities and to develop a protocol for other remote
communities to work together to fund, construct, monitor, and maintain bridges.
More generally, this project potentially demonstrates methods for efficient and
cost-effective assessments of infrastructure condition in remote, rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building and maintaining bridges in remote areas
entails challenges common to both the social sciences and engineering. From a
social science perspective, it is critical to understand how bridge construction
impacts community well-being and how communities can work together effectively
to secure the necessary financial resources for bridge construction. From an
engineering perspective, critical infrastructure such as bridges is vulnerable
to the effects of climate, including permafrost thawing and increased
precipitation that accelerate corrosion, and rising sea levels that correspond
with flooding. It is therefore essential to determine effective ways to monitor
the stability and safety of a bridge after it is constructed. The researchers on
this project examine three interconnected research questions. First, how does
bridge construction affect subsistence activities, education, social ties, and
health and safety? Second, how can drones be used effectively to monitor changes
on a bridge? Third, how can communities effectively work together to identify
and apply for bridge construction funding? The study is conducted in regions
that vary in the success of recent efforts to fund and construct bridges. The
researchers partner with local stakeholders to produce reports and
recommendations that can benefit other bridge construction projects. The
researchers use data from interviews and household surveys, complemented by the
use of imagery from drones, which is collected on a biannual basis to monitor
and evaluate long-term structural conditions. By combining perspectives from
social science and engineering, the project demonstrates how infrastructure
projects can align with local priorities. This alignment of resources becomes an
ever-more pressing matter as the effects of long-term environmental change
contribute to the degradation of critical transportation infrastructure.
Additionally, this project engages local school districts to provide real-world
learning opportunities for students and workforce development for
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.