* 2121424
* Helping Improve and Scale Introductory Programming Courses through Automated Code-Reading Exercises
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Craig Zilles, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a tool that will
help computing departments to prepare more students to enter the technical
workforce, in particular to improve their ability to program. Explain in plain
English" (EipE) questions are considered by many to play an important role in
helping students to learn to program by emphasizing “code reading,” an important
developmental skill that supports “code writing.” However, while many
programming course activities (e.g., code writing) can be objectively graded in
a straight-forward manner, activities like "Explain in plain English" (EipE)
questions that ask students to read a given piece of code and describe its
function in English are difficult to grade consistently. While EipE questions
are well regarded by researchers, they are not in widespread use
instructionally, presumably due to the burden of manually grading them and the
slow feedback provided to students. The goal of this project is to develop a
natural language processing (NLP) based autograder for EipE questions that will
provide students with immediate feedback, ease the instructional burden of using
EPiE questions in the classroom, and help increase the use of this effective
pedagogical approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting from a bag-of-words and
bigram-based implementation that is already accurate enough for use in low
stakes assessments, this project will refine this implementation using publicly
available pre trained Transformer architectures. The project centers around two
research questions: (1) How does student performance on code reading activities
relate to performance on other activities in introductory programming courses?
and (2) Can we improve student success rates in introductory programming courses
by introducing automated formative EipE assessments? The proposed qualitative
and quantitative studies will contribute to the understanding of how novices
learn to program and the role that learning to read code plays in learning. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.