* 2121816
* Collaborative Research: Investigating Mantle Source Reservoirs and Cretaceous Plate Motions Recorded by Ancient Mid-Pacific Oceanic Rises and Seamount Tracks
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Valerie Finlayson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 403,517.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earth’s surface is composed of
numerous rigid ‘plates’ that move with the flow of a highly viscous interior
mantle. Individual plate movements can be determined if their past motions are
compared to a fixed source on Earth, such as so-called “mantle hotspots”. These
hotspots are generated by mantle plumes, large thermo-chemical uprisings of
material that originate on or near the core-mantle boundary. These upwellings of
hot material can produce volcanism on Earth’s surface that remains relatively
stationary while plates move over them, generating chains of compositionally
distinct volcanoes that are progressively older the further they are from the
hotspot. This work, through tracing ages, compositions, and morphologies of
several poorly-documented volcanic chains, seeks to better understand the timing
and drivers of global scale plate reorganization events that took place in the
Mid-Cretaceous (120-80 Ma). The target locations include the Liliuokalani Ridge,
Hess Rise and Mid-Pacific Mountains in the Central Pacific region. The team will
be able to test whether the features were built by mantle plumes that are
currently underlying the Northern French Polynesia region. The combined age and
chemistry results will then be used to constrain the timing of a major plate
reorganization event at ca. 100 Ma. This project supports three early-career
scientists, two PhD, and one MSc student. In addition, the seagoing expedition
will include eight undergraduate research participants from the minority serving
institutions of University of Nevada, Las Vegas and California State University,
Long Beach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves a 31-day
seagoing expedition to dredge seamounts, ridges and rises within and near Hess
Rise and the Mid-Pacific Mountains. In addition, the team will analyze basalts
recovered on NOAA-Ocean Exploration and Research expeditions from Karin Ridge
and samples from an upcoming E/V Nautilus expedition to the Liliuokalani
Seamounts. Onshore work will include obtaining 40Ar/39Ar age determinations and
geochemical tracers (major and trace elements; Sr-Nd-Pb-Hf isotopes) from
representative lava flows. These new samples and comprehensive datasets will
allow for the testing of the following hypotheses: H1) The Liliuokalani
Seamounts and Hess Rise were formed by the Marquesas Mantle Plume. H2) The
Pitcairn Mantle Plume is the primary source of the Karin Ridge and Mid-Pacific
Mountains. H3) The Mid-Pacific Mountains record the timing and orientation of
Cretaceous plate motion changes. H4) The structure of the Mid-Pacific Mountains
and Hess Rise are controlled by plume – (distal) ridge interaction through the
generation of asthenospheric melt channels. Testing these hypotheses will lead
to an improved understanding of mantle plume dynamics and ‘bottom-up’ controls
on oceanic geomorphology and large igneous province construction. Furthermore,
mapping the long-lived expressions of mantle plumes allows for unparalleled
insight into the mantle source reservoirs that feed hotspot volcanism. The
combination of geo-chronology, chemistry and morphology will allow for a
significantly improved Pacific absolute plate motion model during the Cretaceous
Normal Superchron (122-83 Ma).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.