* 2121744
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Foundations of Algorithms Augmented with Predictions
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Benjamin Moseley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2024
* USD 249,999.00

The ability to process and use information to make better decisions is driving
breakthroughs in science and engineering, and they are being materialized in
business. Machine learning is one of the central forces behind such
revolutionary progress. For example, machine learning is often used to make
predictions for uncertain information such as traffic in a road network or
consumer demand for an online business. Unfortunately, machine learning is
imperfect and commonly error-prone. The goal of this project is to design
efficient decision-making algorithms that result in solutions that are both
high-quality and robust to error in the predictions. The investigators of this
project will organize a workshop to disseminate research findings to the
community. The research will be incorporated into courses and the investigators
will develop an undergraduate degree program on the intersection of business and
machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the
foundations of augmenting decision-making algorithms with error-prone machine-
learned predictions. The project’s goal is to develop algorithms that break
through worst-case analysis barriers with high-quality predictions and have
graceful degradation in quality as the error in the predictions grows. The
algorithms developed will use predictions to improve the worst-case running time
and better cope with uncertainties in the future input. The predictions used
will be grounded in computational learning theory and be shown to be efficiently
learnable. The project has the following goals. The project will (1) investigate
using predictions to improve the running time of algorithms for problems of
fundamental importance such as matchings and flows; (2) use predictions to give
algorithms information about uncertain inputs for online problems and
investigate various measures to better gauge the prediction quality; and (3)
develop a theory for which parameters can be efficiently
learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.