* 2121169
* MCA: Using Machine Learning to Predict Seismic Failure Limit States in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Luis Ibarra, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,742.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) award will enable the Principal Investigator
(PI) to train in machine learning (ML) methodologies in order to bridge the gap
between performance-based earthquake engineering and ML to estimate the collapse
limit state of structures. Structural collapse is a building’s most catastrophic
failure mode and the most difficult to evaluate using traditional methodologies.
This study will apply ML algorithms to predict structural collapse of buildings
under strong seismic events. These algorithms will be trained to learn without
being explicitly programmed and can transform the way in which structural
systems are designed and evaluated. Performance-based methodologies are used for
evaluation or design of important structures, but there are significant
limitations to estimate structural failure due to model complexity and the
sensitivity of drift and other response parameters to small input parameter
variations. Also, most buildings are designed using simplified elastic methods,
and the expected structural damage under natural hazard events is only
approximated from general considerations. In this study, ML algorithms will be
trained using numerical simulations and experimental test results to efficiently
predict collapse of structural design alternatives. The synergistic
collaboration with research partners at Stanford University and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology will build the PI's research capabilities
in this area. The study will be complemented by an educational program based on
high school outreach, support of graduate and undergraduate research students,
and training demonstrations. This award will contribute to the National Science
Foundation (NSF) role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program.
Project data will be archived in the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.designsafe-ci.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current collapse methodologies are based on sophisticated
nonlinear finite element models, which can be an onerous task in the design
process and even for performance evaluation of existing systems. The project
research objectives include: (i) implementation of optimal ML techniques for
application to failure limit states, (ii) data mining of dynamic response of
building structural components from available databases, and (iii) development
of approaches to improve the performance of structural systems. Several
promising strategies for the researched structural collapse application will be
considered, such as variations of artificial neural networks, support vector
machines, and response surface models. The following fundamental questions will
be answered: (i) what level of building input data is required to efficiently
predict collapse? and (ii) can ML algorithms be trained to assess the reserve
capacity and redundancy of damaged systems, in which material deterioration is
highly uncertain or key structural components (e.g., columns) are removed? The
ML algorithms will be used to find hidden correlations associated to structural
collapse and will be trained to consider several sets of input data, ranging
from basic building information to nonlinear deteriorating input
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.