* 2121146
* Scholars Award: The Political and Material Ecology of Horseshoe Crabs in the Biomedical Industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kristoffer Whitney, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2023
* USD 120,152.00

This project addresses a vital part of the U.S. public health infrastructure:
lysate from horseshoe crab blood. Limulus Amoebocyte Lysate (lysate or LAL) is
derived from the blood of horseshoe crabs, and is the only method approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to detect the presence of endotoxins in
pharmaceuticals, surgical tools, implants, and vaccines. By following the
production of lysate from horseshoe crab harvesting through bleeding labs,
pharmaceutical facilities, and regulatory bodies like the FDA and the Atlantic
States Marine Fisheries Commission (ASMFC), this project will scrutinize the
intricacies of natural resource conservation, regulation of the biomedical
industry, and the relationships between ecological and medical science. At stake
in the debate over horseshoe crab fisheries are the ethics of environmental
governance, protection of human health, and advancement of scientific knowledge.
As this research is being done at an institute of higher education, additional
benefits of the project include direct input into environmental regulatory
processes, enhancement of educational opportunities for students – including
those in under-served communities – in environmental studies, and dissemination
of research products to both academic and general
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a multi-sited, mixed-
method study of the biomedical use of Atlantic horseshoe crabs (Limulus
polyphemus). A derivative of horseshoe crab blood -- Limulus Amoebocyte Lysate
(LAL or Lysate) – is used to test endotoxins in the bio-pharmaceutical industry.
This project will focus on the Atlantic States Marine Fisheries Commission
(ASMFC or Commission) attempts to regulate the extraction and circulation of
horseshoe crab blood as well as industry attempts to reduce mortality rates
while continuing to harvest blood for LAL testing. Through historical research,
semi-structured interviews, and site visits, this project analyzes the complex
political ecologies of a natural resource vital to human economies, coastal
ecosystems, and public health. This project asks: how do these marine organisms
and their biomaterials circulate within and through different epistemological,
legal, industrial, and bio-ecological pathways, and with what ramifications?
Understanding the intricacies of horseshoe crab conservation, public health
regulation, and biomedical knowledge generation is not only relevant to the
scientific and regulatory communities involved, but will be of intense interest
to environmental humanities and science studies scholars. A number of broader
impacts are envisioned for this study, including undergraduate course
enrichment, the opportunity to mentor students with related research interests,
and ongoing work with underserved communities like the large Deaf/Hard of
Hearing student population at RIT. It will be of interest to environmental
studies and science studies scholars, as well as stakeholders in the horseshoe
crab industry and policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.