* 2121387
* Social Robots and the Production of Space: Exploring the Socio-Spatial Dimensions of Human-Robot Interaction
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* David Feil-Seifer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2024
* USD 398,066.00

This project investigates long-term human-robot interaction outside of
controlled laboratory settings to better understand how the introduction of
robots and the development of socially-aware behaviors work to transform the
spaces of everyday life, including how spaces are planned and managed, used, and
experienced. Focusing on tour-guiding robots in two museums, the research will
produce nuanced insights into the challenges and opportunities that arise as
social robots are integrated into new spaces to better inform future design,
planning, and decision-making. It brings together researchers from human
geography, robotics, and art to think beyond disciplinary boundaries about the
possible futures of human-robot co-existence, sociality, and collaboration.
Broader impacts of the project will include increased accessibility and
engagement at two partner museums, interdisciplinary research opportunities for
both undergraduate and graduate students, a short video series about the current
state of robotic technology to be offered as a free educational resource, and
public art exhibitions reflecting on human-robot interactions. This project will
be of interest to scholars of Science and Technology Studies, Human Robotics
Interaction (HRI), and human geography as well as museum administrators,
educators and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary
project brings together Science and Technology Studies, Human Robotics
Interaction (HRI), and human geography to explore the production of social space
through emerging forms of HRI. The project broadly asks: How does the deployment
of social robots influence the production of social space—including the
functions, meanings, practices, and experiences of particular spaces? The
project is based on long-term ethnographic observation of the development and
deployment of tour-guiding robots in an art museum and an earth science museum.
A social roboticist will develop a socially-aware navigation system to add
nuance to the robots’ socio-spatial behavior. A digital artist will produce
digital representations of the interactions that take place in the museum, using
the robot’s own sensor data and other forms of motion capture. A human
geographer will conduct interviews with museum visitors and staff as well as
ethnographic observation of the tour-guiding robots and of the roboticists as
they develop the navigation system. They will produce an ethnographic analysis
of the robots’ roles in the organization of the museums, everyday practices of
museum staff and visitors, and the differential experiences of the museum space.
The intellectual merits of the project consist of contributions at the
intersections of STS, robotics, and human geography examining the value of
ethnographic research for HRI, the development of socially-aware navigation
systems, the value of a socio-spatial analytic for understanding emerging forms
of robotics, and the role of robots within evolving digital geographies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Science and
Technology Studies program in SBE and Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL)
Program in EHR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.