* 2121102
* Collaborative Research: CompCog: Adversarial Collaborative Research on Intuitive Physical Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ernest Davis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 365,029.00

People are able to reason about the world in amazingly complex ways, yet we
consider these capacities part of simple “common sense,” generally shared across
individuals and cultures. We toss and catch balls, stack dishes in the sink, and
pour a morning cup of coffee with almost no effort. Yet the cognitive systems
that support these capabilities are not well understood; even our most advanced
attempts to reverse engineer them in robots fall short of human-level efficiency
or flexibility. This grant was designed as an “adversarial collaboration” to
bring together scientists from two different sides of a critical debate about
the nature of human physical reasoning abilities. One theory (championed by the
MIT PIs) suggests that this physical reasoning is based on a cognitive system
that allows people to simulate what might happen next, similar to how physics
engines for video games are used to predict what will happen next in those
scenes. While this theory has provided many successful explanations of human
behavior, including making precise predictions about how people think Jenga
towers will fall, or where they think balls flying through the air will land,
another growing body of research (led by the NYU PIs) has demonstrated many
instances where the simulation theory cannot adequately describe what people do,
but where simpler and approximate “rules-of-thumb” (even inaccurate ones) can.
Because human physical reasoning is unlikely to be purely simulation or purely
based on simplified rules, a team of experts from both sides of this debate will
be crucial for advancing our understanding of the cognitive processes that
underlie these reasoning capabilities. Towards reconciling these views, this
grant advances the idea that consideration of known human limitations -- e.g.,
in memory or attention -- can explain the processes that people use when
reasoning about the physical world. The goal is to integrate these constraints
into a more complete theory of human reasoning that can account for both our
failures and our successes in comprehending the physical world. True
understanding of these processes will require “reverse engineering” human
cognition and perception by designing computational models with similar
limitations and capabilities to people. These scientific models may provide
insight for researchers in AI and robotics who are interested in designing
systems that interact with the world like people, including self-driving cars or
the control of prosthetic limbs. Furthermore, exploring how people learn and
reason about physics may provide new approaches for physics education. Finally,
studying and modeling these facets of physical reasoning will require developing
extensible tools, which will be released as open-source software to open up the
research into human physical reasoning to a wider set of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies and proposes to resolve
tensions between theories of human physical reasoning that suggest that it is
based on relatively accurate simulatable mental models, and those that suggest
it is based on heuristics and other qualitative forms of reasoning. The research
includes experiments related to those that have been used to demonstrate
simulation theory, but modified to induce shortcuts in physical reasoning in two
broadly different ways. Aim 1 experiments consider scenarios that are expected
to run into human resource limitations, either in attention, memory, or time –
for instance, asking people to predict the stability of complex towers of blocks
with too many pieces to track individually. Aim 2 experiments consider scenarios
that could be reasoned about with simulation, but could more easily be reasoned
about with simple rules or heuristics – for instance, studying how people use
rules like “the heavier side will tip over” when judging which direction a
balance beam stacked with objects will fall. Human behavior in these experiments
is examined for deviations from pure simulation theory in line with the expected
resource limitations (e.g., using rules, focusing on a subset of objects, or
representing objects more coarsely), and computational models are developed to
explain this behavior. These models are designed around the framework of
“resource-rational” cognition, which suggests that people deploy limited
cognitive resources in a way that efficiently solves the problems they
encounter. The behavioral results and models together allow investigation into
(a) whether and when people’s physical reasoning is constrained by resource
limitations, and (b) the types of shortcuts people take to circumvent these
limitations. Performing this research requires developing an integrated software
suite for designing experiments and modeling across a wide variety of physical
scenarios. Designing these integrated packages typically requires a large set of
technologies -- physics simulators, graphics engines, computational modeling
methods -- that are outside the reach of most psychologists, which in turn
limits research into human physical reasoning. The PIs are in a unique position
to contribute here because their laboratories are focused on computational
models of psychology and they have an extensive track record of developing open-
source software used by multiple research groups worldwide. The software suite
used in this grant is designed to be open-sourced and shared with the broader
research community to facilitate further research into human physical reasoning
without requiring extensive knowledge of the underlying
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work was supported by SBE/BCS
Perception, Action, and Cognition, EHR Core Research (ECR), and CISE/IIS Robust
Intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.