* 2121014
* Theo Colborn and Environmental Endocrine Disruption
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marsha Richmond, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Since the 1990s, scientists and global health experts have been concerned about
the impact of environmental endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) on the health
of animals, humans, and the ecosystem. The recognition of endocrine disruption
is due to the work of Theo Colborn (1927-2014). In 1988, Colborn, an Associate
of the World Wildlife Fund working with Canadian biologists, first identified
developmental and reproductive disorders in fauna exposed to environmental
toxins in the Great Lakes basin. In 1991, she organized a conference of
biologists and biomedical scientists to review the data, resulting in release of
the Wingspread Consensus Statement, which concluded that a "large number of man-
made chemicals released into the environment … have the potential to disrupt the
endocrine system of animals, including humans." This heralded the birth of
endocrine disruption science. In 1996, Colborn and two colleagues published the
popular book, "Our Stolen Future: Are We Threatening our Intelligence and
Survival? A Scientific Detective Story," translated into sixteen languages.
Following in Rachel Carson's footsteps, Colborn aimed to inform the public about
the danger of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) in the environment, food,
personal care and manufactured products, which can interfere with normal
endocrine system functioning. Mimicking or blocking hormones that regulate
normal developmental processes, EDCs are associated with such problems as
reduced sperm quality and fertility, abnormalities in sex organs, early puberty,
certain cancers, learning disabilities, diabetes, obesity, and more. This best-
selling book prompted government regulatory agencies in the US and abroad to
investigate endocrine disruption, but progress to date has been slow. Up to her
death in 2014, Colborn worked tirelessly as a research scientist, policy expert,
and activist advocating on behalf of the public to urge precautionary action to
reduce environmental EDCs. This project traces the history of endocrine
disruption science and policy in a biography highlighting Colborn’s
extraordinary scientific career. The book and associated websites will
contribute to STS scholarship and educate the public about the continuing
problems posed by endocrine disrupting chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing
on extensive primary and secondary sources (including Colborn‘s archive and oral
histories by colleagues and others), this project addresses several core issues
within STS literature and contemporary science and society: (1) The changing
role of women and gender in science after the advent of second wave feminism,
illustrated by the new field of endocrine disruption and the formation of
transdisciplinary research groups; (2) The challenge EDCs pose to the US
regulatory process—based on traditional toxicological methods and standards, but
confronted by chemicals with low dose effects dependent on time of exposure—as
contrasted with the approaches EDCs taken by the EU and Japan; and (3) The use
of biography to educate a new generation about the complex issues of endocrine
disruption (especially PFAS contamination) by narrating a life in science
dedicated to ensuring individual health and the future of humanity, and yet
recognizing the importance of developing safe industrial practices that promote
the national and global economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.