* 2121549
* Helping Computer Science Students Learn How to Build Accessible Computing Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kristen Shinohara, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 09/30/2024
* USD 167,623.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping students learn to
consider accessibility for a diverse user audience in software design and
development. Accessibility is about ensuring equitable access to information and
services for users regardless of their background or ability. Computer science
curricula often lack sufficient coverage of this important topic, which affects
students’ preparation for the computing workforce. This project will expand the
coverage of accessibility beyond elective and special interest computing courses
by creating and assessing educational materials for teaching accessibility in
existing core computer science courses while maintaining the integrity of the
courses. The teaching materials will be made available to the public using
academic and industry networks so that other institutions can adapt the material
to their programs. Including accessibility in computer science curricula will
help students acquire the necessary skills to build accessible technology,
resulting in graduates with a wider breadth of technical knowledge for an
increasingly competitive technology industry. In addition, raising awareness of
accessibility as a key topic in computer science facilitates an open classroom
environment that is more welcoming for STEM students with disabilities, which
could lead to broadening participation in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: (1) improve
existing core courses in computer science using a set of modules that focus on
accessibility-related problems such as data structures and object-oriented
programming; (2) assess student learning of core and accessibility learning
objectives as well as instructors’ use and acceptance of the new modules. To
achieve these goals, the project team will refine and update a set of existing
accessibility modules, initiate a pilot study with instructors at other
institutions, and analyze assessment data to inform improvements in the modules.
Each module will include a brief guide to the accessibility content covered, the
computer science concepts addressed by the assignment and how accessibility has
been incorporated, exemplar instruction slides for the accessibility content,
assignment materials including grading rubrics, and pre- and post-survey
questions. The assessment of student learning and instructor perceptions will
use experience sampling, student surveys, and focus groups. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.