* 2121572
* A Study in Engaging Students with Complex Topics through Knowledge Graphs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* William Tomlinson, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving sustainability
science instruction and learning at a general education level for undergraduate
students. Educating future generations about sustainability science is a
critical problem for humanityâ€™s collective future. Recognizing the importance of
this topic, many colleges and universities have established or are developing
general education courses on sustainability science that every student must
take. This project will improve undergraduate STEM education by developing and
studying the effectiveness of educational modules that engage students from many
different majors with sustainability science and helping them grapple with the
complexity of the topic. It is based on the key observation that knowledge
graphs, an emerging means of storing information computationally, provide a
potential way to span across disciplines and unpack complexity one layer at a
time. They allow students to engage with problems that more accurately represent
the challenges of sustainability science than traditional techniques. The
contributions of the project include: (1) a new knowledge graph-based approach
to supporting student learning of concepts in sustainability science that
addresses a critical shortcoming in the sustainability education landscape; (2)
assessments of this approach in terms of engagement and efficacy at helping
students learn key concepts in sustainability; and (3) a publicly available
computational scaffolding for this technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
goal of the project is to assess three core research questions: (1) Can
knowledge graph-based educational modules help students improve their
understanding of sustainability concepts within and across fields? (2) Can
student contributions to a shared knowledge graph form a useful foundation for
later pedagogical activities? (3) Can students contribute accurate and relevant
sustainability information to a global, public knowledge graph through their
coursework? The team will investigate these questions by developing a novel
computational platform for education and deploying it with more than 2,000
students across two universities. The platform developed as part of this grant
will enable students to make their own knowledge graphs based on course content
and integrate their graphs with those of their peers, as well as complete
further activities based on revising the collective graph. Assessment will
involve both quantitative and qualitative evaluations of the course modules and
their effect on student learning, as well as computational analyses of the
collectively-constructed graph. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.