* 2121075
* MCA: Physics-Informed and Geometry-Informed Machine Learning for Analysis of Multi-scale Distensible Biological Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Fatemeh Hassanipour, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 360,517.00

This work will support research about fluid-structure interfaces in biological
problems using advanced computational techniques. Machine learning is emerging
as a powerful new tool for challenging problems in computational science and
engineering, including biomechanical engineering. How fluid flows through the
vessels in the body is a challenging problem. This occurs in many situations,
such as in pumping blood flow through aorta, repeated air flow through lung
capillaries, and milk transport through lactating breast in response to periodic
suckling. These problems are particularly challenging to study because of both
computational complexity and the geometric complexity of these soft materials.
This project adapts machine learning techniques in a novel manner to the unique
shape and requirements of this problem. This work will eventually improve our
understanding of the operation of human organs. Educational outcomes of the
project activities include mentoring undergraduate students, under-represented
minorities, individuals with disabilities, as well as K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, a variety of biologically
significant phenomena arise from fluid flows driven through deformable ducts and
the interaction between fluid-mechanical and elastic forces, including nonlinear
pressure drop and flow rate relations, wave propagation, generation of
instabilities, as well as oscillations of flow at bifurcated joints. These
physical phenomena are governed by corresponding partial differential equations
that are highly nonlinear and highly coupled. The project utilizes physics-
informed and geometry-informed neural networks for studying these complex
phenomena, whose understanding at multiple scales has been hampered by
computational issues. The former is based on incorporating governing equations
into the loss function in the training of neural networks. The latter is
designed to address multi-scale bifurcations, and is based on training sub-
networks representing single bifurcations at different scales, and combining
them into an overall network architecture whose connections are inspired by the
multi-scale bifurcation geometry. In addition to the specific outcomes, the
project also contributes to the broader dialog on the application of machine
learning in scientific computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.