* 2121898
* MCA: Partnering Land and communities for equitable and inclusive STEM learning
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Karla Bradley Eitel, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 227,519.00

The goal of the project is to explore Land education pedagogy and its curriculum
and pedagogical innovations in the preparation of Native and non-Native
educators to engage Native and non-Native students in environmental STEM
education on Indigenous lands. The investigator will implement a professional
development plan focused on pedagogical innovations within various teacher
education and environmental STEM learning programs to (a) understand the tools
and technologies that can support these innovations and (b) develop new research
methods for understanding the impact of these innovations on individuals,
communities, and socio-ecological systems. The research builds on the
investigator’s prior inquiries on culturally connected identity and how
technology can be used to deepen observation skills and communicate to broader
audiences while not distracting from students’ engagement. The project will
advance this knowledge and build new collaboration through network engagement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project uses the Actor Network Theory and
Critical Indigenous Research Methodologies to frame the research design and
approach. There are four driving questions: (1) What affordances does Land
education pedagogy offer in creating inclusive and epistemologically diverse
STEM learning environments, building more equitable relationships to particular
places and to socio-ecological systems, and impacting the diversity of the STEM
workforce? (2) What tools and technologies can assist in sustaining long-term,
mutually beneficial relationships to support the preparation of Native and non-
Native educators who will engage in educational strategies that lead to diverse
STEM workforce on indigenous lands? (3) What are the impacts of a Land education
pedagogy on individual students’ sense of belonging and STEM identity,
communities of educators’ approaches to STEM engagement, and the health of
broader socio-ecological systems? Data will be collected from K-12 and graduate
students using autoethnographies, photovoice and symbol-based reflections,
observations, and network mapping. Evidence will be analyzed using content and
discourse analysis. The research findings will inform programs that employ Land
education pedagogy to shape more equitable and inclusive environmental STEM
education for students and teachers and to increase STEM persistence among
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by the
Mid-Career Advancement Program that enables scientists and engineers to
substantively advance their research program and career
trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.