* 2121410
* RII Track-2 FEC: Genome Engineering to Sustain Crop Improvement (GETSCI)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Kan Wang, University of Hawaii
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,994,456.00

Improved and practical crop breeding tools are required to meet the increasing
demands of a growing global population and to overcome the sudden and variable
stresses, made worse, by climate change. This project brings together
researchers from the University of Hawai’i at Manoa and Iowa State University to
develop an efficient, robust genome engineering toolkit that can be used to
speed the generation of resilient crops adapted to a changing environment.
Reproductive barriers are a major bottleneck that limits the genetic diversity
available for crop improvement. Tropical maize germplasm is a rich source of
genetic diversity but its flowering behavior in temperate regions precludes its
broad use for maize improvement. To access this diversity, our two institutions
formed a collaboration that integrates our strengths in tropical plant biology
and transformation (Hawai’i) with maize transformation, genome engineering, and
breeding (Iowa). Our goals are to establish a rapid and efficient genetic
transformation platform and to develop improved genome editing tools to
reprogram the flowering behavior of high-yielding tropical maize lines allowing
their incorporation into any maize breeding program. Both Hawai’i and Iowa will
gain a valuable new capability in genetic transformation and genome engineering
which will transform the types of crop research possible at both institutions.
Expected impacts from this project will help address food security and economic
weaknesses in Hawai’i, by allowing for the development of new tropical crop
breeding industries. In Iowa, access to gene-edited temperate-adapted tropical
germplasm will move maize improvement into the next era of genome-optimized
breeding. Workforce capacity will be increased by engaging underrepresented
students, particularly Native Hawai’ians and Pacific Islanders, in diverse
aspects of genome engineering research, by the exchange of undergraduates
between partner institutions to prepare a globally competitive, multiculturally,
and socially responsible workforce, and by creating opportunities for improved
science communication skills through training sessions, workshops, and
engagement with the community to communicate the value and safety of these new
tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical to our future is maintaining the rate of
genetic improvement of the crops that feed us and sustain our economy. But the
sudden and increasingly severe stresses caused by climate change limit the pace
of improvement. Advances in genome engineering offer rapid solutions by enabling
precise and targeted reprogramming of molecular networks to improve crop
performance. The rich genetic diversity in tropical maize is largely
underutilized for maize improvement because tropical lines are photoperiod
sensitive and flower late in the long-days of temperate growing regions. To
access this diversity, we formed a collaboration between the University of
Hawai’i at Manoa (UH Manoa) and Iowa State University (ISU), which integrates
strengths in tropical plant system biology and transformation (UH Manoa) with
maize transformation, genome engineering, and breeding (ISU). Our goal is to use
gene editing to suppress the photoperiod response in elite, high-yielding
tropical maize to promote earlier flowering. These edited tropical lines can
then be used to enhance any maize breeding program. Our objectives are to (1)
establish an efficient, germplasm-independent maize transformation platform, (2)
develop a facile, tractable genome editing toolkit to suppress the photoperiod
response in six tropical inbreds, (3) analyze photoperiod network function in
genome edited tropical lines, and (4) improve skills in communicating the value
and safety of these new genome engineering tools. &lt;br/&gt;The outcomes from
this project include new tropical maize transformation capabilities at both
jurisdictions, genome editing reagents for modulating flowering in maize, six
elite tropical inbreds adapted to temperate breeding programs, a mechanistic
understanding of the response to reprogramming the flowering network, and
improved skills to communicate the value of this technology in professional and
public contexts. Broader impacts expected from this project include opening this
technology to academic labs, that can build research capacity by allowing genome
engineering of diverse crops. Democratizing these tools are expected to speed
breeding advancements, sustain crop improvement efforts, and spur economic
growth. Both Hawai’i and Iowa will gain a valuable new capability in maize
transformation and genome engineering, and will transform the types of crop
research possible at both institutions. In Hawai’i, this project will help
address food security and economic weaknesses revealed by the pandemic, by
allowing for development of new tropical crop breeding industries. In Iowa,
access to gene-edited temperate-adapted tropical germplasm moves maize
improvement into the next era of genome-optimized breeding. Workforce capacity
will be increased by engaging underrepresented students, particularly Native
Hawai’ians and Pacific Islanders, in diverse aspects of genome engineering
research, by the exchange of undergraduates between partner institutions to
prepare a globally competitive, multiculturally, and socially responsible
workforce, and by creating opportunities for improved science communication
skills through training sessions, workshops, and engagement with the community
to communicate the value and safety of these new
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.