* 2121415
* Expanding Scientific Opportunity with a Digital Course Based Undergraduate Research Experience: Development and Evaluation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Courtney Murren, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,680.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding student
opportunities for learning through research by developing, implementing and
evaluating a digital course-based undergraduate research experience module in
plant biology using quantitative methods. This project will increase research
experiences in foundational and upper division courses in experimental plant
biology by expanding materials for use in a digital environment. Substantial
evidence indicates that participation in undergraduate research in a course
where students contribute to new knowledge discovery increases student learning,
science self-efficacy, and persistence in STEM. Digital course-based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) has been successfully utilized for
genomic sequence data, and this new project will introduce these methods to
other biology sub-disciplines. This project will build on an existing live plant
research and education program that addresses a grand challenge in biology â€“ the
link between genes and traits. In the course-based research module, students
will study variation among plants in their response to genetic changes and
environmental treatments by measuring plant traits from photographs using
digital tools. This project aims to advance our understanding of student
learning gains in quantitative and plant biology, and identity as scientists
from this new digital curricular approach. Significant student learning gains,
and plant biology discoveries benefits are expected through this project, as
well as the expansion of access to quantitative biology research experience by
more students in a broad range of institutional types. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to: 1) design, modify, and curate plant biology and
data science materials for quantitative biology literacy and learning via a CURE
using digital images of plants in an ecological genetic experiment by adapting
an in-person CURE for the digital environment, 2) provide faculty development
and professional networking opportunities associated with student learning
modules through yearly workshops and Slack communication, and 3) evaluate
teaching and learning for a digital CURE using qualitative and quantitative
methods. The project will adapt photography and plant science techniques in
novel ways such that students can make observations to facilitate discoveries by
collecting trait data using digital approaches. The novel CURE instructional
materials will include videos, web materials, digital images of experimental
plants, and tools for data analysis and data communication. The project will
involve faculty instructors and students from public, private colleges,
including minority-serving institutions, in foundational and upper division
courses. Faculty and students will collaborate across campuses and contribute
novel discoveries through their findings. To evaluate the goals of the project,
the planned evaluation will use student focus group (qualitative) and survey
methodologies (quantitative) prior to and after each course offering for
formative and summative evaluation. Evaluation will also include faculty focus
groups which will inform and expand knowledge on the course-based approaches.
Yearly faculty development workshops will contribute to support for adoption of
this new curriculum, networking and support among instructors committed to
innovative pedagogy. This project will add to our knowledge of faculty
instructional gains following workshops and iterative course development.
Results of this project will expand student access to experimental research in
courses in institutional settings with limited laboratory space, and develop
transferable STEM research skills in data management, data display and data
communication. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.