* 2121422
* Broadening Engagement in Mathematics Participation and Readiness Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Veny Liu, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,883.00

The project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing practices to
increase motivation and persistence in mathematics teacher preparation. This
Engaged Student Learning Level 1 project, Broadening Engagement in Mathematics
Participation and Readiness Education Project (BE-MathPREP), proposes to
implement a tiered-mentorship model at the University of Hawai‘i West O‘ahu
(UHWO). The BE-MathPREP mentoring model in the UHWO pre-service math teacher
preparation program uses a multilayered structured program in which the lower-
division math students are mentored by Peer Academic Leaders (PALs). PALs
include mathematics faculty, in-service mathematics teachers, and peer pre-
service mathematics teachers who mentor lower-division mathematics students
through this project’s Math Teacher’s Circle at Hawaii (MaTCH) sessions. Two
research questions guide project activities: (Q1). How well does BE-MathPREP PAL
improve lower-division math students’ math self-efficacy in ways to increase
STEM interest? (Q2). How well do BE-MathPREP PAL and MaTCH improve teacher
candidates’ teaching and math efficacy in ways to increase student persistence
in STEM teaching? Anticipated outcomes of the project include an increase in the
number of diverse students pursuing STEM teaching and production of at least 20
dedicated pre-service teachers who become committed and competent professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of BE-MathPREP is to determine the effectiveness
of evidence-based practices in teaching and learning mathematics, including
culturally responsive strategies, and to provide academic support for
undergraduates in/to the mathematics teacher preparation program at UHWO. BE-
MathPREP starts with selecting student mentors (PALs) with priority given to
pre-service teacher candidates. This is followed by implementing the PAL program
and MaTCH sessions during the summer and academic year. One or two PALs assist
in each section of foundational math courses. Mentored by the course instructor,
PALs are involved both in-and-out of the classroom. PALs build on hard skills
throughout the semester, such as understanding and communicating the course
material, and soft skills, such as rapport that PALs develop with their faculty
mentors. PALs work directly with in-service teachers through MaTCH meetings to
develop their first teaching portfolio. In addition, PALs have the opportunity
to receive support for organizing place-based summer workshops and undergraduate
research. This project contributes to knowledge generation by developing a
recruitment and retention model based on peer-mentoring in an indigenous-serving
institution. The establishment of the math community of UHWO students and
professionals (faculty and in-service teachers) through the BE-MathPREP PAL and
MaTCH efforts has the potential to allow all members to stay current in math
content, as well as to continue to develop practices that advance math
education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project
to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation goals, which are well-
aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.