* 2121999
* Creating Pathways to Increase Retention and Transfer Rates of STEM Majors at Two Los Angeles-Based Hispanic Serving Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shannon DeVaney, Los Angeles Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to address the problem of
low retention and transfer rates of underrepresented minorities in STEM at two
sister Hispanic Serving Community Colleges in Los Angeles (Los Angeles Valley
College-LAVC and Los Angeles Pierce College-LPC). Between LAVC and LAPC, Biology
is the most selected STEM major (and third largest major overall), yet only
17-20% of students (a majority of whom are under-represented) complete the
degree or transfer as a STEM major. Partnering with the University of Southern
California (4-year university) and Bioscience LA (life science workforce
development organization), this project will support 176 LAVC/LAPC students over
three years using research-backed intervention methods designed to retain and
attract students in STEM. Recruitment will target new students for early
engagement in activities that will include academic resources and transfer
support that scaffold onto new, modified, or existing courses at LAVC/LAPC.
Activities will also include research experiences, internship opportunities, and
introductions to a broad network of STEM academic and industry professionals.
Anticipated outcomes include higher retention of LAVC/LAPC students in STEM,
higher transfer rates to 4-year institutions as STEM majors, and insights into
actual and perceived barriers for program administrators to inform ongoing
intervention strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two leading research questions
guide the framework of this program: 1) Which factors most influence the
decision of under-represented students to persist in STEM; and 2) How can the
educational experience of STEM students at 2-yr institutions be improved to
increase persistence? This program will apply interventions to improve student
performance and motivation, with the goal of improving the retention and
transfer rates of marginalized students. Strategies will include exposure to
diverse career paths, academic coaching, developing a learning community,
faculty and near-peer mentoring, early exposure to research experiences, and an
immersive opportunity at a research field station. Quantitative data from
program evaluations will document the impact of these early interventions on
student retention and persistence. Qualitative data via focus groups will
provide insight on additional impact factors and outcomes of the program.
Results will be disseminated via NSF annual reports, presentations at regional
and national conferences with sessions that focus on STEM education and partner
institution’s websites. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.