* 2121670
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing and quantifying carbon sequestration processes across the Andean Convergent Margin
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Karen Lloyd, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,761.00

Subduction zones are the interface between Earth’s interior (crust and mantle)
and exterior (atmosphere and oceans), where carbon and other volatile elements
are actively moved between terrestrial reservoirs by plate tectonics. The
efficiency of volatile transfer controls the chemical state of Earth’s interior
and exterior, including the atmospheric composition. In turn, the distribution
of carbon and other volatiles in Earth’s surface reservoirs has enabled
conditions favorable for life on Earth. Despite the importance of carbon, its
fluxes, sources, and sinks remain under-constrained in subduction-related
fluids, with an almost complete absence of studies linking it to underground
biological processes. The deep carbon mass balance has previously been estimated
by comparing subducting slab inputs to arc volcano degassing outputs, with the
difference representing the amount of carbon that is transported into Earth’s
deep mantle. However, slab and mantle-derived carbon can also be sequestered in
the form of hydrothermal minerals (e.g., calcite, aragonite) and by microbial
uptake in the crust of the overriding plate, effectively masking an unknown
portion of the carbon output from the subduction zone. The lack of constraints
on these key processes, however, limits the understanding of the overall
efficiency of the deep carbon cycle. This project involves substantive
collaboration with colleagues in Chile, including an international workshop, and
the work of several U.S. students will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will characterize the extent of mineralogical and biological carbon
sequestration along the geologically well-studied Andean Convergent Margin
(ACM). The PIs hypothesize that calcite precipitation sequesters significant
amounts of carbon in the ACM, particularly where the crust is thickest in the
Central Volcanic Zone (CVZ). Furthermore, this project will test if subsurface
microbial communities sequester carbon into biomass through chemosynthesis,
forming an additional sink for carbon. Finally, the PIs will systematically
assess how geochemical transformations and microbial communities vary as a
function of subduction parameters (i.e., carbon input from the slab, upper plate
thickness and lithology, as well as slab dip angle), which can then be used to
compare results to a range of global convergent margins. To accomplish these
goals, the PIs will conduct a field expedition to the CVZ in 2022 to collect
fluid and gas samples from ~15 natural springs, seeps and fumaroles in the
forearc and arc. They will measure helium and carbon isotopes, microbial
chemosynthesis rates, and contributions of chemosynthesis to total microbial
biomass in all samples. CVZ results will be interpreted alongside published and
unpublished datasets from the ACM and other convergent margins globally (i.e.,
Central America). If subsurface geochemical and biological carbon sinks are
found to be substantial in the ACM, it will add to growing evidence that carbon
sequestration is widespread in the overlying crust of convergent margins. Such a
finding could fundamentally alter the canonical understanding of deep carbon
cycling between Earth’s surface and mantle. This project involves substantive
collaboration with colleagues in Chile, including an international workshop, and
the work of several U.S. students will be supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.