* 2121367
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Turbulent Dynamics of Convective Bursts and Tropical Cyclone Intensification Using Large Eddy Simulations and High-Order Numerics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Simone Marras, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 335,004.00

Hurricane intensity changes are governed by a number of complex and competing
processes that are difficult to simulate. This project will address one of the
key uncertainties in hurricane intensity, the turbulent mixing of air and
moisture in the inner core of a hurricane. In particular, the study will focus
on convective bursts, which are roughly equivalent to large thunderstorms near
the hurricane’s eyewall, and how they influence the intensification cycle. Rapid
intensification changes have occurred in many recent high-impact storms and
while forecasters know the general conditions that may lead to rapid
intensification, the exact timing and magnitude of those changes are difficult
to predict. This research will provide additional information to the scientific
community which may result in improved numerical modeling of these storms. The
project will also provide training and outreach opportunities to several
students, thereby training the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to understand the
fundamental physics of tropical cyclone intensification with an emphasis on the
role of turbulent dynamics. The researchers aim to 1) understand the turbulent
nature of the convective burst cycle from formation to maturation and decay
during intensification, and 2) identify the roles of axisymmetric and asymmetric
dynamics in the intensification of tropical cyclones in a fully turbulent regime
characterized by a wide range of energetic length scales with a minimally
dissipative dynamic core. To address these aims, the researchers plan to conduct
very high-resolution Large Eddy Simulations (LES) of tropical cyclones at 50m
horizontal and vertical grid spacing using the newly developed ClimateMachine
community model. The model output will be analyzed using diagnostic budget
calculations for angular momentum, kinetic energy, and thermal energy equations
in a Eulerian and Lagrangian reference from to enable improved physical
insight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.