* 2121124
* GeoConvergence Workshop
* TIP,ITE
* 04/01/2021,07/31/2021
* Christopher Tucker, Fund For the City of New York
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,300.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future. The objective
of this workshop on GeoConvergence is to help identify topic areas for new
tracks in the NSF Convergence Accelerator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A wide variety
of scientific and engineering fields rely on a common, accurate, and precise,
4-dimensonal (4D) geographical framework. Yet, these fields of inquiry have
their own origins, communities, and languages that balkanize collaboration and
hinder the synergies that might otherwise be realized. This is an issue not just
in science and technology fields such as Artificial Intelligence; Computational
Modeling and Simulation; Augmented-, Virtual-, and Mixed-Reality; Sensors and
the Internet of Things; Robotics &amp; Autonomy; and GIS &amp; Remote Sensing,
but also in so many other academic disciplines and professional fields whose
advancement depends upon overcoming data silos and organizing observations and
knowledge within a common 4D space/time framework. Otherwise, the various “silos
of excellence” would expend their intellectual energies working without the
benefit of an organized intellectual community dedicated to easing the common
barriers, liberating scholars and practitioners from mechanistic issues to focus
on fundamental advancements needed by all. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
GeoConvergence workshop will convene a broad and diverse set of stakeholders
across disciplines, professions, and sectors of society to help identify,
characterize, and develop a common, accurate, and precise, 4D geographical
framework to for real-time convergence of 4D data across a broad range of
applications. Such a framework must be developed with thoughtful consideration
of all factors including social, economic, environmental and ethical
implications of information integration, in order to realize the its full
potential without suffering the unintended consequences of uncontrolled
technologies.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Uneven distribution of geospatial enablement
across various fields of technology, disciplines and professions has stunted the
broader positive impacts that would otherwise have been available to society.
This workshop will serve to establish a community, a framework and a roadmap for
advancing and accelerating 4D GeoConvergence covering complex geographies
including urban environments and natural environments. The workshop format will
include keynote presentations and discussion sessions on a wide range of topics.
The workshop outcome will include a formal report on 4D
GeoConvergence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.