* 2121275
* Utilizing Elaborated Situational Judgment Tests to Improve Selection, Enhance Training, and Facilitate Workplace Understanding and Cohesion
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Harms, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 264,390.00

Situational judgment tests (SJTs) are increasingly understood as a valuable tool
for predicting organizational performance. However, many researchers have noted
that they largely fail to represent the reasons certain actions are judged to be
effective in organizational settings than others, or why respondents selected
less effective actions. This project will focus on evaluating how elaborated
situational judgment tests (ESJTs) – whereby respondents additionally rate the
expected effects of responding in different ways to SJT scenarios – can address
this limitation. Past work has detailed that ESJTs provide avenues for
representing a person’s reasons for selecting different responses to job-
relevant situations in the form of graphical causal models. This project will
explore how ESJTs can be used to (a) represent how diverse populations (e.g.,
individuals of different age groups, genders, or ethnicities) understand
particular workplace scenarios, (b) represent the role of situational factors in
altering the effectiveness of specific organizational behaviors, and (c) provide
opportunities for teaching more effective organizational behavior. By bringing
these processes to light, EJSTs can be used to not only improve the validity of
personnel selection systems and inform more effective workplace training
procedures, but also to advance efforts to create a fairer and more inclusive
work environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Project 1, ratings of the expected
effects of different responses to organizational situations within a validated
SJT will be collected from both working adults and subject matter experts. These
ratings will be used to create new indices of the degree to which employees show
an expert’s understanding of the effectiveness of different responses to job
situations. These indices will be explored for their ability to predict
organizational outcomes such as job performance and satisfaction beyond other
valid predictors. In Project 2, a novel set of scenarios will be developed to
detail how specific contextual factors (e.g., deadlines, relative organizational
rank) alter the reasons for preferring one response to job-relevant situations
over others. In Project 3, ESJT-based instruments will be explored as
pedagogical tools that can supplement case studies in MBA and other professional
programs for teaching effective decision-making, and for detailing how
populations with different backgrounds and levels of experience come to perceive
and process organizational situations differently. These can then be used to
provide more concrete points for discussing how diverse groups come to
understand “the same” organizational situations differently, and for teaching
employees about the factors that make different responses to organizational
situations more or less effective. The project will generate publicly available
tools for creating and modeling data from elaborated situational judgment tasks,
and for utilizing them effectively in both selection and job training
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.