* 2121238
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: A global seafood trade network database for sustainable food systems, human health, and nutrition security
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Jessica Gephart, American University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 12/31/2025
* USD 785,240.00

Around the world, over a quarter of all food is traded internationally. Global
trade can provide foods at lower prices, supply more types of foods year-round,
and resist local supply shortages, such as crop failures. At the same time,
global trade has drawbacks and can pose a risk to food security. For example,
environmental disasters can create supply shortages that are passed on to
importing countries or nutritious foods can be redirected away from domestic
markets. Seafood is an important source of nutrition around the world and is
among the most highly traded foods. As a result, it is important to understand
when global seafood trade either improves or threatens food and nutrition
security. This grant supports the construction of a database that tracks the
flows of products in the global seafood market. The database includes
information on the kinds of seafood that are being traded across countries, who
is selling it and who is buying it, and how this network of buyers and sellers
changes over time. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project constructs the Aquatic
Resource Trade in Species (ARTIS) database which shows the global flow of
seafood species for the first time. This database enables research on the
environmental and human outcomes of food system globalization, including a
better understanding of the conditions under which trade promotes environmental
sustainability, human health, and food security. Research in these areas has
been limited by missing data and, for the data that exist, mismatches in the
taxonomic and product resolution of the data. The ARTIS database uses techniques
of optimization to align public data sets. These linked datasets are joined to
new data on the nutrient content of different kinds of seafood. ARTIS is
available to researchers through published underlying data and code and a
downloadable R package that archives the data and code. The project also
develops an interactive website that will allow users to explore the seafood
trade without downloading data or requiring coding skills. The ARTIS database is
important for answering pressing questions about the role of global seafood
trade in sustainable food production and nutrition
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.