* 2121967
* EAGER: SAI: Human-Centered Design and Enhancement of Next Generation Transportation Infrastructure with Connected and Automated Vehicles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Yunfeng Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-driving vehicles, or connected and
automated vehicles (CAVs), are advocated as a solution to improve the safety of
the transportation system. However, current transportation infrastructure is
only designed for human drivers, without considering the characteristics of
self-driving vehicles or their interactions with other self-driving and human-
driven vehicles (HDVs). Miscommunication and improper interactions between self-
driving and human-driven vehicles may lead to more accidents during the
transition period when the two vehicle types coexist on the roadway. Despite the
fact that adaptations of transportation infrastructure are as critical as the
technological advances of the vehicles, most research on traffic with both
driverless and human-driven vehicles has disregarded the role of transportation
infrastructure. This project seeks to strengthen American transportation
infrastructure by investigating future infrastructure design methods that
support communication among self-driving vehicles, infrastructure, and human-
driven vehicles to enhance safety and speed widespread adoption of self-driving
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “smart” transportation infrastructure of the
future must support communication among connected and automated vehicles (CAVs)
and between CAVs and human-driven vehicles (HDVs) if the goal of efficient and
relatively error-free vehicle transportation is to be attained. This project
aims to advance knowledge in infrastructure design by integrating the cognition
and actions of humans with a system-of-systems approach, viewing roadway
transportation as an overall system consisting of CAVs, human-driven vehicles,
and infrastructure subsystems. The central hypothesis of this project is that
transportation infrastructure that is optimized based on the new features of
CAVs will appreciably reduce accidents and traffic delays. The methods take a
human-centered design framework that focuses on the perceptions and actions of
HDV operators in relation to interactions with CAVs. The goal is to develop an
empirical research base that will guide the future vehicle transportation system
design under mixed traffic conditions. To this end, the multidisciplinary team
of investigators will 1) Identify root causes of accidents between HDVs and CAVs
from accident reports, interviews of CAV experts, surveys of drivers, and
studies of human cognition and actions in a driving simulator; 2) Propose
countermeasure solutions to deliver necessary information to human drivers and
CAVs based on identified root causes, information needs, and human-information
processing; and 3) Use the countermeasure solutions and information needs to
understand improvements in current infrastructure that would better support
communication and interactions between HDVs and CAVs. As a final step, the PIs
will evaluate the proposed solutions at a real-world
roundabout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.