* 2121849
* MCA: New directions in female aggression research
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Jennifer Gleason, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2024
* USD 269,468.00

Animals fight for access to resources including food, mates, and territories.
Fights between males are more overt than fights between females, and as a
consequence have received more attention. In this project, female fighting will
be examined in several fruit fly species that differ in their ecology to
determine if resource type affects fighting in females. In addition, the genetic
basis of female fighting will be assessed to determine if it is similar to male
fighting. To accomplish this project, the investigator will be trained in
assessing female aggressive behaviors using rapid scoring methodology. The
investigator works extensively on interactions between males and females during
courtship but lacks expertise in fighting behaviors and in rapid scoring
technologies. The collaborative partner in this work has performed extensive
research on female aggression in the model fruit fly species, Drosophila
melanogaster, and has developed rapid scoring of behaviors. By joining together
to perform experiments with three fruit fly species, the investigator and the
partner will tackle fundamental questions in evolutionary biology. The project
will provide protected time and resources in a new field of research for the
investigator and will develop research experiences for students in the classroom
and in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conspecific aggression is a strategy for
increasing access to resources. Male-male aggression receives far more attention
than female-female aggression, because often the access to mates is more skewed
for males than for females. In this project, female aggression will be examined
in Drosophila species that differ in their biology and thus the resources they
require. In addition, the genetics of female aggression will be assessed to
determine if it has a similar basis to that of males. The investigator will work
with a collaborative partner to be trained in assessing female aggressive
behaviors and in high-throughput phenotyping. Each partner brings different
expertise to the project. The lead investigator works extensively on courtship
behavior in Drosophila concentrating on signals and their reception, including
phylogenetic and quantitative genetic approaches. She has worked with many
different species and is familiar with their biology. The collaborative partner
has performed extensive research on female aggression in D. melanogaster and has
developed automated tracking and scoring of the behaviors while using molecular
genetics approaches. Working with three drosophilid species, the investigator
and partner will tackle fundamental questions in evolutionary biology. The
project will help to advance the career of the investigator by providing
resources and time to advance a new field of inquiry that is complementary to
that of previous work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.