* 2121326
* Expanding The Capacity Of The Center for Infrastructure Transformation and Education Through Integrating Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion into Infrastructure Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Philip Parker, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2023
* USD 92,074.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding the capacity of
the Center for Infrastructure Transformation and Education (CIT-E) to support
civil, construction, and environmental engineering faculty members in their
efforts to integrate diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) into infrastructure
education. The causes of inequitable infrastructure are many; however, given its
leading role in infrastructure-related education and research, the civil and
environmental engineering (CEE) faculty has an obligation to recognize and
address the need for systemic change. Historically, CEE faculty members have not
received formal training on DEI issues. While such training is becoming more
common, a gap remains. This Level 1 Capacity Building project will support
CIT-E, an existing and thriving community of practice (CoP), through providing
the foundation for future work in developing a multi-institutional effort to
transform the CEE education community into a community that can sustain growth
in DEI integration. The collaborative research project is a joint effort by the
University of Wisconsin, Platteville, Lafayette College, Colorado State
University, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the increased capacity generated by this
expanded network and a shared vision, the CIT-E CoP work will be transformative.
Leveraging the CIT-E and the CoP, the project frames the work through the lens
of two continua: race neutral/race conscious and inclusion
infrastructure/exclusion infrastructure. This project will develop i) CIT-E
communal understanding of how DEI and infrastructure are related; ii) what the
interaction among members reveals about DEI; iii) how members of the CoP can
educate one another by addressing DEI issues in education, research, and
professional practice; and iv) how the CoP can inspire real and lasting change.
Specifically, this project will increase the capacity of CIT-E through the
following project objectives: i) gather evidence by compiling a list of non-
normative examples of successful institutional efforts that positively impact
DEI; ii) assess CIT-E resources and needs via Asset Mapping; iii) evaluate
Community of Practice as an appropriate Change Theory; iv) recruit additional
stakeholders and organizations to CIT-E based on the gaps identified in previous
project objectives; v) identify, cluster, and prioritize ways of integrating DEI
into CEE education using Group Concept Mapping (GCM); and vi) provide the
foundation for developing a multi-institutional effort to transform the CEE
education community into a community that can sustain growth in DEI integration.
The Research Team will ensure that key stakeholders, including experts in Change
Theory, DEI strategies, and curriculum development are invited to provide
external peer review of the project. The Research Team will facilitate working
sessions to address larger tasks such as GCM and Asset Mapping. Through a
collaboration with the Institute for Research in the Social Sciences (IRISS),
the project will i) build the capacity of the geographically-dispersed Research
Team by accelerating the team’s integration to operate as a highly-functioning
team and ii) explore how Team Science might add value to efforts to expand the
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.