* 2121787
* ADVANCE Partnership: Promoting Equity and Inclusion to Facilitate Retention of Faculty through Evidence- and Place-Based Intervention Training
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jay Farrell, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 09/30/2025
* USD 802,538.00

The University of California, Riverside (UCR) Collaborative NSF ADVANCE
Partnership project (COE ADVANCE) aims at developing an organizational culture
and climate that better promotes equity and inclusion for engineering faculty.
This will be achieved by building awareness and understanding of exclusionary
behaviors and implementing bystander training. This project will affect
individual and organizational change in Colleges of Engineering (COEs) across
the University of California (UC) system, starting in the Bourns College of
Engineering (BCOE) at UCR and expanding to all other UC COEs, through a
partnership with the UC Engineering Deans’ Council. The project objectives
include: (1) Increase individual and organizational awareness and understanding
of the culture and climate within COEs across the UC system, particularly as
they affect women and in the context of intersectionality; (2) Develop
organizational leaders, allies, and coconspirators from the departments and
colleges to provide bystander intervention training for all faculty and to model
behaviors that promote equity and inclusion; (3) Empower faculty to apply
bystander intervention strategies that promote positive organizational culture
and climate, encourage equitable attitudes, and facilitate systemic change; and
(4) Elucidate the intersectional experiences of underrepresented faculty and
resistance to change among overrepresented faculty. This project is in
partnership with the ADVANCEGeo: From the Classroom to the Field: Improving the
Workplace in the Geosciences (#1725879) and NSF INCLUDES: Leveraging Field-
Campaign Networks for Collaborative Change (#1835055)
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COE ADVANCE project will result in: (1) An
increased understanding and adoption of strategies by engineering faculty across
the UC system for identifying and addressing exclusionary practices; (2) An
intervention model that can be used in multiple higher education contexts to
promote equity and inclusion of STEM faculty, staff, and students; (3) A network
of organizational leaders from departments within COEs across the UC system who
are committed to modeling equity and inclusion, and who are connected to the
AdvanceGEO and INCLUDES partners and their networks; and (4) An improved culture
and climate for COE faculty across the UC system. Important elements in this
project for supporting systemic and sustainable change include: engagement of
leadership at the College, University, and UC System levels; development of
organizational leaders within departments as allies and co-conspirators; and
faculty empowerment through department-centralized training (train-the-trainer
model). Training materials and research methods will be developed through the
partnerships with the AdvanceGEO and NSF INCLUDES projects. These project
partners bring experience in applying such approaches in a place-based context.
The COE ADVANCE research methods, data, deliverables, and outcomes will
contribute to a growing body of knowledge and published literature on bystander
intervention programs, as well as on efforts to promote equity and inclusion in
academia. Although COE ADVANCE focuses on inclusion for STEM faculty, systemic
shifts in organizational culture and climate will also positively affect
students and staff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is designed to
foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and elimination of
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational barriers that inhibit
equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the organizational
culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership" awards provide support for projects
that scale-up evidence based systemic change strategies to enhance gender equity
for STEM faculty regionally or nationally. This project is also supported by the
NSF Directorate for Engineering's Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.