* 2121044
* QLCI-CI: NSF Quantum Leap Challenge Institute for Quantum Sensing in Biophysics and Bioengineering
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* David Awschalom, University of Chicago
* Cooperative Agreement
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2026
* USD 20,950,000.00

Quantum sensing has the potential to revolutionize understanding of the inner
workings—the molecular underpinnings—of biology and human health. Quantum
sensing will allow probing the physical properties of biological systems with
nanometer resolution and single-molecule sensitivity, resolving the microscopic
relationships among ions, molecules, cells, and tissues while also elucidating
dynamics. The Institute for Quantum Sensing in Biophysics and Bioengineering
will create new types of biocompatible quantum sensors and embed these quantum
sensors within biological systems to extract new information and gain control
over biological processes that, until now, have been beyond reach. The Institute
brings together researchers from materials science, physics, chemistry,
engineering, biology, and medicine working side-by-side at every step to define
and tackle these manifestly interdisciplinary
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute will train the future quantum
technology workforce by creating a Quantum Academy (for K-12) and Quantum
Institute (post-secondary workforce training). These programs will work with
underserved communities within Chicago, exposing students to quantum science and
training teachers in the development of quantum science curriculum. These
programs seek to show students not only the material, but also the scientific
process, to help them understand quantum science and see themselves as
scientists. The programs also will match trainees with potential employers in
quantum technology fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Quantum Leap Challenge
Institute for Quantum Sensing in Biophysics and Bioengineering will develop
biocompatible quantum materials, establish protocols for quantum sensing and
imaging within cells, and demonstrate the utility of quantum measurements in
biology and medicine. The research is focused on four thrusts. In the sensing
thrust, this project will define novel biocompatible probes to enable quantum
measurements that are correlated in time and/or space. In the biological
targeting thrust, material compatibility and biochemical specific targeting will
be ensured, and sensing protocols will be developed to overcome issues related
to integrating quantum sensors into living cells. In the correlative imaging
thrust, the Institute will develop controlled test cases, image processing
techniques, and reconstruction tools that exploit both classical and quantum
correlations for imaging biological systems. Importantly, these three thrusts
are tightly connected to a fourth thrust centered on biophysical and biological
grand challenges to help image dynamics in ion channels, force networks,
bioelectricity, and cellular communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.