* 2121058
* MCA: Neurogenetic divergence during incipient speciation in chorus frogs
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Emily Lemmon, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 338,977.00

Species interactions can indirectly promote the evolution of new species,
particularly when the combination of species within a community varies across
geography. When different species attempt to hybridize, the resulting offspring
may have low fitness. Costly hybridization can not only cause divergence of
mating behaviors between species but also among populations of the same species,
leading to the origin of new species. The purpose of this project is to
understand how auditory neurons in the frog brain evolve as acoustic mating
behaviors diverge among populations during speciation. This work will be
accomplished by integrating prior field studies with new experiments on auditory
neurons. These studies will advance understanding of how the time-based
information contained in sounds (e.g., beats, rhythms) is interpreted in the
brain and how the timing differences in signals affect behavioral responses. The
research will offer unprecedented insight into how new species form, from the
level of organisms and populations to the single neuron and genomic levels. The
project will provide training and protected time for the lead researcher and a
graduate student to engage in cutting-edge research at the intersection of
multiple branches of biology. Furthermore, the work will enhance ongoing
outreach activities by generating integrative data sets, examples, and
multimedia materials to engage students in the exploration of compelling
biological questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will connect broad-scale
evolutionary processes promoting speciation to fine-scale changes in the central
nervous system that contribute to reproductive isolation. Research will be
conducted on chorus frogs (Pseudacris), a system undergoing cascade
reinforcementâ€”a process through which interactions between species indirectly
cause behavioral divergence within species. This project will identify neural
correlates of time interval-based mating preferences across speciating
populations through neurophysiological experiments on neurons of the auditory
midbrain. Specifically, this work will test two mechanisms of divergence:
rescaling of neural tuning and redistribution between auditory neuron classes.
The study will also test for differential expression of ionotropic receptor
genes and other genes involved in synaptic transmission between behaviorally-
divergent frog populations at the single-nuclei level. In particular, this work
will determine whether expression of candidate synaptic transmission genes is
correlated with behavioral evolution. The planned research will open new avenues
for inquiry, providing a launching pad for integrative studies spanning
neuroscience, behavioral ecology, genomics, and evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.