* 2121491
* EAGER: SAI: Collaborative Research: Behavioral Theories for Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructure
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ali Farhadzadeh, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,064.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal
opportunity, protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and
fuels American leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across
the science and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human
reasoning and decision making, governance, and social and cultural
processes enables the building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that
improves lives and society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI project investigates interactions
between the human decision-making process and infrastructure performance. Human
actions and the decisions made in planning, designing and constructing
infrastructure are influenced by an engineer’s socioeconomic and demographic
characteristics, attitudes, values, and perceptions. Infrastructure response is
also driven by uncertainties in material properties, design strategies, and
physical and climatic stressors. This project links a well-studied social
science framework (The Theory of Planned Behavior) to engineering modeling,
offering new and transformative knowledge about infrastructure management. The
new research models are specifically tested in the context of resilient flood
protection systems such as levees and breakwaters in flood-prone communities.
The project aims to advance social science theory, develop new metrics for
measuring and predicting the interaction of social, economic, and physical
behavior of infrastructure components, and to use these metrics to enhance the
resilience of infrastructure. The project ultimately helps to connect engineers
with tools and methods that enable them to better understand and consider human
behavior, potentially leading to tangible physical outputs. This will improve
infrastructure design and performance assessment, making infrastructure safer,
more cost-effective, and resilient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
primarily on theory building to develop a dynamic and novel model merging the
Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) and System Dynamics Modeling. The goal is to
integrate important social science variables such as values, norms, and
attitudes into the flow of decision making an engineer undertakes for
infrastructure design and uncertainties associated with infrastructure
performance. The project develops a refined theoretical framework merging TPB
with engineering, including a systematic theory-driven literature review,
interviews with experts, and a survey of the engineering community. This static
model is then transitioned to a more dynamic system platform incorporating
dependencies, sensitivity analyses, and multivariate statistics. Bridging the
theory to practice is tested on two flood defense target infrastructure systems
(levees and breakwaters) in flood-prone communities. The anticipated outcomes of
the research include advancing social science theory, developing new metrics for
measuring and predicting the interaction of social, economic, and physical
behavior of infrastructure components, and using these metrics to enhance the
resilience of infrastructure in design, construction, performance, and
maintenance phases. The project builds a transdisciplinary new theory by
extending a widely studied behavioral framework to strengthen convergence
between social science and infrastructure. Ultimately, the project will help to
connect engineers with tools and methods that enable better understanding of
human processes that intervene in the performance of urban
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.