* 2121005
* MCA: Physics-Informed Machine Learning from Acoustic Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Parisa Shokouhi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 417,329.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) grant will fund research and training that
enables effective use of acoustic sensors to estimate material properties,
diagnose state, or predict failure in engineered devices and structures, as well
as for seismic monitoring of mines, carbon sequestration sites, and geothermal
energy reservoirs, thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity and welfare. Acoustic sensors range from miniature
transducers for medical diagnostics and structural health monitoring to
seismometers for recording large-scale ground motion. In current practice, the
time-varying signals from such sensors are reduced from thousands of data points
to a few hand-crafted features. This underutilization of data results in poor
feature resolution and an inability to accurately diagnose the evolving state of
materials or predict imminent failures. This project will overcome such
shortcomings by building an analysis and modeling framework that accounts for
the full acoustic signal waveform and is informed by knowledge of the underlying
physics, thereby achieving improved accuracy, generalizability, and
interpretability of its predictions. This framework offers an unconventional
approach to nondestructive defect detection in aerospace, automotive,
infrastructure, pipelines, and energy industries, as well as to the longstanding
challenge of earthquake prediction, and may translate into improved
classification of abnormalities in medical ultrasound imaging. An integral
component of the training plan is the development of a new project-based
graduate-level course bridging acoustics and machine learning and with course
materials made available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make
fundamental contributions to the integration of machine-learning techniques with
domain-specific knowledge about the elastodynamic response of complex materials
systems in a data analysis framework that extracts an information-rich set of
critical features from acoustic data. It achieves this goal by constructing
physics-informed deep learning models to predict shear failure using ultrasonic
data from laboratory experiments on rocks. Such models are expected to minimize
the risk of overfitting, thereby making them adaptable also to other datasets,
and to be more explainable, permitting new understanding of wave propagation and
interactions in complex media, for example, with heterogeneities and
discontinuities. First, multi-headed models that incorporate dimensional
reduction techniques and multi-task learning are trained to identify the most
informative acoustic features in a limited dataset. Next, models are constructed
that also respect coupled friction and 3D wave transmission laws. Finally, model
interpretability, robustness, and generalizability are evaluated against a
larger set of experimental conditions within and outside the bounds of the
training data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.