* 2121528
* EAGER: SAI: Collaborative Research: Conceptualizing Interorganizational Processes for Supporting Interdependent Lifeline Infrastructure Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Branden Johnson, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 176,913.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;American lifeline infrastructures, such as
drinkable water, power systems, and ground transportation, include technology,
organizations, and expertise that keep Americans alive and working. They are
highly interdependent and require each other’s functioning for normal operation.
Yet Pacific Northwest infrastructures are under-prepared for the Cascadia
subduction zone (CSZ) earthquake (magnitude 9.0+), with a 7-15% probability over
the next 45 years or so. It likely will destroy or damage many infrastructures
at the same time, making life difficult for months or years as these lifelines
are slowly restored across the region. This project examines how operators and
managers—specifically, the expert staff who keep the drinkable water, power
grid, and ground transportation infrastructures going—are prepared to handle
such rare extreme hazards. The aim of this research is to transform how the U.S.
prepares for the next CSZ earthquake, by improving coordinated preparedness and
recovery of interdependent infrastructures after the earthquake, and informing
how these interdependent infrastructures are designed, developed, and maintained
to enhance their resilience and sustainability. Avoiding waste in coordinated
recovery of these various lifeline infrastructures could save thousands of lives
as well as millions of dollars to the U.S. economy every day.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is conducting table-top emergency
response exercises, detailed interviews, and group discussions and with control
room operators, maintenance supervisors, real-time support staff, and managers
across potable water, the power grid, and ground transportation infrastructures.
These activities help to identify critical shared or interconnected control
variables (e.g., electrical voltages, reservoir release rates, management
structures) that may severely hamper coordinated recovery if not acknowledged
and planned for. These data are used to develop an agent-based model (ABM), a
computer model that incorporates human behavior data into the design of “agents”
who respond to various situations, to identify the outcomes of various
earthquake and infrastructure response scenarios beyond those used in the
interview/discussion/exercise work. Key informants in infrastructure planning
and emergency response in Washington and Oregon, the states most vulnerable to
consequences of a CSZ earthquake, will be consulted and informed throughout the
project to maximize its value, with wider distribution of results to multiple
stakeholders through policy briefs, white papers, and presentations to enhance
its value for practitioners. The project aims to provide scientific evidence for
a new decision-aid tool to be further researched and developed. This project’s
proposed integration of social science (e.g., organizational operations
analysis, trust, values) and engineering theories and methods (e.g., resilience
engineering, ABM) is largely untested but has the potential to provide first
insights into how interorganizational processes support or hinder coordinated
recovery of interdependent infrastructures. Despite the uniqueness of a CSZ
earthquake event, it is expected that much of the new knowledge generated
through this project will be generalizable to other disasters and regions, given
that failures of multiple infrastructures do occur simultaneously in other
hazard events. Anonymized qualitative data and open-source simulation software
will be made publicly available for other researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.