* 2121157
* A Self-Study of Contingent Faculty and their Impact on Undergraduate STEM Education at a Research-Intensive Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Margaret Beier, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 160,365.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by addressing contingent
faculty labor equity to improve STEM education. Contingent faculty comprise
69.5% of higher education instructional faculty nationwide. They include both
part-time and full-time faculty who are appointed off the tenure track.
Contingent faculty play a critical role in undergraduate STEM education and hold
great potential for advancing student success as well as institutional
commitments to diversity, equity, and inclusion. Transforming faculty labor
conditions to better support contingent faculty, particularly at research-
intensive institutions, is critical for educating an increasingly diverse
population and providing equitable STEM education. This Capacity Building
project will offer a model self-study of the role of contingent faculty within
university structures. The study has potential to deepen and transform current
understandings of faculty roles at the university. Project outcomes include: (i)
identifying a replicable set of institutional changes that enhance STEM
education; (ii) revealing institutional models and best practices for achieving
equitable STEM educational outcomes with a diverse faculty workforce; and (iii)
identifying a theory of change that will be generalizable to similar research-
intensive institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use
a grounded theory approach to identify how research-intensive institutions can
transform organizational structures, processes, and policies to ensure that
contingent faculty enhance STEM education, educational equity, and institutional
reputation. As the projectâ€™s scope focuses on systemic, transformational change,
the project team will consist of both tenured and contingent STEM faculty, upper
administration, and staff who support undergraduate teaching and learning. The
project will conduct a self-study that employs a mixed method approach,
including institutional data analysis and surveys, interviews, and focus groups
with faculty and administrators, to understand how the labor conditions of
contingent faculty affect STEM education. The project will engage in four key
activities: 1) an assessment of the institutional and individual factors at the
proposing institution that affect contingent faculty labor conditions and
perceptions; 2) an analysis of the impact of contingent faculty labor conditions
on STEM teaching and learning at the proposing institution; 3) identification of
a theory of change that provides a framework for interventions and institutional
transformation of the contingent faculty role at research-intensive
institutions; and 4) identification of and collaboration with an institutional
partner to build upon the foundation laid through the self-study. This project
will yield new information on how contingent faculty agency and integration in
research-intensive institutions affect STEM outcomes and address a gap in
understanding of the institutional processes, structures, resources, and
policies necessary to ensure that contingent faculty enhance STEM education.
Focus on the research-intensive context will advance understanding of the impact
of contingent faculty on student learning to an institutional type that has
received less attention in the literature despite a critical role in preparation
of the professional STEM labor force. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track,
the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.