* 2121293
* Non-Profit and HBCU Collaboration to Establish a Plant Phenotyping Data Science Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sandra Leal, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,206.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the diversity of
students in the STEM pipeline through the provision of opportunities for
undergraduates at a historically black university to collaborate with plant and
data science researchers via a course-based undergraduate research experience
(CURE). A vibrant and diverse STEM pipeline is critical to the nation’s economy,
innovation capability, and economic prosperity. In the United States, this STEM
pipeline relies on diverse backgrounds, viewpoints, and experiences to improve
innovation and outcomes, yet the participation of minority ethnic groups like
African Americans in the pipeline remains lower than their representation within
the population as a whole. Recommendations for building and sustaining a diverse
and robust pipeline in STEM call for increasing the number of mutually
beneficial collaborations between faculty at historically black colleges and
universities (HBCUs) and scientists in traditionally white academic
institutions. Expansion of such collaborations would enable the numbers and
types of authentic research experiences available to undergraduate students at
HBCUs to increase. Current efforts to improve undergraduate STEM education
include the adoption of CUREs that can successfully engage large numbers of
undergraduate students in authentic scientific research. CUREs in diverse
disciplines including biology, biochemistry and chemistry are gaining prominence
in undergraduate institutions as a successful strategy for growing the STEM
pipeline, but they are not prominent at HBCUs. Through this project, the Donald
Danforth Plant Science Center (DDPSC), a non-academic, non-profit plant science
research facility, and Harris-Stowe State University (HSSU), a HBCU, are
collaborating to develop and offer a plant and data science CURE. The overall
goal is to increase the number of minoritized students in the STEM
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The American Association for the Advancement of
Science (AAAS)’s 2011 report, Vision and Change, recommended that the biology
education community prioritize providing opportunities for students to practice
science through active engagement in research rather than just reading about it.
Experiences in research for undergraduate students are known to greatly
contribute to academic achievement, future career interests, and increased self-
efficacy. Despite such benefits, these research experiences have historically
not been readily available to entire classrooms of students at minority-serving
institutions. This project will enhance the scientific research skills of
underrepresented racialized minority students through a CURE which will train
student in cutting-edge skills in image analysis and data science techniques,
using image datasets from current scientific research studies. By major and by
course (biology vs math) we will analyze various student learning outcomes,
including self-efficacy, attitudes towards data science, position on a knowledge
acquisition curve, and Laboratory Course Assessment Survey (LCAS) scores. We
will include in our model variables that might impact knowledge acquisition and
self-efficacy using a generalized linear model (GLM) that includes attitude,
gender identity, race/ethnicity, educational background, major, and scores for
collaboration, discovery/research, and iteration. To determine how collaborating
with data scientists impacts students’ perceptions of their role in research, we
will use a mixed methods approach of analyzing the LCAS results which will
quantify student’s perceptions of their engagement in collaboration,
discovery/research, and iteration. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.