* 2121875
* EAGER: SAI: Socio-Technological Guided Enhancement of Power Infrastructure Resilience
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Ge Ou, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 11/30/2024
* USD 298,833.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens Americaâ€™s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study looks at failure of the electric
grid, aiming to improve understanding of how the electric grid can be designed
to ensure that the most vulnerable people in the U.S. are not also the most
likely to experience and to be harmed by grid failure. Severe weather is the
leading cause of power outages in the United States. Outages created by grid
failure, when the electric grid fails to provide reliable service, can cause
serious adverse impacts ranging from economic damage to possible loss of life.
Grid failure and the impacts of grid failure are not distributed equally across
all geographies and social settings, meaning that outages are more likely to
occur in places where the grid is not prepared to respond to grid failure and
the impacts of grid failure are more likely to harm already vulnerable
communities and groups. This project provides new knowledge for strengthening
American critical infrastructure, including the electrical grid infrastructure
as well as other built infrastructures and social infrastructures that shape the
vulnerabilities involved in disaster response
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study creates a data-enabled decision-
making framework integrating socioeconomic and engineering factors to understand
the outcomes and impacts of potential grid failure. This involves first
aggregating community-level power resilience metrics for weather-related power
outages and quantifying key socioeconomic factors that are relevant to
understanding the impacts of grid outages. Subsequently, a social-economic-
engineering framework is developed to enable examination of different proactive
disaster response plans through an integrated simulation platform. This platform
allows for consideration of the technologies, policies, and planning mechanisms
that would provide for an approach to preparing for grid failure and response
resilience that is more robust and resilient and less harmful to vulnerable
communities. The platform is tested using case studies. Expected project
outcomes include a comprehensive power infrastructure resilience analysis
framework, which can unveil plans to substantially improve for community
resilience by assessing grid failure as a socio-technological
issue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.