* 2121239
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: A global seafood trade network database for sustainable food systems, human health, and nutrition security
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Christopher Golden, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 12/31/2025
* USD 114,760.00

Around the world, over a quarter of all food is traded internationally. Global
trade can provide foods at lower prices, supply more types of foods year-round,
and resist local supply shortages, such as crop failures. At the same time,
global trade has drawbacks and can pose a risk to food security. For example,
environmental disasters can create supply shortages that are passed on to
importing countries or nutritious foods can be redirected away from domestic
markets. Seafood is an important source of nutrition around the world and is
among the most highly traded foods. As a result, it is important to understand
when global seafood trade either improves or threatens food and nutrition
security. This grant will support the construction of a database that will track
the flows of products in the global seafood market. The database will include
information on the kinds of seafood that are being traded across countries, who
is selling it and who is buying it, and how this network of buyers and sellers
changes over time. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will construct the
Aquatic Resource Trade in Species (ARTIS) database which will show the global
flow of seafood species for the first time. This database will enable research
on the environmental and human outcomes of food system globalization, including
a better understanding of the conditions under which trade promotes
environmental sustainability, human health, and food security. Research in these
areas has been limited by missing data and, for the data that exist, mismatches
in the taxonomic and product resolution of the data. The ARTIS database will use
techniques of optimization to align public data sets. These linked datasets will
be joined to new data on the nutrient content of different kinds of seafood.
ARTIS will be available to researchers by publishing the underlying data and
code, archiving the data and code with a downloadable R package, and development
of an interactive website that will allow users to explore the seafood trade
without downloading data or requiring coding skills. The ARTIS database will be
important for answering pressing questions about the role of global seafood
trade in sustainable food production and nutrition
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.