* 2121028
* NSF-BSF: RI: Small: Efficient Bi- and Multi-Objective Search Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sven Koenig, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,694.00

This project develops faster search algorithms for route-planning problems where
multiple cost measures are used to determine the best solutions. For example,
when transporting hazardous goods it is important to consider both the duration
and safety of a route. Other applications include planning power-transmission
lines, inspection and manipulation planning in robotics, scheduling satellites,
and routing packets in computer networks. These bi- and multi-objective search
algorithms work by maintaining many paths from the given start location to each
location encountered during the search. This approach currently prevents them
from solving realistically sized problems in real-time. This project both
investigates techniques for speeding them up to realistic problem sizes and
develops new benchmark instances for evaluating their performance. It is part of
an international collaboration that also includes the exchange of personnel and
the development of educational material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bi-objective (and
multi-objective) search algorithms allow the cost of every graph edge to be
quantified by two (or more) real values. They essentially assume that one wants
to find the set of all paths, called the Pareto frontier, such that each path in
the set is better than all other paths from a given start vertex to a given goal
vertex with respect to the sum of at least one cost component of its edges (or
equally good with respect to all cost components). The researchers of this
project work on finding synergies between ideas from existing bi-objective
search algorithms and recent algorithmic developments in the artificial
intelligence search community to develop the next generation of optimal and
approximately-optimal bi-objective search algorithms. They are also working on
generalizing their bi-objective search algorithms to multi-objective search
algorithms and applying them in the context of transportation and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.