* 2121760
* Collaborative Research: How roots, regolith, rock and climate interact over decades to centuries - the R3-C Frontier
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Daniel Hirmas, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2025
* USD 519,273.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine how the
interaction of climate, the physical and chemical characteristics of the
bedrock, and the action of vegetation, control the movement and storage of water
and carbon on Earthâ€™s surface. These processes in turn influence climate by
altering important factors such as greenhouse gas concentrations like H2O and
CO2. Human activities can change these pathways, and this research will enable
the forecasting of the possible impacts upon the Earth-surface environment. To
achieve this goal requires synthesizing existing datasets, collecting new data,
and training teams of people in the fields of water science, geochemistry, soil
science, geophysics, ecology, and Earth system modeling. The project will
include 28 undergraduate students, four graduate students, and three
postdoctoral scholars across seven universities to collectively explore how the
interaction of plant roots and bedrock regulate water and carbon movement
between the land and atmosphere. The project will also train 45 educators to
develop discovery-based learning approaches in their classes, the products of
which will be publicly accessible on available web
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate when and to what
degree bedrock exerts more control than roots on water and carbon fluxes. Using
an interdisciplinary approach that incorporates new data collection, data
harvesting, machine learning, and numerical modeling, this research will
determine the mechanisms by which bedrock and fracture distributions govern the
development of preferential flow paths. It will also examine depth, degree, and
timing of coupling between the subsurface and atmosphere and its impact on water
storage and fluxes. The project will explore how plant roots interact with
bedrock to shape the subsurface structure, associated carbon storage, and
transpiration rates. Methods will include 3D geophysical surveys and structural
soil pore analyses to determine the occurrence of changes in the subsurface and
how they govern root water uptake. Global in situ and remotely sensed data will
be integrated via machine learning to discern emergent patterns in subsurface
structure on larger scales. The project will leverage existing datasets and
collect new data from the NSF Critical Zone Cluster Networks (CZCNs), National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), and Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
programs. The ultimate outcome will be a comprehensive framework of hydro-
biogeochemical linkages to forecast how climatic conditions and subsurface
structure regulate hydrological flow and the carbon
cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.