* 2121240
* Strengthening Physics Achievement via Research and Collaboration (SPARC)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anna Ivanova, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 225,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving college students'
success in introductory physics. General Physics I (PHY 210), a calculus-based
introductory physics course, is a "gateway" course for all STEM majors at Hostos
Community College. The course serves a diverse population of students, many of
whom are first-generation college students and are from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM. In this project, the investigators will redesign this
course by implementing a strategy called "Doing Physics" (DP), which emphasizes
problem-solving, scientific reasoning, and collaboration. The new approach to
the course will integrate inquiry-based science, collaborative and game-based
learning, course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs), and mentoring
students to pursue independent research opportunities. The aim is to increase
the retention rate and pass rate in the course, and thereby to increase the
number and diversity of students who pursue, persist in, and complete degrees in
STEM. At many colleges and universities, an introductory physics course is
required for, and sometimes poses a barrier for, students pursuing STEM majors.
Therefore, the new curriculum that will be pilot-tested in this project has the
potential to become a model for improving introductory physics
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
improve student outcomes in a calculus-based general physics course, and thus
better prepare the students for subsequent science and engineering courses and
for careers in STEM. The project team will develop the "Doing Physics"
pedagogical approach, implement it in the General Physics I course, expose
students to authentic research through CUREs, prepare students to apply for and
succeed in intensive summer research experiences (such as NSF Research
Experiences for Undergraduates [REU] opportunities), and measure the impact of
the new approach through rigorous evaluation. Expected outcomes for the students
include higher completion and pass rates in the course; increased persistence in
STEM, graduation in STEM, and progression to STEM careers; and enhanced
confidence, self-efficacy, sense of belonging, identity in STEM, and
collaborative skills. The project evaluation will use a mixed-methods approach,
looking at the program's impact on students' academic performance, progress
relative to developmental objectives, retention (within the institution and
within STEM disciplines), and post-graduation outcomes relative to non-
participant peers. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and tools. This project
is also supported by the NSF HSI Program, which has the goals of enhancing the
quality of undergraduate STEM education and increasing the recruitment,
retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing associate or baccalaureate
degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.