* 2121019
* MCA: Characterizing Rhizosphere Decomposition with Novel Techniques in Contrasting Salt Marshes
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Amanda Spivak, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 370,330.00

Salt marshes provide several important ecosystem services to coastal
communities. One of the most valuable services is buffering coasts from damage
due to rising sea levels and coastal storms. Marshes provide this service by
building soils and growing vertically. Marsh soils are mostly made of minerals
delivered by rivers and organic matter from marsh grasses. Delivery of these
materials can be put at risk by human activities. This places additional
importance on efficient burial and long-term preservation of organic matter in
maintaining marsh elevation. This research examines the small-scale mechanisms
controlling soil organic matter preservation. Laboratory and field experiments
are testing how three preservation mechanisms operate under controlled and
natural conditions. Results help explain spatial variability in soil carbon
stocks and may inform models predicting salt marsh survival with sea-level rise.
The expertise gained through this project provides both career development and
advances in coastal carbon science. High school students and undergraduate
students are also gaining exposure to this science project through an outreach
program in Georgia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three mechanisms affecting
decomposition — oxygen availability, mineral protection, and root exudate
priming — are being investigated using novel geochemical and isotope tracing and
imaging techniques. The experiments are based at two Long-Term Ecological
Research sites – Georgia Coastal Ecosystems and Plum Island Ecosystems – which
have similar tidal ranges, marsh grasses, and production rates but different
carbon storage rates. In the lab, mineral and organic rhizosphere soils are
maintained under oxic or anoxic conditions to test how soil carbon is preserved.
A field experiment is being deployed at both sites, to manipulate tidally-driven
redox conditions. The research is adding knowledge about how redox conditions
affect carbon transformations. The fate of root exudates through microbial
incorporation or soil particle stabilization helps discover what makes both
mineral and organic salt marshes resilient to changing coastal
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.