* 2121693
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Advancing the Reach and Scope of Supplemental Instruction
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Paul Janus, North Park University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,066.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project focuses on increasing STEM
student retention and success in entry-level courses at a Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI) by expanding and adapting Supplemental Instruction (SI) to
online learning environments. SI is a peer-facilitated academic support program
consisting of regularly scheduled out-of-class collaborative learning sessions.
There is growing demand for well-trained STEM professionals, but high rates of
student attrition in introductory level science and engineering courses limit
the number of STEM degrees awarded. Additionally, diversity and inclusion in
STEM fields remains a major concern, with students from traditionally
underrepresented backgrounds earning STEM degrees at levels well below rates of
enrollment. SI participation is a positive predictor of higher grades and
student success in introductory STEM courses, and interaction with SI leaders of
diverse backgrounds has been shown to further benefit underrepresented student
groups in these classes. This project will expand face-to-face and online SI
offerings to make SI more accessible and beneficial to a diverse group of STEM
students, including non-traditional and commuting students. In addition, the
project will seek to expand SI leadership opportunities to traditionally
underrepresented student groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to (1)
determine the impact of the SI program on student retention and success in
introductory science courses, and (2) determine the effect of the SI program on
student’s metacognition, affective components of learning, and positive
attitudes toward STEM education and STEM careers. This multi-year project will
employ a variety of quantitative and qualitative research methods over a period
of three successive fall academic terms. Findings will be compared among three
student groups/ sets: those who attend required face-to-face SI sessions, those
who attend required online SI sessions, and those for whom SI session attendance
is optional. The research will provide insight into the effect of face-to-face
and online SI implementations on student success, particularly among non-
traditional and commuter student populations to whom face-to-face SI sessions
may be less accessible. In addition, the project findings will contribute to
best practices for successful adaptation of SI to online learning environments.
Broader dissemination of the findings at national conferences and in peer-
reviewed educational journals of respective STEM fields will allow participants
to share insights and innovations with the growing community of STEM educators
leveraging peer-facilitated learning models. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.