* 2121351
* Pre-service Teachers Using Culturally Sustaining Pedagogies in Science for English Language Learners
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Max Vazquez Dominguez, University of North Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,046.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by preparing pre-service
teachers in STEM, with a focus on engineering, to serve the growing English
Language Learner (ELL) population in grades 4th-8th using culturally sustaining
pedagogies. The project will provide pre-service teachers with training
consisting of a series of year-round workshops. In these workshops, pre-service
teachers will learn about best practices for teaching science methods, and
collaborate in small groups to co-develop lesson plans focusing on
differentiation for ELLs. Under the guidance of University of North Georgia
faculty, pre-service teachers will demonstrate learning, co-teach the STEM
activities designed specifically to address ELLs, and offer self- and peer-
reflections. Yearlong workshops and mentorship will support pre-service teacher
development. This pre-service teacher institute contrasts with the conventional
pre-service teacher experience as it builds capacity for designing and
implementing STEM activities for ELLs with a under the auspices of university
faculty, as well with a peer support structure that draws on co-teaching models
in the science classroom. Over the three-year span, the project plans to compare
the outcomes from the pre-service teachers attending the summer institute and
the outcomes of their peers attending the regular science methods courses. Such
a comparison is expected to generate new knowledge on the experiences and
effectiveness of designing, planning, and implementing STEM activities with a
focus on engineering for ELLs in elementary and middle grades.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project has two overarching goals. First, the project aims to
generate new knowledge about the experiences of elementary and middle grade pre-
service teachers as they develop teaching skills with a focus on engineering
using culturally sustaining pedagogies that target the needs of ELLs. Second,
the project will assess the impact of elementary and middle grade pre-service
teachers’ instruction on ELLs’ knowledge and competency in solving problems
utilizing engineering skills they will learn throughout the project. The project
will use a quasi-experimental design and a mixed-methods approach analyzing
qualitative and quantitative data to provide an account of pre-service teachers’
and the 4th-8th grade ELL students’ experiences, practices, and products. As
part of the quasi-experimental design, the project will have a treatment group
and a control group, which compares pre-service teachers in the same year of the
teacher preparation program. This project aims to expand the knowledge and
practices on how pre-service teachers use and adapt STEM activities using the
three-dimensional learning approach and the 5E model to teach STEM to ELLs in a
safe and flexible environment. In so doing the project leadership expects to
improve their students’ exposure to and performance in carrying out engineering
activities. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project
to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation goals, which are well-
aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.