* 2121468
* The ADVANCE Resource and Coordination Network
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Joan Herbers, Wepan Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jessie Dearo
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,103,912.00

The ADVANCE Resource and Coordination Network (ARC-Network), managed by the
Association of Women in Science (AWIS), aims to connect scholars and
practitioners committed to equity in STEM in an active and engaged stakeholder
community. This project will address the need to collect, analyze, and broadly
share the knowledge that has been created by the NSF ADVANCE program grantees
since 2001. The ARC-Network will become an easily accessible national resource
on gender equity for faculty in STEM. The ARC-Network will facilitate the
translation and adaptation of this knowledge through on-line resources and
strategic meetings of stakeholders in STEM higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ARC-Network will facilitate the sharing of tools and
resources, identifying opportunities for synergy with other organizations, and
curating and synthesizing the body of knowledge on systemic change and gender
equity. One goal is to empower the community to advance knowledge on systemic
change and to adapt existing resources to their organization, department, and
context. The ARC-Network is made up of two main components: ARC-Network Research
and the ARC-Network Community. As part of the ARC-Network Research, AWIS will:
1) Support Virtual Visiting Scholars who will conduct meta-analyses and
analytics on key topics from the literature; 2) Organize and hold small
workshops on emerging research in various topical areas to produce new research
agendas and partnerships; and 3) Work toward community standards for research,
evaluation, data, and metadata on STEM faculty equity and systemic change. AWIS
will build a diverse, multi-disciplinary, and cross-sector ARC-Network Community
of stakeholders including STEM faculty and administrators from all types of
institutions of higher education, and representatives from industry, government,
and STEM professional organizations. The community will be supported by: 1)
Strategic in-person meetings for scholars and practitioners; 2) A robust online
platform with a rich curated resource library; and 3) Active community
engagement and dissemination efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of women faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.