* 2121625
* Deep Intrinsic Learning for On-line Process Control of Manufacturing Manifold Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Enrique Del Castillo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2025
* USD 364,342.00

This grant will strengthen US industrial competitiveness by studying new methods
for the control of the quality of manufactured products. Modern laser sensors in
manufacturing plants can collect hundreds of thousands of measurements from the
surface of discrete parts or process variables in chemical plants. How to best
use these very large datasets to control the quality of parts is a difficult and
open problem. The first part of this project will develop new machine learning
and mathematical methods for quality control of the manufactured discrete parts
based on 3-dimensional geometrical data obtained from laser scans that do not
require lengthy preprocessing. The grant will then develop new methods for the
identification of a subset of variables that best represent the larger set of
process variables in a continuous process manufacturing facility, such that
effective monitoring of the smaller set of variables can lead to overall best
control of the plant, resulting in better products at lower cost. Open source
software that implements the algorithms developed in this research will be made
available, as well as educational activities that enhance the participation of
underrepresented minorities at both graduate and undergraduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this research will consider
discrete parts of a general free-form whose surface or volumetric scans
constitute large manifold datasets of complex geometry. The research first aims
at finding improved spectrum estimators of the Laplace-Beltrami (LB) operator
using Finite Element Methods (FEM), in particular, solving a Helmholtz partial
differential equation on the part manifold. The eigendecomposition of the LB
operator will be used as part features to monitor in multivariate SPC schemes. A
new Deep Functional Map approach, based on the LB operators of both part and its
CAD model, will localize the defect on the surface of the part, providing a
registration-free solution to the part localization problem. To find significant
differences requires solution of a massive statistical Multiple Comparison
problem which will be investigated. High dimensional continuous manufacturing
processes whose in-control state lies on a lower dimensional manifold require
extending the map from ambient space to embedding for the new observations
collected sequentially in time, in such a way that it is possible to determine
rapidly if they are in the on-control manifold or are significantly far from it.
In the second part of this grant, this problem will be studied with two
alternative approaches: a) a Laplacian Eigenmap that will be extended by solving
a classical inverse problem via a Nystrom technique, and b) Deep Autoencoders, a
type of neural network aimed at high dimensional data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.