* 2121120
* MCA-ECON: The Impacts of Supply and Demand on Ideas, Innovation, and Diversity in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francisca Antman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 405,665.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers play a critical role
in the production of new ideas, yet relatively little is known about how the
composition of researchers affects research output. This project will address
this question directly and explicitly tie the evolution of ideas to demographic
shifts in the representation of historically underrepresented minority (URM)
groups and women in economics. As such, it connects closely with efforts to
broaden participation toward greater inclusion of historically marginalized
groups at universities, colleges, and professional organizations across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will link the most comprehensive data
sets on the supply of, and demand for, Ph.D. economists by year and field within
economics. This unprecedented coverage will enable researchers to track the
evolution of ideas and innovation in economics and the role that labor supply
and demand factors have played in that process. Close examination of these data
will lead to a better understanding of the relationship between the demographic
composition of researchers and ideas, with a focus on estimating the impact of
increasing diversity on the depth and breadth of research innovation and ideas.
This project will also yield insights from the variation in the representation
of women and URM groups across fields over time to provide actionable evidence
on increasing diversity more broadly in the profession. Finally, this Mid-Career
Advancement (MCA) project will support moving the PIâ€™s area of expertise into
the field of innovation while opening new avenues of inquiry into the link
between diversity and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.