* 2121121
* Sparse Sensing, Actuation, and Communication in Complex Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Milad Siami, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,987.00

Social networks that connect people, smart power grids, pandemic influenza
mitigation, and flying drone display are all examples of large-scale complex
networks. Due to the various worldwide applications of these networks, achieving
efficient and robust control and monitoring of such networks is crucial,
especially using limited resources. We seek to accelerate the development of
novel technologies and advanced algorithms for complex dynamical networks using
recent advances in theoretical computer science, graph theory, and machine
learning. The results of this project will provide a rich set of building blocks
to find a sparse yet important subset of available sensors and actuators in the
complex network to enable precise control and high-resolution monitoring of the
entire network. As an integral part of this research program, we also propose an
educational plan involving K-12, undergraduate, and graduate-level education.
The outreach element will improve the pre-college students' awareness of the
impact and attractiveness of both research and engineering careers. Moreover, we
aim to leverage the resources at Northeastern's University Program in
Multicultural Engineering to broaden students' professional skills, find
valuable contacts, and explore one or more career paths. We also expect to
collect the results of this research in a special topic graduate-level course
documenting the theoretical underpinnings and algorithmic implementations of
sparse interaction in complex networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the
increasingly large-scale nature of complex networks, it is crucial to rapidly
estimate and control the state of the overall network in a distributed fashion
with provable performance guarantees, while using a minimum amount of
actuations, observations, and communications at each node and link over time.
The main goal of this proposal is to generalize collaborative subset selection
methods, and adaptive samplings in machine learning to (i) reduce network
complexity and data overload by sparse scheduling of available
Sensor/Actuator/Coupling measurements in complex networks, (ii) deal with
structured uncertainties, missing information, and corruptions on the update
dynamics of each agent or communication link, and (iii) handle a large class of
controllability and observability performance measures that are not supermodular
or submodular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.