* 2121930
* ADVANCE Partnership: Building Community Understanding of the Institutional Compensation System
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Margaret Bailey, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,314,681.00

This project aims to significantly expand knowledge of best practices for
faculty compensation to a broader community in higher education and provide
critical insights to guide compensation practices. Salary outcomes and pay
practices are closely related to the quality of work life and inform our
knowledge of what (and who) is important to the organization. In this domain,
institutional structures and systems of power are influential. Women
consistently earn less than men, even when controlling for demographic and
background variables; a wage gap that increases for women of color. In higher
education, this gap persists among faculty, particularly at institutions with
the highest levels of research. This project’s objective is to improve
institutional understanding and influence actions regarding pay equity through
broader comprehension of compensation structures. Project activities have three
aims: First, engage administrative units (Human Resources, Institutional
Research, Diversity/Inclusion, Legal, and Academic Affairs) in a collaborative
relationship supported by university leadership. Second, enhance pay decision-
makers’ understanding of and basis for pay decisions, and their ability to
communicate to individuals how their pay is determined. Third, increase faculty
knowledge of institutional pay practices while emphasizing the importance of
inclusion and institutional values. Expected outcomes from this work include
improvements in institutional policies and practices, faculty perceptions of pay
equity, leadership skills of pay decision-makers, and institutional engagement
beyond the project partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves
collaborations with three university partners Villanova, Drexel, and Gallaudet,
the American Association of University Women (AAUW), and the NSF INCLUDES Hub
and the ASPIRE Alliance. The three partner-universities will undertake actions
to: promote an inclusive work environment and informed faculty community that
understands its financial model about compensation; align university resources
with institutional values to promote enhanced equity; and support systemic,
sustainable change through institutionalization of compensation interventions.
The project will employ a multi-frame organizational analysis approach,
integrating structural, human resource, political, and symbolic aspects of
organizational theory, to better understand each partner-university. The partner
cohort will explore multiple dimensions of justice regarding salary –
distributive, procedural, interpersonal, and informational – through workshops,
coaching sessions, and organizational action plans. Ongoing formative assessment
will include input from women of color and deaf and hard-of-hearing women. The
project’s reach will expand to additional institutions through the partnerships
with the American Association of University Women, NSF INCLUDES Hub, and the
ASPIRE Alliance. Expected outcomes include implementation of compensation-
related accountability measures, improved faculty understanding of pay
practices, increased comprehension of equity among salary decision-makers, and
infrastructure changes to support ongoing progress. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. 
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate.  ADVANCE "Partnership"
awards provide support for projects that scale-up evidence based systemic change
strategies to enhance gender equity for STEM faculty regionally or
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.