* 2121620
* ADVANCE Adaptation: Project SAGES: Striving to Achieve Gender Equity in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Christine Wagner, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The University at Albany is a doctoral institution with a strong commitment to
research excellence. It boasts a highly diverse undergraduate population and
strives to excel as a diverse and inclusive campus community; yet, women and
women of color are underrepresented in the faculty ranks of STEM departments.
The goal of Project SAGES is to create an environment in which women of all
backgrounds and identities can thrive and develop their careers to their fullest
potential. To accomplish this goal, Project SAGES seeks to increase the number
of women scientists in STEM fields through proactive recruitment and unbiased
hiring procedures and retain them by creating a climate and culture in which
women feel supported, thrive, and advance in their careers from assistant to
associate to full professor. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of Project SAGES are
threefold: Aim 1 seeks to increase the diversity of applicant pools for faculty
searches in STEM through a postdoctoral visitation program to identify
competitive candidates for job vacancies and by education of search committees
and decision makers on inclusive, unbiased search processes. To promote diverse
applicant pools, search chairs will receive real-time feedback about pools to
permit proactive measures if diversity does not meet national norms for the
field. Aim 2 seeks to improve the campus climate by subtly shifting departmental
norms and cultures. Departmental interventions will comprise awareness training
for chairs, the formation of department climate committees, and ally training
for men and women, all with the goal of creating a more inclusive environment.
In addition, consistent and transparent policies and procedures will be
implemented that meet the needs of a diverse faculty. Aim 3 seeks to support
women’s research success. A networking program for women faculty and women of
color and a pilot funding program will allow women in STEM to build
collaborative research teams. Additional support is provided with a novel
external sponsor program in which female assistant professors are paired with a
prominent expert from another university who will provide ongoing guidance on
best strategies for networking, funding, publishing, and achieving tenure.
Through these interventions, Project SAGES aims to bring about sustained
institutional transformation at the University at Albany with the goal of
achieving inclusive excellence in STEM that better reflects the university’s
highly diverse student body. The interventions will lead to a more nurturing and
family-friendly environment for women scientists of diverse identities and
maximize their success through comprehensive professional support structures and
an equitable tenure and promotion process. Outcomes from Project SAGES will be
disseminated through multiple outlets including a website. The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Adaptation"
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.