* 2121933
* EAGER: Understanding and Leveraging Nonlinear Effects in Acoustic Holograms
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Shima Shahab, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2022
* USD 127,441.00

Ultrasound waves, which can travel through human tissues and fluids, have been
used in acoustic sensing, ultrasound therapy, and imaging. The spatial control
over the propagation of ultrasound waves can significantly improve noninvasive
ultrasound techniques. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project will explore acoustic holograms for shaping ultrasound waves in high-
intensity fields. Recent studies suggest that passive acoustic holograms can be
used for projecting an arbitrary acoustic pattern when illuminated with only a
single acoustic source. However, for high-intensity ultrasonic manipulations,
where nonlinear effects set in, the hologram technology is in its early stage on
untested approaches. This project applies new expertise in volume acoustic
holography in nonlinear regimes and contributes to the key elements needed for
the novel field of wavefront engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal
of this EAGER project is to understand how the nonlinear effects influence the
general picture of the reflection and transmission phenomena in acoustic
holograms, which are characterized by the constructed acoustic fields in the
target plane. At higher excitation amplitudes, the nonlinear effects are
exhibited by the generation of harmonics, distortion of the acoustic waveform,
and possibly the formation of shock fronts. These effects can be responsible for
amplitude as well as phase distortions of the primary interfering waves that
give rise to extra acoustic images and ambiguity functions of the reconstructed
acoustic field. This award will explore an untested nonlinear volume holography
approach based on experimental measurements and modeling. The method will help
to answer fundamental scientific questions in wavefront engineering research
including: (1) What are the dominant origins of nonlinearity in acoustic
holograms? (2) Is the enhancement and engineering of nonlinear effects can
increase the efficiency of controlling sound waves? (3) What are the effects of
the intensity level and frequency of the sound wave as well as nonlinear
harmonics on reconstructed acoustic fields?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.