* 2121854
* Membrane fluidity: Both fundamental and functional
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Itay Budin, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 738,612.00

The membranes which enclose our cells are very thin sheets — not solid like a
balloon, but rather fluid, like a soap film. Embedded in the membrane are a
plethora of molecules that conduct the chemical conversation between the cell
and the world outside. This chemical conversation (or “signaling”) underlies
both normal functions, like exchange of neurotransmitters in the brain, and
abnormal ones, like cancer growth and progression. But what choreographs
signaling, so that partners find each other at the appropriate place and time? A
crucial part of the answer is the viscosity of the membrane — Is it thick like
honey, or thin like water? Measuring the viscosity of a cell membrane in an
experiment is extremely challenging, and interpretation of the results relies on
difficult to test assumptions. This project will therefore combine several
different experimental measurements with detailed simulations of membranes. The
simulations (which utilize federally funded supercomputers) are designed to fill
in the gaps in the experiments, so that together they provide a complete
understanding of the chemical origins of membrane viscosity. Through a
collaboration with the Delaware Teachers Institute the research team will
develop a series of lessons on the biophysics of fluids, which will be
disseminated to twelve Delaware high school teachers. This content will both
enrich the curricula of high schools throughout the state, and also expose
students to the field of biophysics as a possible course of study for students
who are strong in math, but also excited by developments in biology and health
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cells actively regulate the fluidity of their
membranes in response to changes in external conditions, like temperature,
salinity, or pressure. Sinensky discovered this “homeoviscous adaptation” in the
1970’s, in bacteria that were grown at different temperatures, yet maintained
constant fluidity. Despite the fundamental importance of membrane fluidity, it
is still not understood how it emerges from the complex milieu of the cell
membrane. Indeed, experimental measurements differ in their reports of membrane
viscosity by more than a factor of ten, depending on the technique and how the
measurement is interpreted. This knowledge gap will be filled by a combination
of detailed simulations of membranes and several types of experiments. The
simulations will use the most accurate and detailed models for membranes and
will leverage federally funded supercomputing platforms. The experiments cover
length and timescales from picoseconds to microseconds, and will use federally
funded beamlines (neutron scattering at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology and x-ray scattering Brookhaven National Lab). By integrating the
simulations and experiments the investigators will resolve discrepancies in
existing measurements and identify what factors determine membrane
viscosity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.