* 2121979
* Spatiotemporal Variability of Tungsten-182 in the Hawaiian Plume
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Walker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,720.00

The isotopic composition of the element tungsten is important to measure in some
types of volcanic rocks because differences in the abundance of the isotope of
tungsten-182 occurred very early in the history of the Earth due to the
radioactive decay of an isotope of another element, hafnium-182. Hafnium-182 was
present in our solar system for only about the first 70 million years of its
history. This means that some of the magmas that crystallize to form volcanic
rocks came from places within the Earth’s mantle that formed more than 4 billion
years ago and that did not mix with other mantle rocks. For this study the
isotopic composition of tungsten will be measured in rocks from the Hawaiian
Islands. Studies have shown that the isotopic composition of tungsten in rocks
from volcanic oceanic islands like the Hawaiian Islands varies. Tungsten
isotopic variations that will be measured by this study will provide important
new information about how the Earth formed and separated into a metal core, and
silicate mantle and crust. The information will also provide hints about where
these old parts of the mantle may be and how they end up in volcanic rocks. The
results will give scientists who model the movement of rocks and melts in the
mantle new insights about how the Earth currently cools itself from the inside
out. This project will support a Ph.D. student and a postdoctoral Research
Associate to conduct most of the, and will also involve contributions from an
undergraduate student as part of a senior thesis project. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;High-precision isotopic analysis will be conducted on tungsten
extracted from a suite of carefully chosen Hawaiian lavas that, based on long-
lived radiogenic isotope systems and trace element abundances. The University of
Maryland laboratory has been a world leader in tungsten isotope research of this
type over the past decade. The various geochemical signals have previously been
interpreted to sample various recycled and deep mantle components. Prior work on
ocean island basalts, as well as other types of rocks (young and old), has
demonstrated the laboratory’s capability to cleanly separate tungsten from
rocks, and generate highly-precise isotopic measurements using thermal
ionization mass spectrometry. The primary objective of this study will be to
identify and interpret small tungsten isotopic “anomalies” and attempt to relate
the anomalies to other geochemical tracers, such as Nd, Pb and Os isotopic
composition, potentially allowing connections to be made between the timing and
nature of both early Earth processes, such as magma ocean formation and core
separation, as well as ongoing processes within the modern
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.