* 2121596
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Impact of Low Prerequisite Proficiency on Student Success in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Alvaro Monge, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2024
* USD 34,073.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying the impact of low
prerequisite proficiency on student success in computer science degree programs.
It is a well-established fact that academia is not graduating enough students
who are qualified to fill the growing employment needs in the technical
workforce. In computer science, courses often require students to have completed
preparatory courses called prerequisites. Little is known about the effect of
variable prerequisite proficiency on student success in subsequent courses.
Surprisingly, despite strong grades in prerequisite courses, many students are
judged to have poor prerequisite proficiency. This project will focus on
answering three key questions: what the impact of low prerequisite proficiency
is on student success in later courses, what are the causes of low prerequisite
proficiency, and what is the extent of the problem. These findings will result
in a better understanding of how prerequisite proficiency impacts student
success, which will be used to improve computer science degree programs and
increase the number of students qualified to fill employment needs in the
technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of student performance have
shown that students from underrepresented groups in computing (e.g., women,
minorities, transfer students, first-generation students) may be
disproportionately impacted by low prerequisite proficiency. The PIs will
examine how students from groups underrepresented in computing are impacted
relative to students from represented groups and will conduct a series of
studies involving faculty and student interviews as well as designing and
administering assessments of prerequisite preparation in multiple courses at
each institution involved in the study. Using a combination of qualitative and
quantitative methods, this multi-institutional project will determine the causes
of low prerequisite preparation, the ubiquity of the problem, and the impact of
low prerequisite preparation on student outcomes (exam scores, grades,
retention). The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.