* 2121097
* RAPID: Informed and Ecological Decision Making of COVID-19 Vaccination
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Aiping Xiong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Vaccination is the most effective method to prevent infectious diseases like
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) and prompt herd immunity. However, herd
immunity could be slowed or stalled if people hesitated to be vaccinated. This
project aims to facilitate informed vaccination decisions. The research aims to
illuminate how people’s vaccination decisions evolve in response to their social
context. The project’s novelty is to follow participants over time to evaluate
their real-world decision making about vaccination. The project will advance the
state-of-the-art on risk communication during crises and decision-making under
uncertainty. The project will identify effective communication about COVID-19
vaccines that are understandable by, and applicable to, the public. The project
could ultimately improve the immunization rate of the population to pass the
threshold for herd immunity and the collective health benefits of immunization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project entails four tasks that will advance the
understanding of human vaccination decision-making under risk and uncertainty.
(1 ) Develop communications about the COVID-19 vaccines that are experimentally
varied in completeness, transparency, and correctness by leveraging the
standards of risk communication in the health domain. (2) Evaluate the
effectiveness of proposed communications in enhancing people’s knowledge of
COVID-19 vaccines and informing their vaccination decisions. (3) Examine the
effectiveness of proposed communications on informing peoples’ vaccination
decisions in real-world application settings. (4) Investigate how people respond
to uncertainties of different situations in order to understand how vaccination
decisions evolve throughout the current vaccination
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.