* 2121092
* Single-grain, multi-parameter characterization of detrital zircon grains to test for the influence of sample processing and sedimentologic processes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Emily Finzel, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 326,121.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A cornerstone of modern studies of
sedimentary rocks is Uranium-Lead isotopic dating of zircon, a common mineral
grain in sandstone. However, there is little understanding of how natural and
induced bias can influence the outcome of dates. This project will focus
specifically on quantifying: 1) the effect of crushing and grinding rocks prior
to analysis, and 2) whether variation in hydraulic conditions during deposition
influences zircon populations. The work of this project will lead to greater
understanding of potential biases and lead to the development of mitigation
strategies. This project will support partnerships between academia and
government and engagement of pre-service and in-service teachers through a field
experience around the Black Hills area in South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this proposal are to test the influence of 1) standard mineral
separation processes for detrital zircon studies on grain size, grain shape, and
surface microtextures, 2) hydraulic sorting after negating or accounting for the
effects of mineral separation with high-n analyses (n=600). A major outcome of
this work will be new protocols for provenance studies that integrates
traditional, current, and new techniques to clearly document sediment sources
and transport history. Our workplan includes: 1) tandem processing of samples
using traditional and newer approaches followed by high throughput particle
analysis to comprehensively characterize particle size and shape, and 2) single-
grain, multi-parameter characterization of detrital zircons to explore for
correlations between age groups, grain size/shape, surface morphology, and
sediment transport history in a variety of ancient lithofacies representing
different hydraulic conditions. This research will elucidate any inherent biases
related to mineral separation and depositional energies in sedimentary systems.
Being able to decipher the ‘true’ provenance in sedimentary basins will lead to
better paleogeographic and sediment dispersal interpretations and tectonic
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.