* 2121222
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Quality-Aware Distributed Computation for Wireless Federated Learning:  Channel-Aware User Selection, Mini-Batch Size Adaptation, and Scheduling
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,12/31/2021
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhengdao Wang
* 12/31/2021
* USD 219,999.00

With the explosive growth of ML/AI technologies, there is enormous potential to
advance networking technologies to enable distributed ML/AI data analytics over
networked systems. This project will explore innovative cross-disciplinary
research at the intersections of wireless networking and machine learning, and
study wireless federated learning (FL) for achieving collaborative intelligence
in wireless networks. It will advance the fundamental understanding of quality-
aware dynamic distributed computation and computation-communication co-design
for wireless FL. This project will spur a new line of thinking and provide new
insights to support various emerging ML/AI applications over wireless networked
systems, such as collaborative robotics, multi-user mixed reality, and
intelligent control and management of wireless networks. The proposed research
will also be integrated with education activities at the PIs' institutions for
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students via curriculum development, research
experiences, and outreach. The PIs will make conscientious effort to recruit
minority graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
quality-aware distributed computation for wireless FL, with focuses on channel-
aware user selection, communication scheduling, and adaptive mini-batch size
design. The proposed research is built on the key observation that the learning
accuracy of the trained model in FL depends heavily on dynamic selection of
users participating in the learning process and the quality of their local model
updates (which is determined by their mini-batch sizes). The quality of local
updates can be treated as a design parameter and used as a knob for adaptive
control across users and over time based on users' communication and computation
costs as well as capabilities. With this insight, the PIs will 1) quantify the
impacts of the variances of users' local stochastic gradient updates on learning
accuracy over the learning process, for general settings including non-IID data,
non-convex loss functions, and asynchronous distributed learning; 2) develop
adaptive algorithms that select the participating users and set their mini-batch
sizes in each round of the FL algorithm, based on users' channel conditions and
the impacts of their local updates on the training loss; 3) jointly design
users' mini-batch sizes and schedule their communications to reduce the learning
time, by investigating the intricate coupling between computation workloads and
communication scheduling. Multi-objective optimization will be used to strike
the right balance between learning accuracy and learning cost (or learning
time).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS), and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.