* 2121681
* Controlling Friction and Adhesion Using Charged Hydrogel Lubricants During Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rosa Espinosa-Marzal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2024
* USD 426,147.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge related to
lubrication in manufacturing processes, promoting both the progress of science
and advancing national prosperity. Oil-based lubricants generate pollutants and
harmful contaminants and, thus, there is a demand for environmentally benign
lubricants that are renewable and, at least, as efficient. While lubrication in
an aqueous medium could solve this need, it is rarely applied in manufacturing
due to the low pressure-coefficient of the viscosity of water, among other
reasons. In biological tribosystems like cartilage, these challenges are met by
employing gel-assisted aqueous lubrication. Thus inspired, this project designs
synthetic waterborne films with charged hydrogel-like structures that enable the
active control of friction and adhesion during manufacturing. Active control of
hydrogel lubrication not only ensures good manufacturing practices in food,
biomedical and pharmaceutical industries, low-carbon footprint and tunable
lubrication of machine components, but also enables handling of soft
biologically inspired materials and delicate electronic components during
manufacturing. Furthermore, the knowledge derived from this research allows
machine interfaces to dynamically adapt to their current task, which increases
machine versatility, efficiency and product quality. Therefore, results from
this research benefit the U.S. economy and society and help to extend U.S.
manufacturing to new application areas. The multi-disciplinary approach helps
broaden participation of women and underrepresented minority students in
research and positively impacts engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research produces fundamental knowledge on active control of hydrogel-based
lubrication via electrical modulation. In particular, the project determines how
modulating the balance between physical interactions in three hydrogel systems,
(1) electrostatic attraction vs. repulsion, (2) hydrogen bonding vs.
electrostatic repulsion, and (3) hydrophobic attraction vs. electrostatic
repulsion), dictates the self-assembly pathway and microstructure, and how this
can be applied to modulate lubrication. These lubricants are synthesized via
microphase separation. The experimental studies combine microscopy, oscillatory
shear and normal and lateral force measurements with polymer physics-based
models to deliver understanding of the role played by physical associations in
the interfacial structure and rheology and how they influence friction and
adhesion. This research also advances the knowledge about how chemical and
electrical stimulation drives changes in friction and adhesion mechanisms. The
new knowledge includes breakthroughs in discovery of hydrogel lubrication
mechanisms enabled by the integration of novel and improved experimental and
modeling toolsets, novel design rules for responsive hydrogels with control over
the structure-property relationships, and a framework to predict the friction
coefficient as a function of the operating conditions and hydrogel
composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.