* 2121883
* Improving First-to-Second Year Retention and Closing Equity Gaps through a STEM Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Jose Vidot, Columbia Basin College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to improve academic outcomes for Hispanic students by creating
and piloting a new STEM Academy which will offer a combination of financial,
academic, and social supports to an initial cohort of students. Such supports
are ultimately expected to result in an increase in the number and diversity of
STEM graduates. Columbia Basin College has consistently had high levels of
attrition for first year STEM majors, particularly for low-income, first
generation, and Hispanic students, with only a little more than half (54%) of
these students persisting into their second year. Through the development of the
new STEM Academy, this project will increase first-to-second year retention
rates in the School of Math, Science, and Engineering, and seek to close the
school's retention equity gaps with respect to Hispanic
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the STEM Academy project are to: 1)
increase participants’ first-to-second year retention by at least 12%, and 2)
reduce the retention equity gap by at least 50%. Towards that end, the project
team will develop a new, cohort-based STEM Academy of 25-35 students for the
pilot year. Students in the Academy will receive supports including direct
financial assistance, reserved enrollment in linked courses, and a new dual-
language orientation course specifically designed for STEM students. STEM
Academy participants will also benefit from intrusive academic advising,
partnership with a peer mentor, and direct access to STEM professionals via an
industry-led STEM colloquium. These high-impact practices are specifically
geared toward increasing students’ sense of belonging and self-efficacy in STEM
subjects, which will improve student persistence during the critical transition
from the first year to the second year of their postsecondary education. This
will result in a larger and more diverse body of students who will be
academically prepared to meet the growing needs of the STEM workforce. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature
and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.