* 2121654
* ADVANCE Adaptation: INSPIRED- Inclusive Practices in the Retention and Equity of Diverse Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Robyn Mallett, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 07/31/2024
* USD 972,496.00

The ADVANCE Adaptation: INSPIRED- Inclusive Practices in the Retention and
Equity of Diverse Faculty - aims to promote the full participation and
advancement of women, underrepresented minorities (URM), and women of color
(WoC) faculty at Loyola University Chicago (LUC). INSPIRED seeks to provide
comprehensive mentoring, pathways for professional growth, equitable workload
policies and practices, and interdisciplinary connections, each important to
mitigating the impacts of isolation, marginalization, and tokenism for these
faculty. LUC is a Jesuit university in a large urban setting serving a racially
and ethnically diverse student body. INSPIRED will combine the Jesuit values of
cura personalis (“care for the whole person”) and magis (“striving for
excellence in the pursuit of justice and the greater good”) with evidence-based
strategies to address racial and gender inequities that impact the success,
retention, and advancement of women, URM, and WoC STEM faculty. To address LUC’s
structural and institutional barriers to gender and racial equity and the
retention of minoritized faculty, this project will: 1) develop university-wide
mentoring programs, 2) recruit Faculty Advocates to assist women and URM faculty
to advance to full professor, 3) implement practices and policies to mitigate
racial and gendered faculty workload inequities, and 4) create opportunities for
interdisciplinary work that involves both intellectual and social connections.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of INSPIRED are to: 1) provide a network of
professional support to improve the success, retention, and advancement of
women, URM, and WoC faculty; 2) provide pathways for professional growth for
women, URM, and WoC faculty that address gender and racial disparities among
full professors and senior administration; 3) create policies to mitigate gender
and racial faculty workload inequities by working with deans and department
chairs to adjust practices and procedures that maintain uneven labor practices;
and 4) create an institutional culture of interdisciplinary connection for
women, URM, and WoC faculty in STEM fields. By adapting the evidence-based
strategies from Syracuse University’s “The Inclusive Connective Corridor: Social
Networks and the ADVANCEment of Women STEM Faculty,” the University of
Maryland’s Faculty Workload and Rewards Project, and Associate to Full Professor
Program, INSPIRED endeavors to effect similar substantive and systemic
institutional changes. Formative and summative evaluations will be based on
quantitative and qualitative data. INSPIRED aspires to serve as a model within
the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities – a network comprised of 28
Jesuit institutions across the country—for how other Jesuit and mission-driven
institutions can deploy the tenets of Ignatian Spirituality to promote
transformative change in the form of greater gender and racial equity. The NSF
ADVANCE program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE “Adaptation”
awards provide support for the adaptation and adoption of evidence-based
strategies to academic, non-profit institutions of higher education as well as
non-academic, non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.