* 2121896
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Synchronization Across Terrestrial and Aquatic Ecosystems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Grace Wilkinson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 02/28/2022
* USD 30,455.00

Aquatic ecosystems are closely connected to their surrounding watersheds through
the flux of water, nutrients, and organic carbon. Similarly, the flux of
exogenous carbon from the landscape causes lakes to be substantial sources of
greenhouse gases as well as sinks for organic carbon buried in the sediment.
There are also important fluxes from inland waters to the terrestrial
ecosystems. Despite the recognition of the importance of terrestrial-aquatic
coupling, synchronization (persistent relatedness) of dynamics between these
ecosystems has not been broadly investigated. Employing data reuse techniques to
use data from Lake Multiscaled Geospatial and Temporal Database (LAGOS) and
Global Lake Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON) databases, the PIs will apply
new analysis tools to answer questions related to the synchrony of lakes and
their surrounding watersheds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To quantify synchronization
between terrestrial and aquatic habitats wavelet coherence will be used to
measure the strength of synchronization between terrestrial and lake ecosystems,
as well as phase relationships, describing time lags. Time lags are hypothesized
to reflect mechanisms of synchrony and may be related to lake size, water
residence time, trophic status, and watershed area. These factors are
hypothesized to affect the degree of aquatic-terrestrial synchrony. Random
forest regression will be applied to test this idea, leveraging the range of
lake and watershed properties. Multiple regression for wavelet transforms will
be used to determine the fraction of aquatic-terrestrial synchrony that can be
explained by climate drivers and assess synchrony between terrestrial ecosystems
and lake nutrient fluctuations for improved inference into non-climate
mechanisms of synchrony.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
National Science Foundation?s Public Access Initiative which is managed by the
NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.