* 2121895
* Collective Dynamics and Resonances of Phonons and Dislocations in Thermal Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Youping Chen, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mohsen Asle Zaeem
* 02/28/2026
* USD 408,274.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research that will
use atomic resolution computer models to determine the nature of interactions
between dislocations and atomic vibrations in crystalline materials.
Dislocations are ubiquitous defects that involve a sudden irregularity (such as
the appearance of an extra row of atoms) in the atomic arrangement of
crystalline materials. They often can move through the material when the
material is under thermal or mechanical loading. The atoms in a crystal vibrate,
with the amplitude of the vibrations increasing with temperature. The movement
of dislocations through the crystal can be affected by their interactions with
these vibrations in a manner similar to the effect that waves have on the motion
of a boat as it moves through the water. This research will quantify such
interactions and determine their effect on heat transport through the material.
The results of this research will be of fundamental importance to the design of
new materials for many applications of heat transport, such as thermoelectrics
that can convert heat to electrical energy for a green economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the team’s educational and
outreach activities. The PIs will design computational lecture series and mini
projects to train undergraduate students every summer during the period of this
project. The PIs will also reach out to women and minority students, and
students with physical disabilities, to explore their research interests and
provide them with research experiences. The datasets and source codes developed
under this project will be made freely available to the computational materials
science community. The research team will also organize a symposium at an
international or national conference on the role of interactions of dislocations
with crystal vibrations on heat transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEHCNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research that will elucidate
the microscopic processes that describe the interaction between dislocations and
phonons and their implications for macroscopic materials phenomena, including
plastic flow, internal friction, and thermal resistance. A general description
for phonon-dislocation interaction that can provide a quantitative agreement
with major experimental results has been a significant challenge, which has
limited our understanding of this interaction as well as its effect on thermal
transport. This research aims to address this challenge by establishing a
multiscale methodology from machine learning of high-fidelity interatomic
potentials to concurrent atomistic-continuum simulation of coupled dislocations
dynamics and phonon transport. This will enable an accurate description of
dislocations in the studies of phonon thermal transport, as well as a
visualization of the transient processes of phonon scattering with multiscale
details of the physical processes to identify the underlying mechanisms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the team’s educational and
outreach activities. The PIs will design computational lecture series and mini
projects to train undergraduate students every summer during the period of this
project. The PIs will also reach out to women and minority students, and
students with physical disabilities, to explore their research interests and
provide them with research experiences. The datasets and source codes developed
under this project will be made freely available to the computational materials
science community. The research team will also organize a symposium at an
international or national conference on the role of interactions of dislocations
with crystal vibrations on heat transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.