* 2121123
* Supporting Conceptual Learning and Disciplinary Thinking in Chemistry through Peer Review and Revision
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ginger Shultz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by amplifying the role of peer
review and revision in supporting student learning of chemistry content via
writing. Writing-to-Learn, including peer review and revision, provides learning
opportunities that are distinct from traditional undergraduate science
instruction. However, it is challenging for instructors to provide meaningful
feedback on writing, particularly in large courses. Thus, incorporating peer
review and teaching students to use peer feedback to revise makes writing more
feasible while also providing additional learning opportunities for students.
This project serves the national interest by improving chemistry education at
the undergraduate level. The project also has potential to improve understanding
of an evidence-based instructional practice and how it can be used to develop
better chemists and a more scientifically literate public. This project will
examine students’ peer reviews and revisions in response to writing assignments
in three undergraduate chemistry courses. In addition, the project team will
interview students to understand their perceptions of and approaches to peer
review and revision. Informed by the analysis of student writing and interviews,
interventions that enhance peer review and revision will be developed and
evaluated. Outcomes from this project will include a better understanding of how
students engage in peer review and revision in chemistry courses and materials
designed to support their more effective use. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate the use of peer review and revision to amplify Writing-to-Learn
assignments supporting conceptual learning and disciplinary thinking in
chemistry. The project design is guided by theories of learning and writing,
including Distributed Cognition and the Sociocultural Theory of Writing.
Distributed Cognition describes how learners can construct knowledge supported
by social interactions and external representations. The Sociocultural Theory of
Writing considers how social and cultural contexts inform the process of writing
and how the act of writing can lead to knowledge development. The specific
objectives of this project are to (1) identify the characteristics of peer
review comments and revisions that effectively support conceptual learning and
the development of disciplinary thinking; (2) characterize students’ perceptions
of and approaches to peer review and revision; and (3) assess how interventions
that engage students in reflective processes support learning through peer
review and revision. To accomplish the first objective, the project team will
qualitatively analyze students’ peer review comments and revisions in response
to Writing-to-Learn assignments implemented in organic chemistry, biochemistry,
and physical chemistry courses. The project team will address the second
objective via student interviews, and feedback surveys focused on how students
approach providing feedback and using their peers’ feedback when revising their
own writing. Findings from the first two objectives will inform the development
of two interventions, back-reviews and revision reflections, that will be
implemented in the three chemistry courses. The utility of the interventions
will be examined by artifact analysis of the back-reviews, written reflections,
and peer review comments and revisions. Project findings will be disseminated
widely to chemistry educators and STEM education researchers by publishing
findings and intervention materials in journals, presenting at conferences, and
by conducting instructor workshops and webinars. While the research for the
grant will be situated within a chemistry context, the findings will have
implications more broadly for disseminating Writing to Learn as an evidence-
based instructional practice in STEM. The NSF IUSE: EHR program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.