* 2121842
* EAGER: Talk of the Town App for Research
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Bonawitz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 74,999.00

Classrooms are not the only places where children learn. Children engage in
‘informal learning’ every day just by spending time with their family and peers.
However, while researchers know this learning occurs, less is known about the
underlying science of this learning -- how this learning works. This is so
because investigators lack access and the means to gather relevant data. The
goal of this project is to develop a technical solution, a mobile-based research
platform called “Talk of the Town” that will provide a window into children’s
informal learning. The development of this tool is significant because it will
make possible access to data that are important for developing and testing
educational interventions at scale, and it will provide access to much more
diverse samples than are typically studied in laboratories, homes, and science
museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proof-of- concept project is to
develop an open-source mobile-based platform called “Talk of the Town,” which
consists of two components. The first component is a mobile app that will be
used to obtain consent, administer onboarding demographic questionnaires.
Critically, the app can prompt parents to record conversations with their
children in different contexts and different locations. It does so by using
conversational prompts about specific topics, including prompts which can be
triggered by proximity to specific landmarks. The second component will be a
server that will be used to store the recorded conversations, and administer
tasks to different app users based on responses to the onboarding questionnaire
and tasks the participating family has completed in the past. These newly
developed technical capabilities will be able to support observational designs,
as well as experimental manipulations and teaching interventions. Importantly,
they will open a window into aspects of children’s learning and development that
have been overlooked and/or understudied&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.