* 2121450
* Examining the Impact of Participation in Engineers Without Borders on Undergraduate Students’ Transition to Practice and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* William Oakes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula in
engineering education through integration of experiences that equip college
graduates to transition to professional practice and develop into leaders within
their fields. Increasing experiences beyond traditional classroom lectures has
been identified by many researchers as a significant element for improving
engineering education to prepare students for their roles as engineers in the
21st century. Transforming curricula to include high impact experiences presents
many challenges for faculty and administrators, and evidence of impact is needed
for planning and advocating for such changes. This Engaged Student Learning
Level I project will provide evidence of impact on graduates who have entered
their professional career and participated in a community engagement experience
as part of their educational program. The project will investigate engineering
graduates who participated in the largest national engineering community-engaged
learning program, Engineers Without Borders USA (EWB-USA). Project goals include
identifying outcomes and attributes of the program that promote learning and
contribute to engineering undergraduate students’ professional development. EWB-
USA is a strategic testbed with all projects being authentic design experiences
with real users in global or domestic communities. The design teams operate in a
variety of contexts as an extra-curricular club, a co-curricular experience
connected to courses, or within the curriculum as a course. This allows for data
to be gathered to inform a wide array of learning experiences within
undergraduate education. EWB-USA is also one of the most diverse engineering
programs, with women representing over 40% of the more than 5,000 student
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will fill gaps in the literature by
answering five research questions. (1) What is the nature of how student
participation in EWB-USA may bridge the experiences of formal post-secondary
engineering education and professional practice?; (2) What professional
competencies do alumni identify as most developed through their EWB-USA student
participation relative to other educational activities?; (3) How do variations
in the nature of involvement with and/or the structure of EWB-USA programs
impact student learning and preparation for professional practice?; (4) How are
graduates of EWB-USA perceived by other members of industry, relative to their
peers?; and (5) How do the above elements relate to and impact participation and
experiences of female versus male students, of students from different races and
ethnicities, and among first-generation college students? The project will
investigate the research questions with two related studies. The first will
study graduates who had EWB-USA experience as undergraduates and the second will
study their employers and mentors to provide a more complete picture of their
competencies from their undergraduate experiences. Both studies will use a
sequential mixed-methods approach, with a survey instrument that will inform the
subsequent semi-structured interviews. The data from graduates, employers, and
mentors will advance the understanding of community-engaged undergraduate
experience and inform faculty and administrators as they seek to improve
engineering education. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.