* 2121677
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Workshop: Coastal Biocultural Restoration as a Nexus for Innovation
* O/D,OIA
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Kelsey Amos, PURPLE MAI`A FOUNDATION
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 10/31/2021
* USD 99,277.00

This grant will support a virtual convergence workshop hosted from Hawaiʻi that
brings together Indigenous and traditional communities, scientists from diverse
fields, nonprofits, businesses, government, and more to develop project ideas
and define priorities for use-inspired research and application coming out of
ongoing collaborative efforts at rebuilding human relationships with coastal
ecosystems based on the land and resource management practices of Indigenous
peoples and traditional communities. The workshop contains four subtopics:
resilience to flooding, tech-enabled coastal and waterway observation and data
management, sustainable economic development, and higher education for
Indigenous peoples in STEM and resource management. The project ideas developed
in the workshop will have the potential to benefit coastal communities’ disaster
preparedness, economies, and success in STEM education for rural and Indigenous
peoples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the workshop will be facilitated
through a series of meetings to ideate and describe possible deliverables
growing out of ongoing coastal biocultural restoration efforts. Ideas should be
backed by research, cutting edge/emerging/innovative by nature, fill gaps in
existing coastal biocultural restoration activities or amplify/scale/leverage
the results of coastal biocultural restoration for greater social or
environmental impact, and may come from applications in different
industries/disciplines and/or require collaboration across sectors. Indigenous
cultures are biocultural, meaning they developed historically as part of social-
ecological systems and have developed generational, observation-based knowledge
of how to manage local and regional resources sustainably. Applying, amplifying,
and scaling Indigenous ecological knowledge can help address the compounding
environmental crises we face in the 21st century. Furthermore, Indigenous and
traditional communities around the world have maintained sustainable management
of or are working to restore traditional territories, creating biocultural
restoration zones that offer opportunities to unlock innovations in natural
resource management, resilience design, computational and network systems for
data-driven decision-making, regenerative economic development, and inclusive
and equitable higher education or workforce training for Indigenous peoples. In
particular, coastal biocultural restoration is impactful because coasts and
waterways form boundary zones of ecological and economic importance, and work in
these zones can inform emerging coastal and fisheries management technologies,
scientific progress in the geosciences, and sea level rise
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.