* 2121063
* A public workflow for predicting peptide binding structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yinglong Miao, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 364,812.00

Peptides, short chains of amino acids, mediate up to 40% of known protein-
protein interactions and play a key role in protein trafficking and cellular
signaling. However, peptide-protein interactions present a challenge for
conventional computational modeling, due to slow dynamics and high peptide
flexibility. It remains difficult to predict binding structures of highly
flexible peptides to target proteins. The goal of this project is to accurately
predict peptide binding structures through the development and validation of a
public workflow termed “PepBinding”, which integrates peptide docking,
accelerated molecular simulations and machine learning. PepBinding will be able
to fully account for the peptide and protein flexibility, and thus greatly
improve the accuracy of peptide binding structure predictions. It will provide a
generally applicable approach for the world-wide Critical Assessment of
PRediction of Interactions (CAPRI) community to predict peptide-protein binding
structures. In addition, the PI will combine research with evidence-based
education and outreach programs of PepBinding for exceptional training of
graduate, undergraduate and high school students as the next-generation
computational biologists, especially underrepresented minorities and STEM
science and technology students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A peptide Gaussian
accelerated molecular dynamics (Pep-GaMD) enhanced sampling method has been
developed, which selectively boosts the peptide essential potential energy and
has been shown to tremendously accelerate peptide motions by orders of
magnitude. Tens to hundreds of nanosecond Pep-GaMD simulations are able to
sufficiently sample peptide conformations in the bound state. The project aims
to (1) develop and benchmark PepBinding for accurate predictions of peptide
binding structures by combining Pep-GaMD with peptide docking and machine
learning, (2) assess PepBinding performance through blind tests in community
challenges and validate new predictions in collaborative biochemical
experiments, and (3) implement Pep-GaMD in widely used simulation packages and
disseminate PepBinding through a public website. Successful development of
PepBinding is expected to greatly drive research frontiers in peptide docking,
molecular dynamics, enhanced sampling, and modeling of biomolecular
interactions. The results of the project can be found at
https://miaolab.ku.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.