* 2121646
* Modulation of Bubble-Mediated Gas Transfer due to Wave-Current Interactions
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Leonel Romero, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 213,162.00

This is project will study the spatial variability of gas transfer across the
air-sea interface within a comprehensive modeling framework. Theoretical and
modeling studies agree at relatively small scales, where the flow becomes less
dominated by the rotation of the earth, motion, especially along the vertical
direction becomes more energetic, with pronounced impacts on ocean
biogeochemistry, and air-sea fluxes. However, no study has focused on wave
breaking variability and related bubble mediate gas transfer due to wave-current
interactions. Most parameterizations of gas transfer coefficients today depend
on wind speed rather than more detailed representation of wave dynamics,
resulting in large uncertainties. Recent parameterizations include wave effects
through integral wave parameters such as significant wave height or wave age,
neither which can explain the modulation due to wave-current interactions at
sharp fronts. A recently developed model of wave breaking statistics provides a
framework to explicitly account for breaking on air entrainment and bubble-
mediated gas fluxes. The model is suitable for coupled earth system simulations
providing a unique opportunity to study the effect of wave-current interactions
on the variability of bubble-mediated gas transfer and fluxes. The results will
have direct applications for climate studies. They can explain the uncertainty
of the observed gas fluxes in coastal environments, helping to reduce the
uncertainty of global CO2 budgets. Other impacts include training students.
Specifically, an undergraduate student will participate in the research. The
project will enhance the participation of underrepresented groups by
contributing to the career of a Hispanic, early-career scientist, and by
exposing the students at UCSB, a designated Hispanic-Serving Institution, to the
research and its results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the work
is to investigate the modulation of bubble-mediated gas transfer due to wave-
current interactions at submesoscales. The modeling is based on recent advances
on surface wave breaking and related air-sea fluxes, which provide a physics-
based framework to model bubble-mediated gas transfer coefficients. Realistic
numerical simulations will be used to investigate the spatial variability of
bubble-mediated gas transfer and their impact on gas fluxes (i.e., CO2).
Preliminary model results show that wave breaking statistics forced by realistic
winds and currents confirm previous findings from observations and theoretical
analysis on the modulation of waves by currents, where wave breaking is enhanced
in conditions with winds obliquely aligned with ocean fronts. The wave breaking
modulation by currents is enhanced with increasing model resolution at
submesoscales. Submesoscale frontal surface convergence and downwelling
velocities overlap with areas with enhanced wave breaking with oblique wind
forcing. It is hypothesized that under these conditions air-sea gas fluxes are
enhanced. This will be tested with numerical simulations at an eastern boundary
current during upwelling conditions. Upwelling areas have been shown to exhibit
significant variability in CO2 concentrations that is not well understood.
Dissolved CO2 will be modeled neglecting biological and chemical reactions
starting from a background equilibrium level and then forced with realistic
fluxes, including bubble-mediated transfer coefficients. The hypothesis will be
tested by comparing model solutions at varying resolutions against a control run
using standard transfer coefficient parameterizations that depend only on wind
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.