* 2121145
* MCA: Genomic diversification and speciation along ecological gradients in a marine fish radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Andres Aguilar, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 373,704.00

Understanding the formation of new species in the marine environment has proven
to be a challenging task for evolutionary biologists. The potential for high
levels of migration and the apparent lack of geographical barriers create a
scenario where ecological diversification and life history shifts are likely
important in the speciation process. This research program will determine the
genomic basis of divergence among closely related species and populations along
latitudinal and depth gradients to determine the role of adaptation in the
speciation process. Rockfish (Sebastes) are an ideal system to examine these
questions as they are a diverse group of temperate fishes inhabiting a wide
array of habitats, and they have been subject to numerous phylogenetic studies.
This study will build upon a growing set of studies aimed at better
understanding the speciation process in the marine environment. Training
opportunities will be provided to undergraduate and graduate students at Cal
State LA, and data from this project will also serve as a resource for the
management of rockfish, many of which are commercially
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize genome
scans and de novo genome assemblies to test for speciation histories of rockfish
associated with divergence along ecological (depth) or geographic (latitude)
gradients. These findings can be used to better understand the role of natural
selection on the genome and how this contributes to the diversification of this
group. The first aspect of the study will examine the role that ecological
adaptation along a depth gradient has played in the formation of new species.
The second aspect will contrast these findings with latitudinal divergence among
closely related species. Together these results will provide novel insights into
the speciation history and genomic divergence for closely related marine
species, and provide a framework for understanding the relative roles of
selection and genetic drift on generating and maintaining marine
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.