* 2121455
* STEM Inquiry Research Summer Enrichment Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mariam Manuel, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,960.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing sustainable
practices to improve undergraduate engagement and persistence in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This IUSE EHR Engaged Student
Learning Level 1 project, STEM Research Inquiry Summer Experience (STEM RISE),
seeks to better prepare and retain STEM majors as qualified STEM teachers and
professionals equipped with tools and resources to serve urban youth. It is a
collaboration at the University of Houston between faculty from the secondary
STEM teacher preparation program, teachHOUSTON, and the College of Medicine,
along with Jack Yates High School in the Historic Third Ward in which the
University resides. High quality teacher preparation in the STEM disciplines is
critical to student success especially in schools that are underfunded and
combatting atmospheres of deficit thinking. Consequently, STEM RISE takes up the
charge by implementing targeted professional development, revising curriculum to
integrate culturally responsive pedagogy, and providing learning experiences
with mentorship facilitated by content experts and peers. The STEM RISE project
is the next step in teachHOUSTONâ€™s evolving trajectory towards being a national
leader in secondary STEM teacher education programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project intends to engage urban high school youth from a predominantly Black
community in summer research experiences to enhance learning and introduce them
to STEM career pathways. It is expected that the high school students will learn
valuable science skills and experiences that will equip them with the knowledge,
motivation, mentorship, and social capital to pursue a STEM career. Supporting
this activity is a mentorship structure that will include undergraduate STEM
student lab mentors as well as faculty (who also mentor the undergraduates) and
pre-service teachers. STEM RISE provides undergraduate STEM majors, pursuing
STEM teacher certification, with novel and meaningful opportunities to embed
culturally responsive teaching (CRT) in their instruction through a revised
Research Methodology in STEM Course and a professional development institute
focused on social justice topics. Additionally, the professional development
institute supports STEM undergraduates in learning STEM CRT methods with
structured practice in lesson design and implementation. The findings from the
project are expected to contribute to the knowledge base about mentoring
undergraduate STEM majors, preservice teacher professional development, and
literature about theory-practice gaps in culturally responsive and inquiry-based
STEM education, including research experiences with underrepresented student
populations. Thus, the project has the potential to contribute to better STEM
teacher preparation, mentoring of undergraduate STEM majors and experiential
learning of varying student bodies, especially students of color who are
historically underserved and underrepresented in STEM fields. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship (Noyce) Program is
providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project to support the project's
preservice teacher preparation goals, which are well-aligned with Noyce Program
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.