* 2121953
* PREM Center for Ultrafast Dynamics and Catalysis in Emerging Materials (C-UDCEM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Gamelin, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
summary:&lt;br/&gt;The University of Central Florida (UCF) is one of the largest
universities in the USA by enrollment and is also one of the largest Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSIs) with 27,244 (38%) of Hispanic and African American
students. It ranks 2nd amongst all institutions in bachelorâ€™s degrees awarded to
underrepresented minority (URM) students. The proposed PREM partnership between
UCF and the University of Washington (UW) will develop a vibrant collaborative
research and innovative education training program in materials, providing
research and education opportunities to 15-20 URM graduate and undergraduate
students. An interdisciplinary team of researchers from UCF and UW will deploy
integrated theoretical and experimental approaches for the rapid discovery of
advanced materials for quantum computing, low power electronics and new catalyst
reactions in line with the vision set forth in the Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI). Students will be co-mentored and will carry out research at both academic
institutions. Exchange visits, conferences and workshops will be organized to
benefit participating URM students and URM students from surrounding community
colleges and universities. The PREM program will allow UCF to develop resources
and infrastructure focused on accelerated emerging materials discovery while
developing a long-lasting collaborative partnership with UW. The research
results under the UCF-UW partnership will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals and conference presentations. Outreach efforts will be conducted via
summer boot camp, a dedicated web portal, and social media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The UCF-UW
partnership envisions collaborative training of under-represented minority (URM)
students in cutting edge research topics to make rapid discoveries related to
materials synthesis, investigation and manipulation of new physical phenomena,
and theory-guided pursuit of novel quantum materials and catalysts, closely
aligned to the MGI. The partnership involves two interdisciplinary research
groups (IRGs). In the first IRG, time and angle resolved photoelectron
spectroscopy will unravel ultrafast processes in new quantum materials including
two-dimensi.onal (2D) van der Waals solids and 2D magnets. The key outcomes from
this effort will reveal important dynamic processes in the femtosecond time
scale and map this behavior across many different 2D materials. In the second
IRG, various defects including point defects (e.g., oxygen vacancies) will be
systematically introduced in catalyst materials to enable single site catalysts
for low temperature CO/hydrocarbon oxidation and CO2 reduction. The key outcomes
from this effort will lead to design rules for accelerated syntheses of stable,
single-site heterogeneous catalyst materials. The unique syntheses,
characterization and testing capabilities at UCF and world-class facilities at
UW will jointly enable the exploration of the basic science of quantum and
catalyst materials and provide unique opportunities for cross-fertilization of
ideas, mentoring, and multidisciplinary training. The collaborative teams will
hold research-focus group meetings via real-time video teleconferencing, summer
internships and student exchange programs. Ultimately, this PREM program will
make fundamental and rapid advances in materials research while enabling URM
students to define a confident path towards their success in future professional
endeavors in materials focused disciplines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.