* 2121976
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: Data Infrastructure for Research on Historical Settlement and Population Growth in the United States
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 09/30/2024
* USD 562,092.00

This project creates a data platform called HiSPLUS (Historical Settlement and
Population Layers for the U.S.) that describes the history of population and
housing patterns in the United States from 1860 to 2020. Scientists can use this
new platform to study the social, demographic, urban and environmental
transformations experienced throughout the country over the past two centuries.
The project brings together data from several different sources. Housing and
land parcel records are merged with building footprint and population data and
transformed into publicly available data that can be used by everyone. The
platform contains spatial data and data tables for most of the 48 conterminous
states in the U.S., data that describe the built environment and population at
fine spatial and temporal resolutions. This publicly accessible platform
transforms the way scientists study social processes related to the built
environment in rural and urban areas. In the future, HiSPLUS will be important
for answering questions about land use, urban planning, and disaster
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates new datasets that include
information about the characteristics of built structures, land use, and the
distribution of the population, and merges them together. Linking these data in
a single data platform creates a novel data resource that contains historical
housing and population datasets with the highest spatial and temporal resolution
to date. The HiSPLUS platform advances innovative methods of data analysis by
developing approaches for merging spatial data from satellite imagery with
population data and land parcel records and developing tools for correcting
errors in the data as it evolves over time. The project also develops new models
for local population counts that are based on the characteristics of housing
structures. Such data provide scientists with the opportunity to answer
important questions about the evolution of the built environment. The platform
makes possible new research on long-run changes in the U.S. population, land
use, urban development, and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.