* 2121649
* Collaborative Proposal: CO2PIP — A Community Project to advance and standardize approaches to paleo-CO2 reconstruction and build the next-generation Phanerozoic record
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Steven Feiner, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 07/31/2025
* USD 383,529.00

A cross-disciplinary team of researchers will develop a state-of-the-art record
of atmospheric CO2 concentrations for the past 400 million years. They will do
so by engaging the broader scientific community to revise existing estimates of
past CO2 concentrations that were previously made using fossil plant material
and minerals that are ‘proxies’ of ancient environmental conditions. The team
will also develop a set of numerical models that are capable of simulating the
land or ocean environments in which the proxies formed in order to better
understand how proxies archive ancient conditions and atmospheric CO2
concentrations. Together these approaches will permit the researchers to build
the next-generation record of CO2 concentrations for the last half billion years
of Earth history. This record is fundamental to understanding how our planet
functions under high and evolving CO2 concentrations. All products of the
project (database, software, algorithms) will be broadly disseminated. The
project will fund and mentor several students and early career scientists and
two planned educational and outreach activities will ensure that the results are
accessible to Earth and Environmental Science students and to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The community project CO2PIP (CO2 Proxy Integration
Project) will advance the science of paleo-CO2 reconstruction and build a
statistically robust multi-proxy atmospheric CO2 record for the Phanerozoic.
This will be done through the development of forward proxy system models of the
conditions and processes that govern the CO2 signal in commonly used CO2
proxies. The broader scientific community will be engaged to modernize primarily
terrestrial-based CO2 proxy records and build a standardized and FAIR paleo-CO2
proxy data repository. Four proxy system models will be statistically integrated
with the vetted and modernized proxy data using inversion analysis to produce
quantitative, data-driven CO2 reconstructions for individual records and to
generate a robust, quantitative reconstruction of paleo-CO2. Digital
infrastructure for presenting and archiving the CO2 compilation and community
endorsed outputs will ensure full accessibility to the scientific community and
public. This research will advance our understanding of proxy sensitivities to
individual controls that affect the accuracy and precision of CO2 estimates and
improve comparability of paleo-CO2 records, thus refining our understanding of
the evolution of paleo-CO2 through the past half billion years of Earth
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.