* 2121730
* EAGER: SAI: New Decision Paradigms by Integrating Utility Theory into Infrastructure Investments
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexander Davis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,954.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to create a new
framework for energy infrastructure investment decisions in the US by
integrating more “macro” system-level sustainability analysis with more “micro”
distributional preferences of stakeholders to generate more realistic, multi-
level decision-making models. Decisions around energy system infrastructure
investments involve numerous decision-makers and constituencies, each of which
has their own interpretations and priorities. Different stakeholder objectives
can conflict, and even may change over time as decision-makers learn more about
the implications of their chosen investment decisions. Infrastructure
investments otherwise beneficial can also lead to poor distributional outcomes
if marginalized groups are excluded from the benefits. This project investigates
priorities and perceptions around distributions of outcomes and opportunities,
examines how they may change with education, incorporates them into an energy
infrastructure optimization model, and evaluates preferences for this
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This framework is created by coupling an energy
system optimization model with stakeholder elicitations, allowing stakeholders
to determine and update acceptable tradeoffs between the environment, cost, and
distributional outcomes for energy transition investment in the US. First,
distributional preferences are elicited from the future engineering workforce
along with an evaluation of how education can affect these preferences. Second,
these preferences are integrated into an energy micro-grid investment decision
model (Maximize Energy Access Model). Third, a survey is administered to the
local community to elicit community preferences and these preferences are
integrated into the optimization models. Throughout this process, the
differences between engineering students and community members are
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.