* 2121165
* Collaborative Research: Testing the reduction of aerobic habitat as a common kill mechanism for major mass extinction events
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Andrew Ridgwell, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2026
* USD 166,994.00

The project will study the response of marine animal ecosystems to environmental
change using three mass extinction events from the geological record as study
systems. Specifically, the project will test the hypothesis that a large
proportion of extinction during these events can be explained by the stresses
that elevated temperatures and reduced oxygen availability place on animal
respiration. Geochemical data will be used to constrain computer simulations of
changing ocean conditions during these mass extinction events. Results from
laboratory studies on animal respiration will then be paired with fossil data to
assess whether differences in extinction intensity in space and across taxonomic
groups can be explained by spatial variation in environmental change or
differences among taxonomic groups in their ability to withstand environmental
change. The project will provide interdisciplinary training to a group of
graduate students and post-docs. It will further impact STEM education through
the creation of a website that will allow access to model results so that
students can visualize and explore model output to understand cause-effect
relationships between continental configuration, ocean conditions, and
biological diversity. The investigators will also offer short-courses on Earth
system modeling and data interpretation at major conferences that will be
recorded for asynchronous use. The project will also involve the development of
a podcast series addressing how we reconstruct the ancient Earth system and use
these reconstructions to better understand the present and predict the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the hypothesis will be tested that
the loss of habitat through constraints on aerobic respiration under climate
change and ocean deoxygenation can explain the magnitude, taxonomic selectivity,
and latitude variation in intensity for the Late Devonian (Frasnian-Fammenian),
end-Permian, and end-Triassic mass extinction events. Paleoredox and
paleoclimate proxy data and geochemical indicators of diagenetic alteration will
be used for both global average and local conditions before and after each major
event combined with predictions from Earth system models and occurrence data
from the fossil record of marine animals to separate aspects of extinction than
can be explained by physiological stress from those that require other
explanations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.