* 2121225
* Bringing Authentic Research to the Remote Classroom: A Fully Online Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience for Astronomy Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ariel Anbar, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,840.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing a scalable model
for bringing research into online undergraduate programs. There has been a
tremendous shift towards online learning in the past two decades. At the core of
this initiative is the desire to make participation in research accessible to a
diverse population of learners who may not be able to accommodate the standard
model of full-time education on a physical campus. Participation in research is
a critical component of any STEM degree, as it involves learners in the process
of scientific inquiry, while improving studentsâ€™ data literacy and critical
thinking skills. Although participation in research is a common component of in-
person STEM degrees, fewer opportunities exist for online students. This project
will broaden student participation in research through the implementation of a
course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE) geared towards students
enrolled in online astronomy degree programs. This CURE will take the form of an
upper-level research course that focuses on computational literacy and data
replication. The emphasis on renewed analysis of existing data is an innovative
and significant divergence from the way CUREs are typically conducted. Since
multiple students can engage in analysis of the same dataset, this design will
highlight the under-discussed role of result replication. As a result, this
scalable replication-based model will be transferable to other institutions
while simultaneously laying the groundwork for developing online CUREs for
students across a variety of scientific disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to address a common disparity between online and in-
person STEM degree programs by providing students in the Astronomical and
Planetary Sciences program with an upper-level research course that focuses
predominantly on research literacy and data replication. This research course
will emphasize the importance of repeated analysis as it pertains to exoplanet
observational characteristics. Future space-based observations of exoplanets
require ongoing maintenance of their predicted celestial position, also known as
ephemerides. Replication-driven research of this kind will provide updated
ephemerides, making meaningful contributions to current exoplanet research.
Using established measures from prior work analyzing undergraduate research
experiences, the project team will study the effectiveness of this course to
determine the impact of an online CURE designed around the use of data analysis
and reproducibility on student learning, research literacy, and student self-
efficacy. The goal of this research is to advance understanding of the design
components that are required in an effective CURE, knowledge that will inform
the development of both online and in-person undergraduate research courses in
the future. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.