* 2121713
* Figuring Thin Optical Components Using Ultrashort Pulsed Laser Stress
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Brandon Chalifoux, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2024
* USD 383,618.00

This grant will support research that will contribute new knowledge related to
manufacturing lightweight optical components like lenses and mirrors. Laser
stress bending is a manufacturing process involving focusing a laser into glass
mirrors or other optical components under conditions which lead to the material
permanently bending into a particular shape. Lightweight optical components are
critical for national defense as in space communication and remote imaging, and
consumer devices as in virtual reality headsets or smartphones. Laser stress
bending has the potential to create accurate lightweight optical components at
far lower cost than is possible today because the process speed can be higher
than existing optical manufacturing techniques. The laser stress figuring
process it not yet fully understood, and this award supports fundamental
research to provide knowledge needed to help advance laser stress bending to an
industrial process that can benefit the U.S. economy, society, and national
defense. This multi-disciplinary research combines manufacturing, materials
science, optics, and mechanical engineering and will enhance engineering
education. This research will provide research training activities that broaden
participation of underrepresented groups including first-generation
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser stress figuring of high-aspect ratio
optical substrates can provide similar equivalent material removal rate as
conventional polishing but applied after coating or mounting and with
potentially higher accuracy. Ultrashort pulsed laser stress figuring depends on
creating controllable, repeatable, and stable stress at specific locations. Such
laser-generated stress has been shown to be driven by at least four mechanisms
depending on process parameters: densification, nanograting formation, explosive
void formation, and quenching. This research fills the knowledge gap of between
the generated stress and the optical pulses within these regimes, addressing the
stability and repeatability of the stress, and the utility of this stress in
shaping optical components. The research team will conduct experiments using
spatially shaped ultrashort laser pulses and in-situ curvature metrology to
measure multi-directional stress, model the connection between microscopic
stress and macroscopic deformation, measure strength and stability of shaped
glass substrates, and quantify manufacturing-relevant quantities such as
equivalent material removal rate, accuracy, and convergence
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.