* 2121925
* HNDS-I: From Households to Landscapes: Cyberinfrastructure for Interdisciplinary Research in the Ancient American Southwest
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffery Clark, Archaeology Southwest
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2024
* USD 802,714.00

CyberSW is an online gateway to archaeological knowledge. Free to anyone with
Internet, cyberSW opens the way for big-picture research on the ancient American
Southwest. To date, it contains data on 25,000 Indigenous villages, including
pottery, stone tools, room counts, and public buildings at those villages. This
grant will expand the structure of cyberSW to include data on individual
households within some of these villages, using information similar to that
collected by the US Census. The US Census collects information such as wealth,
cultural background, and number of people from a particular address or
neighborhood. This project will collect similar data from ancient households and
neighborhoods using the artifacts and architecture they left behind. In
addition, links between households, neighborhoods and settlements will be
explored through time. Because cyberSW currently provides data only about
settlements, expanding the database to include households and neighborhoods
within settlements will allow new research on how Indigenous peoples lived
before the Spanish arrived. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the guidance of Tribal
members, cyberSW will be expanded to include information about rooms, trash
deposits, and other household features. This will make it easier to study how
households and their networks changed over long periods of time. The project
will develop a variety of network analyses and metrics from household
architecture and associated artifacts, and make these analyses and metrics
available through the online science gateway. This gateway will include a
chronology tool that dates and groups artifacts and households to reconstruct
neighborhoods and networks at different points in time. Using this interface and
other tools, scientists, Tribal members, and the public will be able to explore
ancient Indigenous settlements without compromising actual site locations.
People will gain insight into the different social groups who lived in these
villages. They will also be able to explore how households and villages
interacted with one another. Importantly, it will be possible to download data
in formats and at scales useful for other kinds of research. This will make
cyberSW a great tool for geographers and other scientists who use census data to
study households. It will also encourage researchers to cross disciplines and
work together to learn about the past, present, and future of households.
Finally, cyberSW will serve as a model for large archaeological databases across
the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.