* 2121160
* PFI (MCA): Integrating Computational Chemistry with Machine Learning to Engineer Carbonaceous Adsorbents for Volatile Organics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Elham Fini, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2025
* USD 473,784.00

The broader impact of this Partnerships for Innovation (Mid-Career Advancement)
(PFI (MCA)) proposal is to simultaneously improve air quality and infrastructure
durability. The research is motivated by recent insights on emissions of
volatile organic compounds and ozone precursors during the lifetime of asphalt-
surfaced areas (e.g., roads, roofs bridge decks, etc.). This project will
engineer functionalized carbon from biowaste to remove ozone precursors emitted
from pavements. The functionalized carbon will be made via thermochemical
conversion of a combined feedstock of food waste and algal biomass.
Computational simulations, machine learning, optimization, and laboratory
experiments will be combined to determine the underlying mechanisms controlling
adsorption of known gases into functionalized carbon. This functionalized carbon
will be introduced to bituminous composites to increase the retention of
compounds that would otherwise be released to the surrounding atmosphere. The
study presents a new vision where outdoor construction elements can positively
contribute to environmental health. The proposed intervention is designed to
simultaneously enhance the durability of outdoor construction elements and the
quality of surrounding air by retaining compounds that otherwise leave bitumen
and enter the air, with some serving as ozone precursors, negatively impacting
air quality and human health outcomes. The project involving minority graduate
students in education, outreach activities, and cutting-edge interdisciplinary
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to promote the use of two
waste streams (algal biofuels and food waste) to address ozone concerns while
contributing to carbon sequestration and extending the service life of outdoor
construction undergoing intense ultraviolet (UV) light exposure. This project
will integrate computational modeling and data analytics for the design and
synthesis of functionalized carbon with desirable retention characteristics for
select bitumen compounds. It has been documented that aging is accompanied by
the loss of alkane and aromatic compounds in bitumen, so retention of the latter
compounds via functionalized carbon is expected to not only improve air quality
but also delay the aging of bituminous composites, especially those used in
outdoor construction that are subjected to various degrees of UV exposure,
depending on their location. This proposal may result in significant resource
conservation while promoting economic growth within a bio-mass value chain where
waste from algal biofuel and food is converted into value-added
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.