* 2121641
* Collaborative research: US emissions of sulfuryl fluoride, a pesticide and potent greenhouse gas
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Scot Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 10/31/2024
* USD 322,074.00

Sulfuryl fluoride is a pesticide used to exterminate termites and other pests
from homes and buildings, agriculture, and international shipping. Globally,
atmospheric concentrations of sulfuryl fluoride have been increasing
exponentially as it replaces the toxic pesticide methyl bromide. Methyl bromide
is being phased out as it depletes the stratospheric ozone layer, which shields
life on Earth from harsh ultraviolet light. Although sulfuryl fluoride does not
deplete the ozone layer, it is a potent greenhouse gas and can cause negative
health impacts at high exposure. There are numerous knowledge gaps regarding the
use of sulfuryl fluoride that prevent a full assessment of its environmental
impact. The goal of this project is to address these knowledge gaps by modeling
emissions, fate, and transport of sulfuryl fluoride. This will be achieved
through specific research to measure sulfuryl fluoride concentrations in ambient
air, evaluate how use and emissions are changing over time, and estimate the
fraction of emissions that are absorbed during fumigation. Successful completion
of this research will provide key information for assessing the environmental
impact of sulfuryl fluoride to better inform federal and state regulatory
agencies. These findings will also facilitate greenhouse gas emissions
accounting for sulfuryl fluoride, which currently do not include this compound
in official estimates. Additional benefits to society will result from mentoring
high school research interns each summer from Baltimore Public Schools,
increasing scientific literacy and enhancing the Nationâ€™s STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sulfuryl fluoride is a toxic pesticide and
potent greenhouse gas; it is a common fumigant used to exterminate termites and
pests that infest residential structures and agricultural products. In spite of
the exponential increase in usage as a replacement for methyl bromide, there are
major gaps in understanding the environmental fate of sulfuryl fluoride. The
goal of this research project is to address these gaps by evaluating US
emissions of sulfuryl fluoride and place these emissions in a global context.
This goal will be achieved through two primary research objectives to: i)
estimate the magnitude and distribution of sulfuryl fluoride emissions across
the United States using atmospheric observations of the gas coupled with inverse
modeling, and ii) evaluate recent trends in US emissions in the context of
global emissions increases. This research is designed to test three hypotheses
that H1) California accounts for a larger share of US sulfuryl fluoride
emissions than any other region of the country, H2) increasing US emissions
account for the majority of global emissions increases, and H3) at least some of
the sulfuryl fluoride used for fumigation is absorbed into structures or
agricultural products. Successful completion of this project will provide
critical information necessary to characterize the human and ecological health
impacts of sulfuryl fluoride use by scientists, regulators, public health
professionals, and other stakeholders. Preliminary analysis by the research team
indicates that increased sulfuryl fluoride use in the state of California may
completely negate recent progress toward meeting emission reduction goals in the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.