* 2121008
* MCA: Precision Electrospinning Training to Enhance Electrokinetic Filtration and Spectroscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Stuart Williams, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2024
* USD 363,697.00

This grant supports research in the development of advanced nanofiber
fabrication techniques that will be applied towards the manufacturing of
enhanced filters. The researchers will be trained in electrospinning, a
technique where a combination of fluid dynamic and electrical forces generate a
mesh of nanofibers. More specifically, electrospinning enables the researchers
to develop a heterogeneous network of high quality uniform fibers whose
composition will enable advancements in filtration. The fiber mesh will comprise
of a network of electrically conductive and insulative fibers that, when
energized, will generate strong electric forces that will significantly enhance
particulate trapping capabilities. Further, this unique network of fibers can be
applied to various disciplines, including controlled high throughput sorting of
biological cells and nanoparticles. This special network of fibers will lead to
advancements in smart filtration, fluid transport, and heat transfer, leading to
technological advancements that impact the U.S. economy and society. The
candidate’s electrospinning training will have immediate impact on ongoing
multidisciplinary research projects at his home institution and manufacturing
interests within the state of Kentucky. Gained knowledge will be transferred to
the local community: researchers will develop hands-on activities, create a new
multidisciplinary course, and involve high school students in their research
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to fabricate a high
throughput dielectrophoretic nanofiber-based particle sorter; this will be
possible by developing a heterogeneous fibrous mat that contains both
electrically conductive and insulative nanofibers. Both fibers are sources of
significant field non-uniformities, greatly enhancing dielectrophoretic forces
throughout the device and enabling an inexpensive platform capable of high
throughput particle sorting whose selective trapping is AC frequency dependent.
The principal investigator will be trained in advanced electrospinning such that
the research team can fabricate and test these heterogeneous nanofiber networks.
Experimental particle-sorting results will be compared to physics-based
numerical simulations. The manufacturing method can be scaled up, enabling
large-scale electrokinetic nanofiber applications beyond their typical use in
microfluidic devices. The application of electrokinetics to low cost
heterogeneous fibrous platforms is underexplored; discoveries in their
manufacture and physical operational limits can advance the application of
dielectrophoresis and electrohydrodynamics in purposefully-designed nanofiber
mats. The investigator’s training in electrospinning will impact other research
activities at his university, including advancements in personal protective
equipment, energy efficient supercapacitors, cell scaffolds for cardiac
remodeling, inexpensive neurostimulation, and in situ drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.