* 2121447
* Facilitating Widespread Implementation of Teaching Strategies Known to Promote Student Success throughout a State System of Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Suann Yang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,753.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by promoting widespread use of
evidence-based, equitable teaching practices that promote learning, success and
persistence for our students, particularly those from historically excluded
groups. Equipping diverse STEM graduates with the knowledge, critical thinking
skills, and problem-solving skills to address complex societal challenges like
climate change is critical for sustainable growth and development of our economy
and democratic society. The challenge addressed by this grant is that STEM
educators receive very rigorous post-graduate training in their disciplines but
little to no pedagogical training, leaving them to rely on traditional lecture
approaches that have been shown to be less effective in driving student learning
or retention in STEM majors. This Level 1 Institutional and Community
Transformation IUSE grant will develop and evaluate the impact of a professional
development program that targets a state school system: the State University of
New York (SUNY) system, which is the largest state system of post-secondary
schools in the US. The project provides effective training and support for
faculty in the use of teaching strategies that improve the success and
persistence of their students, particularly from traditionally underserved
social groups. The project is building on the success of two national
professional development programs that are joining forces to provide three tiers
of training and support to faculty in the SUNY system. This project will focus
on a subset of schools that are geographically distributed across the SUNY
system, which have built connections and momentum as part of a SUNY-system pilot
grant in 2019-2020. Participants in the project will take part in training and
community groups to support their adoption of innovative teaching practices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to leverage the connections
within the SUNY school system to accelerate diffusion of inclusive, evidence-
based instructional practices (EBIPs). The project intends to employ three
important levers for change – professional development, agents of change, and
communities of support (Laursen et al., 2019) – to accelerate adoption of high
impact practices (HIPs) already occurring within pockets in this system. As part
of the proposed activities, the first cohort of faculty will take part in three
levels of training and support designed to maximize the likelihood that they
will adopt one of three HIPs: project-based learning (PBL), course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) or vertically integrated projects
(VIPs). Two nationally prominent professional development programs – the Mobile
Summer Institutes on Scientific Teaching (MoSI) and the Science Education for
New Civic Engagements and Responsibilities (SENCER) - will provide general
training in the implementation of EBIPs. Participants will receive specific
training in implementation of one of the three HIPS by local change agents who
have successfully deployed these strategies. Finally, participants will join a
faculty mentoring network (FMN) of their peers and two expert leaders who will
provide support and guidance as they begin the process of implementing HIPs on
their own campuses. This longer-term support through community is emerging as an
important lever to promote full adoption of innovative teaching strategies.
Participation in the project training programs will be tracked and changes in
teaching beliefs and behaviors will be measured to determine the efficacy of
this approach in fostering widespread change in teaching. Through the
Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts
to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education
and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.