* 2121531
* I-Corps:  A hand-held device that generates 2D and 3D ultrasound sonograms
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Hod Lipson, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
introduction of a point-of-care ultrasound device that may reduce the cost of
data acquisition in research and support scientific advancements in patient
care. Currently, over 60% of the world lacks access to ultrasound imaging
technology. In addition to prohibitive cost, training also is a barrier. With
the implementation of machine learning algorithms, an aspect of guidance and
image classification is introduced in the proposed device. This may facilitate
the screening of potential complications during pregnancy and provide guidance
during breast biopsies, among other applications. To train machine learning
algorithms, large datasets need to be generated, but ultrasound data is
expensive and slow to collect. In the United States, more than 125 million
ultrasound studies are performed yearly at an average cost of $800 each. The
main advantages of a broadly accessible ultrasound device are global
accessibility to affordable medical diagnostic technology, and a platform for
telemedicine software applications. Sonograms may then be shared wirelessly with
physicians and healthcare providers, potentially eliminating the need for a
physical office visit, which for many is a long, expensive, and complicated
journey. This proposed point-of-care ultrasound system will address the needs of
global users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a hand-held, USB (universal serial bus)-powered device that
generates 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional ultrasound sonograms and streams
images in the same format as webcam video. This video may then be displayed or
processed by diagnostic software. The hardware and software are user friendly
and applicable for a range of audiences. In addition, artificial intelligence
can be used to reduce the training burden for new users. The axial resolution of
the proposed portable system is 0.6 mm, lateral resolution is 1.9 mm at 30 mm
depth, and central frequency is 4.25 MHz Â± 5%. When tested with tissue
equivalent phantoms, the device rendered images of sufficient quality to extract
value and critical information such as the size of internal structures as well
as volumetric information, which may be used to guide clinical decisions. Cart-
based ultrasound systems that provide the best-in-market 3-dimensional image
quality and processing software can retail for $250,000, which is prohibitive in
price for many markets. The proposed point-of-care system may eliminate barriers
to diagnostic imaging including price, lack of proficiency in sonogram
interpretation, and difficulty reaching medical facilities. The combination of
performance, simplicity, and price make this technology broadly accessible and
manageable for a range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.