* 2121851
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-I: The Digital Society Project: Infrastructure for Measuring Internet Politics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Pemstein, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 08/31/2024
* USD 737,487.00

Issues such as internet freedom, cybersecurity, misinformation, and the
polarization caused by social media are central to modern life. They play a key
role in social life, politics, and the strength of democracy around the world.
Yet measuring how these issues affect political events in online spaces is hard.
Scholars do not know what factors matter most. This project will produce tools
and data to help study problems in the online world that affect state security,
business risk, and daily life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports
infrastructure to collect data from around the world on cybersecurity, internet
freedom, disinformation, coordinated information operations, and the
politicization and polarization of social media. The project builds a global
pool of experts who will provide data each year. It also advances methods to
ensure that these data are valid. The project links the data to a massive set of
political tweets, coded by place. Scholars and others can access these data
through an online interface and open-source software. This project can help us
learn how states monitor, alter, and control online space. This research is
critically important to the US government, aid and human rights groups, and
private industry. Policy makers can also rely on this project to better
understand how, and where, to step in to curb internet-driven political
violence, stop the spread of disinformation, reduce electoral manipulation, and
enhance government accountability. Civil society groups can use assessments of
online freedom and cybersecurity to improve human rights surveillance. Firms can
use the data to reduce harm caused by their social media platforms. Finally,
teachers and students can use this project to better understand politics in a
digital world, equipping citizens to safely traverse the modern information
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.