* 2121723
* EAGER: SAI: Community-Informed Surveillance Infrastructure for Public Safety and Equity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mark Ackerman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,779.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security cameras that collect data processed
with artificial intelligence are being widely adopted as a key element of urban
public safety infrastructure in the United States. This development is enabled
further by a new public-private-community partnership model--a collaboration of
the police department, city government, private business owners, and community
officials. The technology, meant to secure buildings and help police identify
criminals, enable facial recognition and identification of people. Citizens and
scholars have raised concerns about biases embedded in these surveillance
technologies that can perpetuate prejudices and further disadvantage poor
communities. This project is investigating how surveillance infrastructure
affects community power relationships and whether such systems could lead to
unintended consequences for communities experiencing marginalization. The
project is investigating how individuals and communities perceive and interact
with surveillance infrastructure, and whether individuals’ and communities’
needs for public safety are fulfilled. The project's ultimate aim is to create
and develop fair and equitable public safety infrastructures in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through an ethnography and a community-based
participatory approach, this project examines past and ongoing transformations
of surveillance infrastructure in order to envision the future of public safety
infrastructure in communities experiencing marginalization. The proposed
research is identifying both perceptions of safety and any tensions around the
public-private-community partnership in data-driven surveillance and public
safety infrastructure. The research will uncover the social, technical, and
political impact resulting from the public-private partnership in developing and
implementing public safety infrastructure. It is investigating the voices,
history, and experiences of members of the public and those experiencing
marginalization. It will propose what equitable public safety infrastructure
might look like in the future and inform the design and development process of
future public safety infrastructure. Contributions include empirical and
theoretical insights to surveillance studies and critical infrastructure
studies. This investigation will also advance the fields of social computing
concerning fairness, justice, and equity of socio-technical infrastructure and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.