* 2121638
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: The Market is the Interface: Online Labor Platforms and Contingent Knowledge Work
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Dunn, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2024
* USD 160,360.00

This longitudinal study examines the ways in which online labor platforms are
reshaping work, with a focus on how they sustain their market-making roles, and
how workers and employers adapt to these changes. Given the centrality of
knowledge work to the U.S. economy, and the lessons of the current pandemic,
findings will inform policy makers and contribute to ongoing debates on work,
labor and the economy. The research will accomplish this in three ways: (1)
Better understanding of platform architecture design and market adaptation, both
critical to strengthening labor markets and supporting both workers and
employers. (2) Deeper insights on the emerging structures of working
arrangements and digitally-reliant labor strategies, for both workers and
employers, to guide training, educating, policy-formation, and worksite support
for an emerging form of future work. (3) Specific analysis of each role that
online market-making platforms can play in redressing, exacerbating, or
transforming known issues with differential treatment of women workers and
workers from under-represented populations. The research will significantly
advance current understanding about the ways that online labor market interfaces
both replicate and address known differences in access to labor due, in part, to
the worker's gender, race, and ethnicity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collection
focuses on one type of contingent knowledge work: online freelancing conducted
through online labor platforms that support human-computer interactions and
enable a two-sided labor market. Freelancers (who sell their services) and
employers (who seek the services of sellers) interact through the different
interfaces provided by the market-making platforms, rendering this a negotiating
space. That is, a study of online labor is also a study of market making,
platform architecture, and humans and computer-based systems interacting.
Building from current work and the relevant literature, this study pursues three
primary research questions: (1) How does an online labor platform sustain its
market-making role? (2) How do freelancers adapt to changes on a platform? (3)
How do employers adapt to changes on a platform? Findings will provide a
transformative lens into the ways in which labor markets are creating a new form
of digitally-reliant labor infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.