* 2121919
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging Fluid-Structure Interactions for Efficient Control in Geophysical Flows
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Eric Forgoston, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 199,934.00

Microvehicles provide a low-cost platform for a variety of robotics and
automation applications. Their excellent maneuverability, agility, and ability
to operate in truly three-dimensional environments have enabled ubiquitous, low-
cost sensors for a range of data collection and monitoring tasks. Recent
developments in micro-aerial, ground, and marine vehicles have advanced in many
exciting and high-profile ways. However, because of the vehicles' low weight and
limited computational and power capacities, controlling them is more challenging
since the motion of the vehicles is significantly impacted by the environments
in which they operate. This award supports fundamental research needed to
understand fluid-structure interactions, that is, how small vehicles in water or
air move and react within a surrounding flow. The investigators will use these
insights to establish a new paradigm for the design and control of low-cost
microvehicles, resulting in more power-efficient systems and, thus, extending
their lifetimes. The work is an interdisciplinary effort combining knowledge in
fluid dynamics, control theory, and reconfiguration planning. It will improve
navigation and monitoring of dynamic and uncertain environments, and will
contribute fundamental knowledge in the areas of weather and climate prediction,
environmental monitoring, fisheries science, and shipping, to name just a few,
thus benefiting the U.S. economy and society. It will also provide opportunities
for training interdisciplinary undergraduate and graduate students at the
intersection of robotics and fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
insight underlying this project is that small, resource-constrained vehicles can
exploit their nearly limitless environmental forces to extend their own power
budgets and operating lifetimes. In particular, by adjusting their morphologies,
these vehicles can adapt their transport properties in a fluid environment and
control their trajectories without active propulsion. Accomplishing this vision
will require foundational science in dynamics and control to understand fluid-
structure interactions in systems of vehicles that not only have volume and
inertia, but can also reconfigure their shape. The project will make initial
steps in this direction by: 1) characterizing the effect of aspect ratio and
mass on a vehicle's passive transport properties and the inertial coherent
structures underlying these complex dynamical systems; 2) synthesizing design
and motion control strategies incorporating inertial effects and the underlying
fluid-structure interactions; and 3) investigating the efficiency trade-offs
between morphological reconfiguration and active propulsion in a variety of
fluid flows. The knowledge and insights developed during the course of this
program will expand the capabilities of micro-autonomous vehicles to perform
long-term operations and will lay the groundwork for future innovations in the
large-scale deployment of micro-machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.