* 2121155
* Collaborative Research: GCR: Growing a New Science of Landscape Terraformation: The Convergence of Rock, Fluids, and Life to form Complex Ecosystems Across Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Scott Saleska, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,158,103.00

The U.S. and the world today face the increasingly urgent question of how to
better understand and manage complex physical-biological systems in order to
address pressing problems such as: restoration of degraded landscapes,
sustainable management of ecosystem services, including water cycling and
supply, ecosystem nutrition, biodiversity, carbon sequestration in the face of
global change, and eventually, terraforming planets beyond earth. At the root of
these problems is the fundamental question of landscape terraformation: how does
life expand and sustain itself, in increasingly complex and symbiotic forms,
across landscapes at multiple scales to transform bare rock into complex multi-
function ecosystems? This Growing Convergence Research team of earth scientists
(hydrologists, geochemists), biologists (evolutionary genomicists, ecosystem
ecologists), and social scientists (anthropologists who study cultures of
science) will leverage a unique and powerful “convergence instrument” --
University of Arizona’s Landscape Evolution Observatory, consisting of three
large experimental hillslopes at Biosphere 2 -- to both reveal key mechanisms of
landscape terraformation and catalyze new ways of interdisciplinary thinking to
empower and diversify this next generation of scientists to achieve convergence
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central investigation of this work is of how
small scale hydrological, geochemical, ecological and evolutionary processes
interact to create emergent landscape-scale terraformation, across three stages
of biological complexity: from simple lithotrophic microbial communities
(including microbial crusts), to non-vascular plants (mosses without roots), to
vascular plants with roots and sophisticated hydraulic architectures.
Experiments will test model representations of water flow through landscapes,
its effects on the transformation of rock via weathering at different scales,
and thence, feedbacks which modify those landscapes and their biological
habitability. At the same time, the composition and function of organisms as
they colonize barren landscapes and develop symbiotic associations (especially
for N fixation) will be manipulated to select from biological diversity in
genes, traits, and functions, in order to identify the biological feedbacks
which simultaneously transform hydrological and geochemical processes. In the
process, convergence research will be studied, understood, and reflected through
a novel, social science-based “Cultures of Convergence Science” investigation of
the entire team in an ethnographic inquiry designed to identify practices
conducive to successful convergence research. This proposal is supported in part
by the&lt;br/&gt;Critical Zone Collaborative Network
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.