* 2121273
* Enhancing Introductory Physics with Augmented Reality Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Rosengrant, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 299,994.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students'
understanding of concepts in introductory physics. Introductory physics courses
at large universities often serve hundreds of students every semester. One of
the challenges in physics is that even with demonstrations and lab experiences,
many concepts remain difficult for students to visualize. In addition, many
instructors still rely on the lecture format instead of inquiry-based pedagogy,
which more directly engages students. In this project, the investigators will
develop multiple Augmented Reality (AR) simulations for general physics classes.
Students will be able to manipulate these simulations of physical objects while
holding in their hands a "cube" that acts as a controller for the simulations.
The AR technology, which is relatively new in education, offers the promise of
turning traditional lecture-style classrooms of 20 to 200+ students into dynamic
learning environments, with students using only their smartphones and a
"printed-out" cube. The investigators will explore the effects of the new
simulations and the enhanced learning environment on students' understanding of
the associated physics concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
develop six AR simulations covering key topics associated with forces,
rotational motion, optics, circuits, thermodynamics, and magnetism. Along with
the simulations, the team will develop video tutorials to help instructors use
the tools in their classrooms. In particular, they will encourage instructors to
incorporate the new tools using an Investigative Science Learning Environment
(ISLE) approach. Then they will attempt to determine what benefits, if any, are
achieved, both for the students and for the instructors. The team will explore
education research questions such as the following:&lt;br/&gt;(1) When AR
simulations are incorporated into physics instruction, are they an effective
tool to support instructors in adopting proven, research-based pedagogical
strategies?&lt;br/&gt;(2) What are the effects of the simulations on students'
conceptual understanding?&lt;br/&gt;(3) What are the effects of the simulations
on students' achievement?&lt;br/&gt;(4) Are there specific aspects of AR that
are beneficial to the physics students?&lt;br/&gt;(5) Do the AR experiences
promote any additional interest in physics?&lt;br/&gt;(6) How do instructors
perceive and use the simulations? (Do they find them useful for instruction? Do
they perceive increased student interest in the content? Do they perceive
increased student understanding of the material? What supports do instructors
need for successful implementation? Will they continue to use the
simulations?)&lt;br/&gt;The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.