* 2121574
* Enabling Deliberative Science Communication among Science Faculty, non-Science Faculty, and Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Peters, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,989.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula in
science education through the implementation of course modules in science
communication to the general public. This project will engage students in the
practice of science communication in layman's terms and help them become
facilitators for deliberation of science between scientists and the general
public. The COVID-19 pandemic has given cause for the reemergence of mistrust of
the science establishment by various communities with potentially devastating
consequences to public health. The Tuskegee study (1932-1972) where an effective
treatment for syphilis was withheld from Black men is often cited.
Communications training of scientists, while extensive, is often limited to the
dissemination of findings to other scientists and entails skillsets quite
different from those needed to communicate with the lay public. Furthermore,
racial and cultural gaps often present additional barriers to generating trust
when a majority establishment seeks to communicate with minority communities.
Scientists at Xavier University of Louisiana, a Historically Black College and
University (HBCU), are well-poised to bridge to minority communities based on
their deep history of community involvement and the institution being the top
producer of African American students who complete medical school. Effective
translation of science into public policy requires two-way communication between
lay audiences and scientists. Inculcating the practice of science communication
starting with undergraduate courses can be beneficial for developing effective
science communication skills. Teaching this process to undergraduates can be the
beginning of a two-way communication that will lead to improved science
communication skills and public understanding of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has four objectives. (1) Train faculty in
developing skills to communicate science at a level that a general audience can
understand through deliberative pedagogy workshops. Incorporating formal
communication-in-context training to STEM and non-STEM faculty will provide the
solution for bridging the gap in scientific communication to the public. (2)
Faculty will be awarded mini-grants to modify/develop course modules in core
courses to include deliberative pedagogy on science communication to the general
public. These course improvements will ensure that students receive critical
communication skills throughout their curriculum. (3) Train a cohort of
undergraduate students as facilitators and moderators of deliberative democracy
meetings on matters of science. The trained student facilitators will conduct
two meetings on science deliberation within the university in the fall and
spring semesters every year. (4) Students and faculty who have received training
in science communication to the public will engage the community on science
matters that impact the local community through newsletters, blogs, student
presentations, and meetings thereby assisting the public in informed decision
making. Given the mistrust in science among minorities, training minority
students to become agents of science to communicate to the public will go a long
way in fostering trust in the minority community. The activities outlined in
this project will provide our university with a system of two-way communication
between science agents and the public that can be used by students and faculty
to effectively communicate science with the public. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.