* 2121417
* Preparing Elementary Pre-Service Teachers to Integrate Computing across the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Na Gong, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,985.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, implementing,
and researching the effectiveness of a program for undergraduate pre-service
teachers (PSTs) to integrate computer science learning in elementary education.
Many states in the U.S. have required that all public schools offer computer
science courses or instruction. However, computer science is currently not
offered as an independent course in most U.S. elementary schools. Hence, there
is a critical need to integrate computer science into K-6 subject content
courses to ensure every student has access to computer science learning. A
systematic educational program is necessary for elementary PSTs to learn
computer science knowledge and, more importantly, strategies for integrating it
into K-6 subjects. However, it is challenging to place such an intensive
endeavor into a single course in teacher education programs, so there is a
shortage of PSTs who can integrate computer science learning in K-6 subject
classes. The Technological Pedagogical Content Computational Thinking (TPC2T)
model, a model for the infusion of computational thinking into another subject,
will be used. In this Engaged Student Learning Level-1 project, 175 elementary
PSTs from 5 cohorts will participate in a series of sessions and student
teaching over three semesters to learn and apply computer science across all K-6
subjects. This project will also generate an empirically tested PST educational
framework and a computer science integration teaching model for classroom
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims 1) to improve PSTs’
interest, self-efficacy, and knowledge of computer science integration in K-6
subjects by the end of their teacher preparation program, and 2) to advance the
TPC2T model and make it a comprehensive model for K-6 computer science
integrated teaching. To address these goals, the project team will conduct a
mixed-method triangulation design research based on Bandura’s self-efficacy
theory and Lent, Brown, and Hackett’s social cognitive career theory. The
research findings and educational materials will be disseminated via the public
project site, conference presentations, peer-reviewed journal publications, in-
person and online workshops, and events hosted by NSF-funded centers, such as
the STEM Learning and Research Center. This project is expected to benefit
society by developing the teacher workforce in computer science K-6 education.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE: EHR project
to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation goals, which are well-
aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.