* 2121412
* Enhancing Equity and Access Via Digitally-mediated Collaborative Learning Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthew West, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing best practices
to increase access to high-quality education for all students regardless of
where they live. Research indicates that engaging students in collaborative
activities is associated with increased student persistence and improved student
learning outcomes and retention. Different teaching methods and resources have
been developed and tested to improve collaboration during face-to-face
instruction. However, there is a lack of evidence-based practices to maximize
synchronous collaborative learning in online environments. COVID-19 exposed the
need to adapt collaborative learning activities to fit a variety of delivery
modes, with the use of video conferences and other technology tools. However,
the need to provide high quality online and collaborative experiences may be a
vital strategy for increasing future equity and access to education in general,
especially to the increasingly diverse population of students who seek STEM
education. This project will advance understanding about the interconnections
between online learning, equity and access. Synchronous online collaborative
learning activities have the potential to widen the digital equity gap,
affecting students from low socioeconomic groups, or across different time
zones. On the other hand, these activities increase the perception of “real
interactions,” which are negatively impacted by reliance on e-mails, online
forums, and chat messaging systems. The first part of this project will
investigate the impact of students’ choice of synchronous or asynchronous
classes on their learning goals, sense of belonging and satisfaction. The second
part of this project will develop online strategies for collaborative learning
that are adapted from the evidence-based face-to-face facilitation strategies,
including the use of group awareness tools and designated team
roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand how online collaborative
learning can bolster equity and provide critical social support for students as
they wrestle through the challenges of learning, the project will answer the
following research questions: 1) How does the schedule of synchronous computer-
supported collaborative learning activities affect access and equity?; and 2)
How face-to-face facilitation strategies can be adapted for use in online
environments, especially to enhance equity and access? To address the first
question, students will be split into two sections which will determine how they
will complete the collaborative learning activities, either following the
designated university schedule time, or a time of their choosing. Performance
and participation data will be collected to measure the impact of the
intervention, as well as class observations, and sense of belonging and
satisfaction surveys. For the second research question, this research project
will develop online tools to incorporate facilitation strategies for online
collaborative learning activities. As part of this research, the new tools will
be tested, and several metrics will be used to measure its effectiveness. All
the online tools developed for this project will be part of an open-source
software that is currently widely adopted in many universities. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.