* 2121214
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Collaborative Research and Education Architecture for Transformative Engagement with STS (CREATE/STS)
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marisa Brandt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 45,810.00

The aim of this project is to test innovative methods for integrating STEM and
humanities curricula in a 4-year college setting. With pervasive and
increasingly complex ethical and social issues related to emerging science and
technology, undergraduate students in both STEM and humanities fields need
better interdisciplinary preparation to address these societal challenges in
their professional careers. While general education requirements may ensure
breadth, there remains little integration of STEM and humanities perspectives.
The field of Science and Technology Studies (STS) is uniquely positioned to
facilitate such integration through STS pedagogies—interdisciplinary practices
of teaching and learning that build on the field’s deep engagement with the
ethical and societal dimensions of science, technology, and innovation. This
project implements and evaluates a model for collaboratively developing STS
pedagogies with a cohort of STEM and humanities faculty and undergraduate
students, designed to build new interdisciplinary STS modules for each
participating faculty member’s course. This research has the potential of
refining a model that can be adopted by a variety of institutions to facilitate
the dissemination and uptake of STS pedagogies across the
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three research
questions: 1) Can this model effectively support the integration of humanities
and STEM perspectives in undergraduate training? 2) Can collaborative STS
pedagogy development effectively cultivate new interdisciplinary collaborations
between humanities and STEM experts? 3) Does this model contribute to the
recognition and value of STS in interdisciplinary undergraduate training within
four-year degree programs? Through four year-long implementations of the model
across four different institutions—James Madison University, Colorado School of
Mines, Michigan State University, and University of Maryland College Park—this
research will evaluate and refine the model, attending to institutional,
disciplinary, and other factors that impact its implementation and
effectiveness. Using ethnographic and qualitative methods for analyzing each
implementation, this project will produce a rich description of the model and
associated STS pedagogies, and an open access best-practices handbook for
adapting this model in different institutional settings and collaboratively
developing STS pedagogies with humanities and STEM colleagues. Additionally, as
undergraduate students will be involved in the project and will support data
collection and analysis, it will provide opportunities to mentor a new
generation in research and evidence-based STS
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.