* 2122690
* HSI Implementation and  Evaluation: Bridging the Gap: Designing a Technology Learning Community Integrating Computational Thinking to Improve STEM Engagement Across Disciplines
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mohammad Azhar, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 599,673.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to create a Technology
Learning Community that integrates Computational Thinking into both formal
classroom-based and informal co-curricular learning environments to mitigate the
intimidation barriers encountered by the HSI students in STEM. While
computational fields and careers are the focus of the 21st century, many
minority students and women are still underrepresented in STEM, which can impact
innovation. Research shows this is often due to lack of confidence and self-
efficacy. This project will create a generalizable and effective model that will
enable Hispanic, URM, and female-identified students to gain the self-efficacy
needed to persist in STEM/allied fields by combining Computational Thinking
within both formal and informal learning. Involving both Computer Information
Systems (CIS) and non-CIS majors (i.e., social science and business), this
technology focused learning community will improve the student's problem-solving
skills and innovation. By infusing Computational Thinking into both CIS and non-
CIS courses, providing students access to solve real-world problems via Hack-a-
thons and Make-a-thons, as well as providing faculty training - this project
will improve persistence, retention, and increased interest of URM/women
students in STEM/allied fields promoting innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the project is to create an inclusive Technology Learning Community
(TLC) to increase student efficacy, STEM engagement, STEM interest, and
persistence, through three objectives: (1) Integrate Computational Thinking in
CIS and non-CIS courses using real world problems to introduce concepts such as
Artificial Intelligence Ethics and Data Science. (2) Bridge formal to informal
learning through a hybrid Success and Innovation Lab, Hack-A-thons, and
collaborative Make-a-thon Projects for Social Good, supported by faculty, peer
mentors, and industry experts. (3) Expand Computational Thinking Across
Disciplines by training faculty across both CIS and non-CIS disciplines (such as
Business, Social Sciences). The project will study how to combine Computational
Thinking and Project-based learning to link formal classroom activities to
informal learning engaging a total of 600 HSI students. This project will
facilitate relationships and engagements by incorporating local business and
incubator partnerships. This intervention conducts research on whether a TLC
that increases participation in STEM by engaging diverse students in learning
across disciplines can meet three major needs: increasing retention and
persistence, reducing the STEM intimidation barrier, and filling a gap for
interdisciplinary learning communities. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning,(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.