* 2122476
* Collaborative Research: Combined transport and scanning probe study of twisted van der Waals devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Emanuel Tutuc, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 215,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many semiconductor devices rely on
creating heterostructures consisting of multiple layers to enable their desired
functionality. Traditional semiconductor heterostructures are limited in the
choice of materials that can be utilized because of requirements of lattice
matching between the different layers. However, atomically thin materials have
the ability to overcome this limitation through the creation of van der Waals
heterostructures realized in a layer-by-layer stacking approach. This will allow
a much wider range of electronic properties to be created in these
heterostructures. Furthermore, they have an additional degree of freedom which
is the twist angle between different layers, which gives rise to a long
wavelength moiré pattern between the layers. This moiré pattern modulates the
electronic properties, and can give rise to correlated states such as
superconductivity or magnetism. In this project, we will use semiconducting
transitional metal dichalcogenides of the form MX2 where M is a transition
metal, and X is a chalcogen to create novel Boolean logic devices where the
twist angle between layers controls the electronic properties. The proposed
project will develop new fabrication techniques, characterize the novel
electronic properties, and then implement logic devices based on these newly
developed heterostructures. The proposed program will create new educational and
research opportunities at University of Arizona and The University of Texas at
Austin by fostering the growth of the interdisciplinary area of quantum
materials and devices. In particular, the proposed research aligns with the NSF
Big Idea of Quantum Leap: Leading the Next Quantum Revolution by developing
material systems and devices that have the potential to enable new quantum
technologies. This proposed research prog¬ram will strongly emphasize the
training of graduate and undergraduate students, thus preparing them for
industrial or academic careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative proposal will engineer and
characterize van der Waals heterostructure devices with flat bands through
heterostructure design, layer-by-layer fabrication, scanning probe microscopy,
and electrical transport measurements. The project will be focused on
homobilayer heterostructures of two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal
dichalcogenides with controlled twist angle between the layers. Due to the twist
angle between adjacent layers, a long wavelength moiré pattern develops which
modifies the electronic properties of the heterostructure and can lead to an
energy-momentum dispersion that is flat. These flat bands have a large density
of states and small bandwidth such that interaction effects will dominate over
their kinetic energy. In this regime, the electronic effects become highly
correlated and we will exploit these properties for the creation of novel
devices. In particular, we will accomplish the following three aims: (1)
Development and characterization of gate tunable TMD homobilayer and trilayer
heterostructures, (2) Creation of novel correlated states through electrostatic
gating, twist and strain control, and (3) Realization of Josephson junction
field-effect transistors for Boolean logic applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement of Merit Review&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.