* 2122247
* Improving the Use of Science in Collaborative Environmental Governance
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Craig Thomas, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 376,934.00

Many complex environmental problems – such as habitat conservation and water
pollution – are managed today through voluntary partnerships of public agencies,
nonprofit organizations, and private actors. In the 20th Century, it was common
for public agencies to address environmental problems individually, with little
assistance from other agencies and limited input from citizens and other actors.
In the 21st Century, public agencies have increasingly participated in
collaborative partnerships for managing environmental problems as a means for
sharing management responsibility across jurisdictions and involving non-
governmental actors in developing plans and projects. This new means for
addressing environmental problems is known as collaborative governance. While
the move from centralized planning and regulation to collaborative governance
can promote fairness, trust building, and inclusion of different types of
knowledge, it may reduce the impact of scientific findings on policies. At
present, little is known about how science informs decision making within
collaborative partnerships. By comparison, academics have long studied how
science is used in public agencies, which are under legal obligations to justify
their decisions based on science. Collaborative partnerships, by contrast, are
not under similar legal obligations. It is thus important to understand how
science informs decision making within these partnerships, particularly given
the important role that scientific knowledge and evidence should play in
addressing environmental problems. This research project will build academic
understanding of how science is used in collaborative partnerships and provide
policy makers and agency managers with guidance on generating usable science
that can be employed in collaborative partnerships to improve environmental
conditions and human wellbeing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
answer the following two questions: (1) How is scientific research valued,
acquired, evaluated, and applied in collaborative environmental governance? (2)
What are the impacts of these current practices? The empirical focus is Puget
Sound, the second-largest estuary in the United States. Drawing on surveys,
interviews, document analysis, and meeting observations, the research team will
compare how science is used in different types of partnerships, ranging from
partnerships comprised mainly of citizens operating at the local level to
partnerships comprised primarily of government agencies operating at larger
scales. Within each partnership, surveys and interviews will be conducted to
understand how participants think about the role science should play, and does
play, in their partnerships. Document analysis and meeting observations will
provide additional data to examine the mechanisms through which science is used
to inform decision-making processes in each partnership. The project will build
theory by testing hypotheses synthesized from the fields of collaborative
governance and the interface between science and policy. In addition, results
will be used to identify practical strategies to enhance links between science
and collaborative governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.