* 2122014
* PFI-TT:  High performance, regenerative windows for building energy reduction and clean energy production
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Abasifreke Ebong, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project offers broader environmental, societal,
and commercial impacts through building energy savings, renewable power
production, and pollutant reductions. Commercial windows significantly
contribute to an increase in heating and cooling loads inside the building while
affecting visual and thermal comfort to the occupants. The development of clean
energy is an important priority as the growing population and new construction
lead to a rise in fossil fuel use and anthropogenic emissions. This project is
expected to improve on-site renewable energy production to help combat global
warming. The US construction market for commercial windows is estimated at
around $3 billion annually. With enhanced energy efficiency and power
production, the proposed regenerative windows have the potential to save both
upfront and operational cost by producing clean electricity and reducing
cooling, heating, and artificial lighting load, making buildings more appealing
to building owners, industry professionals, and stakeholders. Aesthetic
enhancement of the system is expected to further increase widespread adoption of
public use. The project is contributing to an energy-efficient, healthy living
environment through aesthetically intriguing, functionally innovative
windows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a novel high-
performance regenerative window integrated with climate responsive solar cells
to improve on-site clean energy production and building energy efficiency. The
vertical surface of urban buildings offers a prime location to harness solar
energy. Unlike traditional double-pane windows, the proposed windows are able to
be optimized for various performance needs – energy savings, on-site power
production, and user satisfaction. The system incorporates a closed air cavity
where solar cells are installed in a conditioned, closed air space to prevent
heat build-up, dust accumulation, and moisture formation resulting in high
energy conversion efficiency and system longevity. In addition to the enhanced
energy conversion efficiency and system longevity, the system is expected to
yield high thermal performance, good shading efficacy, daylighting penetration,
and acoustic insulation. The system is also designed to promote wide
architectural application and user satisfaction by providing improved aesthetic
appearance, and view-out and daylight illuminance, impacting the health, well-
being, and productivity of building occupants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.