* 2122429
* Collaborative Research: Probing the Ventilation Efficiency of the Deep Ocean with Conservative Dissolved Gas Tracers in Archived Samples
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rachel Stanley, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,825.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transfer of gases between the
atmosphere and the interior of ocean is controlled by processes in the high
latitudes, where deep waters are “formed” by the sinking of cold and/or salty
surface waters. The processes that affect air-sea gas exchange during water mass
formation play an important role in the uptake of carbon dioxide and other
important gases by the ocean. Dissolved noble gases, which are not affected by
chemistry or biology, are excellent tracers of the physics of air-sea gas
exchange: their abundances in the ocean interior tell us about how efficient gas
exchange was when water was last at the sea surface. Another tracer, the “triple
oxygen isotope” (TOI) composition of dissolved oxygen (a measure of the relative
abundances of oxygen-16, oxygen-17, and oxygen-18) is sensitive to both biology
and physics. However, each of these important tracers of air-sea exchange
remains understudied in the modern ocean. This project aims to make new state-
of-the-art measurements of noble gases and TOIs in 100 archived gas samples from
the North and South Atlantic. The methods developed in this project will also
enable future research opportunities that take advantage of these valuable
samples. The project will support the training of a PhD student and multiple
undergraduates, while contributing to ongoing efforts to develop workshop and
lecture materials for a new partnership between Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (WHOI) and a nearby public high school that has a primarily
underrepresented minority student body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of this project is to quantify the magnitude and spatial variability
of two sets conservative tracers that are each independently sensitive to air-
sea gas exchange at the time of deep-water formation: noble gases and TOIs. A
deeper understanding of these tracers will provide insight into the physical
mechanisms that regulate the efficiency of deep-ocean ventilation. Over recent
decades, multiple studies have consistently found undersaturation of the heavy
noble gases (Ar, Kr, and Xe) in the deep ocean, with respect to their solubility
equilibrium concentrations in seawater. However, while several theories exist,
there is no consensus on why the heavy noble gases are undersaturated throughout
the deep ocean nor any reason to suspect that a single process is responsible.
The spatial variability in noble gas disequilibrium between the North and South
Atlantic may provide key clues to this open question, given the vastly different
mechanisms of northern and southern deep-water formation. However, to date,
analytical limitations have limited the robust detection and quantification of
inter water-mass differences in disequilibrium. TOIs may also provide insight
into air-sea disequilibrium during deep-water formation, as the relative excess
of oxygen-17 (with respect to the atmospheric oxygen isotope ratios and
corrected for isotopic fractionation due to respiration) reflects the balance
between air-sea exchange and photosynthesis. Together, noble gases and TOIs
provide useful constraints to elucidate fundamental mechanisms. For example,
sea-ice cover in regions of deep-water formation will simultaneously lead to
undersaturation of noble gases and accumulation of photosynthetic oxygen (and
thus excess oxygen-17). However, few high-quality measurements of TOI in the
deep ocean exist, due to analytical challenges, despite the great potential of
TOI as a conservative tracer of physics and biogeochemistry during deep-water
formation. The proposed work will involve 100 measurements of archived dissolved
gas samples that were extracted at sea in the 1980s and stored in robust tanks
since collection. This project is the first effort to measure noble gases and
TOI in the same deep-ocean samples across a wide spatial range, by consistently
employing the same methodology and instrumentation to eliminate inter-laboratory
biases. It involves measurements in three WHOI labs and makes use of state-of-
the-art techniques for each independent tracer measurement. This work builds in
redundancy to improve the accuracy of results by measuring all samples on
multiple instruments, including pairs of adjacent stations, and carrying out
extraction experiments with the original equipment used in the 1980s to collect
these samples. For example, heavy noble gas elemental ratios will be measured
independently on two separate instruments, and high-precision (order 0.01
permil) measurements of noble gas isotopes will be used to test and correct for
sample integrity. Overall, this large set of archived gases offers a unique
opportunity to better understand these tracers and explore the quantitative
insight they may offer into outstanding questions about the deep-ocean
ventilation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.