* 2122818
* Collaborative Research: Explaining Differential Success in Biodiversity Knowledge Commons
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Beckett Sterner, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 292,095.00

Scientists increasingly rely on community-governed digital portals to store and
access open data. While these digital portals have improved access to data and
other scientific&lt;br/&gt;products, portals are expensive to implement,
challenging to maintain, and often fail to have uptake among key stakeholders.
Like those working in other areas of the digital economy, scientists have
increasingly adopted platforms to implement and tailor portals to particular
communities and needs, a model that lowers infrastructure costs and enables
benefits of scale across networked portals. Yet portals built from the same
platform nonetheless show a large variation in their outcomes. Participation in
any particular portal is often short-lived and the impacts of data portals on
the scientific process are challenging to evaluate; portal usage typically fails
to map onto traditional measures of research productivity such as publications
and citation counts. This project is the first to systematically investigate
scientific data portals built from a common platform in order to understand
portal communities and outcomes. The research design, which compares
biodiversity data portals, will inform studies of other platforms and digital
knowledge commons, such as open source software and peer-production communities.
Specific findings and recommendations will be shared with biodiversity portal
stakeholders regarding the effective design and use of these portals in order to
improve uptake and access to these important species data and facilitate science
and decision making around environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses fuzzy set Qualitative Comparative Analysis (fsQCA) to analyze open
data portals as a kind of knowledge commons that impose minimal restrictions on
access or reuse. The study sample comprises the 37 active and 4 inactive
biodiversity data portals built from the Symbiota platform, one of the largest
and earliest scientific data platforms still under continual development, with
hundreds of participating biodiversity collections and several dozen
individually managed portals. In 2020, Symbiota portals collectively
provided&lt;br/&gt;access to over 60 million biodiversity data records and
accounted for 90% of Web traffic accessing specimens digitized through the NSFâ€™s
Advanced Digitization of Biodiversity Collections (ADBC) program, which has
invested over $50 million in this area to date. The project synthesizes across
multiple types and sources of quantitative and qualitative data to identify why
some of these portals achieve sustained growth and others do not. To do so, the
project collects and analyzes up to ten years of analytics and other information
from the portals, including tracked usage data, community building activities,
features of portal governance, and resource inputs, as well as observation data
collected during portal site visits and interviews with a stratified sample of
portal managers. The fsQCA approach enables comparative inferences about those
portal features most likely to foster productive and sustained outcomes,
including collective benefit and building inclusive scientific
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.