* 2122337
* FET: Small: Establishing an efficient framework for non-Gaussian states engineering and optical implementation of measurements
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Christos Gagatsos, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 357,568.00

Quantum optical technologies (computing, sensing, communications) are
fundamentally based on the generation of quantum states and the detection
thereof. For example, quantum computing requires reliable generation of the so-
called non-Gaussian states in order not to be simulable by a classical computer,
while sensing and communications tasks require optical implementation of
measurements which might have an abstract mathematical description, e.g.,
projection on non-Gaussian states. Therefore, non-Gaussianity is a resource
which, similar to entanglement, is a cornerstone of quantum information. This
project aims to develop a systematic procedure for understanding resource-
efficient production of non-Gaussianity and to provide constructive ways of
generating any desired non-Gaussian state useful to a plethora of quantum
informational tasks. The project also aims to find systematic ways of
decomposing any given quantum optical measurement into a set of quantum
operations which have known optical implementations. The results that will be
enabled by this project are anticipated to have a two-fold impact: advancement
of quantum photonic technologies with immediate impact on defense and security
systems, and the advancement of basic physics by providing novel mathematical
tools for fundamental effects in quantum optics. Graduate students supported by
this project will have the opportunity to gain knowledge on continuous variable
quantum information systems beyond the Gaussian regime, with an emphasis on non-
Gaussianity and entanglement measures. The fundamental results from this project
will have far reaching impacts on communications over the future quantum
internet, on discovering receiver structures for attaining quantum-limited
photonic state discrimination for applications in optical communications and
sensing, on the realizability of various near-term applications of photonic
quantum processors to problems in optimization, and molecular simulations for
evaluating vibronic spectra with applications in drug discovery, and also to
special-purpose applications such as all-photonic quantum repeaters based on
cluster states for entanglement distribution over long-
distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is known that Gaussian states and operations
-- realizable using squeezed states, lasers and linear optics -- complemented
with a single non-Gaussian operation, is "universal", in a sense that any
transformation and measurement on a set of optical modes allowed by the laws of
quantum physics, can be realized using elements chosen from this aforesaid set.
The single non-Gaussian operation could be a non-Gaussian unitary such as a
cubic-phase gate. But it can also be a non-Gaussian measurement such as photon
resolving (PNR) detection, i.e., projection on Fock states, which have been
proven a reliable choice for state engineering in early and recent works.
Indeed, one can produce a non-Gaussian state by projecting a subset of a
Gaussian state’s modes on the multi-mode Fock basis. However, a systematic way
to understand the underlying phenomena, and a neat mathematical description is
missing. The broad goals of this project are twofold. First is to devise a
mathematical tool, specifically a non-Gaussianity measure, tailored in a fashion
that will be useful to state engineering. When the envisioned measure is equal
for two different quantum states, the two states must be equal up to a unitary
Gaussian operator. This will allow for conclusive results as to if a produced
non-Gaussian state is indeed the desired target state (up to a Gaussian unitary
operation which is in principle implementable using known photonic components)
that a quantum circuit is supposed to be able to produce. Earlier works on non-
Gaussianity measures do not possess said property. At the same time earlier
works on state engineering focus on fidelity as the measure of closeness of
quantum states. Fidelity being close to one is a necessary, but not sufficient
criterion for successful state engineering. Finally, the aforesaid tools will
enable us to “stitch” together, simple non-Gaussian states, e.g., Fock states,
into larger, general entangled non-Gaussian target states desired in a given
application. Ultimately, this project aims to devise a systematic way of
constructing any desired non-Gaussian state reliably. Our results will be of
fundamental interest in a deeper understanding of the mathematical structures of
quantum optics, while paving the way to scalable realizations of photonic
quantum technologies. Our second goal is to find recipes with which any quantum
optical measurement (POVM) can be realized using easy-to-prepare Gaussian
states, Gaussian operations and PNR detectors. A POVM on a part of quantum state
transforms the initial state into another state from a set of possible states
with some probability. Leveraging this property, we will re-write a measurement
(e.g., the vacuum-or-not measurement—which has relevance to constructing quantum
optimal receivers for laser communications) as an input state (consisting of the
state to be measured tensored with ancillary Gaussian states), which undergoes
Gaussian unitary evolution, and finally partially projected on Fock states in a
manner that gives the proper set of states and probabilities prescribed by the
given POVM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.