* 2122607
* A Knowledge-Based Framework for Creating and Sustaining Transformational Change for Latinx Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Ann Gates, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,743,603.00

This project aims to use a diversity, equity, and inclusion lens to create
systemic, transformational change at the University of Texas at El Paso to
increase the number of Latinx students, in particular Latina students, who are
competitive in STEM careers. To achieve the aim of increased participation in
STEM fields at the national level, a cross-cutting and replicable institutional
approach that considers learning outcomes, students’ experiences, internal
organizational structures, and external influences will be implemented. With
support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Program (HSI Program), the project team will intentionally embed
concern for diversity, equity, and inclusion in teaching and learning,
professional development, and policies and procedures, seeking to shift culture
across the institution. A key aspect of the project to support long term impact
is capacity building for research on the interplay between STEM education and
"servingness," a conceptual way to understand what it means to move from simply
enrolling Latinx students to actually serving them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to institutionalize the systematic use of data and the authentic
engagement of key stakeholders to build sustained change through continuous
improvement and to maintain, sustain, and build upon inclusive infrastructure
and resources. Project personnel will identify, stratify, organize, present, and
distribute data to be used for decision-making. A transformation team
coordinated by the Provost’s Office will use those data to recommend, plan, and
evaluate action on relevant issues. The institution plans to transform STEM
undergraduate education through changes in core curricula that provide equitable
opportunities to students. In a revitalization of the curriculum, working groups
of faculty will develop modular materials for inclusion in the University core
to increase inclusive instruction, STEM competencies, and engagement. The Center
for Faculty Leadership and Development will implement a professional development
series on inclusive and asset-based pedagogy. The administration will work to
select, compensate, develop, and mentor future faculty leaders invested in
diversity, equity, and inclusion. The Provost’s Office will work with
administration and the Faculty Senate to codify policies and procedures that
recognize faculty and staff efforts in inclusive teaching and learning. The
project will increase publications on metrics-based planning; promote regular
use of metrics and research by deans, chairs, and program directors in planning
and improving interventions; enhance the ability of stakeholders to understand
multiple perspectives on data through visualization; and expand shared
understanding of effective practices. Changes will be institutionalized and
sustained through policies and procedures that recognize and reward faculty and
staff who focus on student success and servingness. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.