* 2122013
* Developing Integrated Computer Science Curricula for Linguistically Diverse Classrooms in Grades 3-5
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Refika Turgut, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 241,897.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science Standards for
K-12 Education are being adopted widely, however there is much to be done before
the standards are fully implemented, especially at the elementary level. After
the release of Computer Science Teacher Association’s K-12 Computer Science
Standards in 2017, computer science (CS) educators began to develop a curriculum
that is aligned with the standards in middle and secondary grades. A variety of
middle school and high school level computer science curriculum materials (e.g.,
Exploring Computer Science, and Code.org) are available. However, there has been
less attention paid to teaching CS in elementary school than in middle school
and high school. Current elementary CS curriculum materials generally focus on
programming without specific attention to physical computing (robotics),
integration with other subjects, and the needs of English Learners (EL). For
this reason, computer science should be meaningfully integrated with math,
science, and rich literacy connections by considering the needs of growing EL
population in the US elementary schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
collaborative project among University of Nevada Las Vegas, George Mason
University, University of South Carolina Upstate and Weber State University.
This project seeks to develop integrated CS curricula using affordances of
educational robotics for grades 3-5 students in linguistically diverse
classrooms; provide teacher professional development around classroom
implementation of integrated units; and conduct educational research with regard
to teacher outcomes (computer science teaching efficacy beliefs and teacher
identity) and student outcomes (attainment of computer science concepts and
practices, views of computer scientists, and computer scientist identity). This
Research-Practitioner Partnership team consisting of computer science-science-
literacy educators, two elementary teachers, and a doctoral graduate assistant
will develop integrated computer science curricula for grades 3-5. In year 1,
the project team will develop and test 3 integrated units. In year 2, each unit
will be implemented in actual classroom settings by three teachers after
receiving summer professional development. Then the units will be revised by the
project team. In year 3, 35 elementary teachers will receive professional
development about how to teach CS integrated with other subjects during summer
and they will implement the units during the school year. This project will
assist elementary school teachers in culturally, linguistically, and
economically diverse communities of Clark County, Nevada, and Spartanburg, South
Carolina, and the less culturally and linguistically diverse community of Davis
County, Utah to successfully integrate CS into their classroom teaching. This
project reflects the stance that CS should be meaningfully integrated with math,
science, and rich literacy connections by considering ELs’ funds of knowledge
and English language proficiency (ELP) levels to extend all elementary school
students’, including ELs, exposure to CS before middle school. This approach
would provide all students with equitable learning opportunities to access CS
education and eventually cultivate their interest in computing fields. The RPP
will provide information to the field on the successes and challenges of
engaging in this work and a program that is evidence-based through rigorous
efficacy research. This project is supported by the CS for All: Research and
RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.