* 2122495
* PFI-TT: Thermal Management of Power Semiconductor Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Raj Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,900.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to pursue research and development
that focuses on the more efficient removal of generated heat from electronic
devices leading to commercialization of a new thermal management technology for
power semiconductor electronics. Demand for power electronics is expected to be
high and continues to grow especially in the defense, transportation, and
alternative energy sectors, as well as the energy generation and distribution,
hybrid/electric vehicles, and ultra-high efficiency lighting systems. There will
be direct benefits of the project towards the development of new compact,
lightweight, and higher reliability power electronic devices. In addition,
successful completion of this project may result in an associated reduction in
cost of operation, lower energy consumption, increased efficiency, and a lower
carbon footprint. Finally, successful commercialization of the technology
through the establishment of a start-up company or tech-transfer agreement and
the training of students and a postdoctoral fellow in innovation and
entrepreneurship will contribute to global leadership in power electronics for
high-technology products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current approach to thermal
management for power electronics is limited due to heat extraction from the back
or substrate side of the device using heat spreader/interface materials of poor
thermal conductivity. This project addresses this technological problem by
commercializing a novel diamond material-based technology to extract heat
directly from the top of the power electronics where heat is generated. The
approach is based on using a diamond film because it is well-suited for thermal
management because of its high thermal conductivity and electrical resistivity.
The extraction of heat directly from the top of a device can enhance efficiency
by 40% and reduce package size and weight. The extraction of heat from the top
also offers higher efficiency and reduced operating costs, while increasing
device lifetimes and density. Another objective of the project is to train the
work force in technology commercialization and entrepreneurship through NSF’s
I-Corps Team Training in which the faculty (technical lead), a mentor and an
entrepreneur lead (post doc and/or student) working on the project are taken
through intensive training on how to successfully commercialize this promising
technology. The new technology may lead to more efficient power electronics,
lower operating costs, enhanced device lifetimes and density, and successful
technology commercialization and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.