* 2122399
* Electro-optical phase retarders based on newly discovered nematics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Oleg Lavrentovich, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 438,605.00

Title: Electro-optical devices based on newly discovered liquid
crystals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are composed of rod-like molecules
that are aligned parallel to each other. When placed between two transparent
electrodes that supply an electric field, the molecules realign, changing the
optical contrast of the device. These devices brought a revolution in the
industry of flat-panel TVs, computer monitors, and smartphones. A detrimental
property of conventional liquid crystals is that they are not sensitive to the
polarity of the electric field, which results in relatively large operating
voltages and long switching times (milliseconds). The project focuses on
developing new liquid crystal devices in which the molecules show a polar
response to the electric field. The goal is to achieve fast (microsecond and
faster) optical response driven by weak electric fields. If successful, the
research will fulfill the demands of new technologies, such as artificial
intelligence, optical switching, augmented and virtual reality, and deep
learning, which require electro-optical devices with a fast microsecond and
nanosecond response. A combination of experiments and theoretical analysis will
provide a superb opportunity to educate students in advanced electro-optical
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is to develop
electro-optical phase retarders based on the newly discovered liquid crystals
such as twist-bend and ferroelectric nematics, which show polar ordering and
polar response to an electric field. The goal is to achieve ultrafast nano-and
microsecond electro-optic response at operating voltages lower than those used
in conventional nematic retarders. The activity will focus on the design of the
deviceâ€™s substrate to impart a proper alignment of the molecules and then use
the electric field to modify their orientation and electric polarity, which
would generate a discernable optical response. The research will establish the
optimum architecture of retarders, defined by the alignment materials, type of
ground-state nematic ordering, the spatial distribution of the electric field,
and coupling mechanisms to the electric field. The electro-optic behavior of
devices containing the newly discovered nematics is complex because of multiple
pathways of field response, such as bulk and surface polarization, dielectric
anisotropy, ionic transport, flexoelectricity, and order electricity overlapped
with anisotropic viscosity, elasticity, and anisotropic surface interactions.
The project will yield an understanding of how the polar and spatially-modulated
molecular arrangements produce an electro-optical response. The transformative
value is in the potential for new design concepts of electrically tunable and
switchable optical phase retarders with fast response. A combination of
experiments and theoretical analysis will provide a superb opportunity to
educate students in advanced electro-optical
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.