* 2122228
* EAGER: International Type II: Classifying the Causes, Consequences, and Lessons of Resilience Within International Scientific Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Elisa Maffioli, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,880.00

Part I: Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has
made clear both the importance of international scientific collaboration and its
fragility. Given the observed disruption to international scientific teams and
collaborative efforts, as well as the risk of future potential disruptions,
there is a critical need to understand how to build international scientific
collaborations that are resilient and sustainable in the face of disruption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the following questions: what are
the characteristics of international teams that influence long-term
collaboration? How do such characteristics allow teams engaging within
international scientific exchange to recover from disruption to their
collaborative efforts, while other characteristics tend to contribute to strain
and even failure? To answer such questions, this project aims to create a
comparative methodology that will allow us to understand, gauge, and contribute
to improving future international scientific collaboration. Analyzing the impact
of the COVID-19 pandemic on international scientific collaborations will drive
our understanding of i) the potential benefits of international scientific
collaboration and how they are realized, ii) the barriers to continued
collaboration in the event of systemic disruption, iii) the reasons why some
collaborations are more resilient than others, and iv) the ways in which risks
to collaboration can be mitigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To answer these
questions, the investigators will develop and test a method that uses i)
publicly available quantitative and qualitative data on international research
funding, administration, and use and ii) original interviews with key informants
selected for their expertise in analysis of scientific network sustainability
and resiliency. Using this information, we will compare international scientific
collaboration in polities chosen for their different positions in world science
and different policy approaches to scientific collaboration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The findings from this method will be useful on two
levels: to gain informants' understanding of scientific collaboration and
resilience; and to gain an understanding of different governmental and policy
approaches from comparing the frameworks, policies, and ideas that are
enunciated in different systems. Results from this effort will provide
international scientific engagements and teams with a critical foundation to
develop and enhance their resilience against current and future disruptions â€“
ensuring that international engagement and scientific innovation shall continue
despite any aberration in how such teams and organizations interact,
collaborate, and pursue cutting-edge scientific ideas in various
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part II: Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a scientifically robust
methodology to comparatively evaluate international scientific relationships and
their resilience in the face of global crises. Anecdotally, the COVID-19
pandemic has dramatically changed the dynamics of international scientific
collaboration, challenging collaboration in many ways while demonstrating its
value in addressing shared problems. But the resilience of international
scientific engagement is under-researched at present, and there is urgent need
to develop resilience structures and practices to prevent permanent disruption.
&lt;br/&gt;To develop a scientific and policy approach focused on the resilience
of international collaborative teams, this project will generate qualitative
data through semi-structured interviews with a purposeful, stratified sample of
research funders, administrators and researchers in selected countries. A review
of publicly available policy documentation, laws, research outputs and funding
amounts will supplement the interview data. An Expert Advisory Group of senior
scientists drawn from selected countries (UK, Singapore, EU) will advise the
team in identifying and constructing the initial stratified sample of
interviewees. The interview data, review of publicly available data, and advice
from the Expert Advisory Group will be used by the investigators to identify
both qualitative lessons and quantitative metrics relating to the resilience of
international research collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;This method would develop
knowledge in two ways. First, by having interviewees in science policy discuss
their operative theories of resilient collaboration, the lessons they drew from
the disruption of COVID-19, and how to build resilient international
collaboration, we would bring the practical expertise and theories of experts
into the discussion of resilience. Second, by taking an explicitly mixed
methods, comparative approach to a diverse sample of science policy systems, we
can develop a framework for comparing different science policy approaches to
collaboration and their effects on resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.