* 2122964
* EMC Experiment: Examining the Fate of the East Madagascar Current
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,390,751.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system of ocean currents that
forms the global Meridional Overturning Circulation (GMOC) plays a central role
in regulating Earth's climate. One of the least understood yet critical aspects
of this system is the upper-layer circulation within the East Madagascar Current
(EMC) in the South Indian Ocean. This project will use surface drifters,
subsurface RAFOS floats and particle tracking in a numerical model of the region
to examine pathways after the EMC separates from the continental shelf near the
southern tip of Madagascar: whether it turns east into the Madagascar Basin or
west into the Mozambique Basin, or both. The project will take advantage of
several RAFOS sound sources associated with the already-funded Deep Madagascar
Basin project (NSF/OCE/PO #1924431), adding one additional sound source to
facilitate triangulation of the mid-depth RAFOS floats of the new project. The
project will provide observations in an under sampled ocean region, help define
the fate of Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) waters, and may inform understanding of
the as yet unexplained Southeast Madagascar Bloom -- a global 'hotspot' for
primary production in an otherwise oligotrophic subtropical region. The project
will support the PI, an early career investigator, and fund the participation of
six early-career Malagasy scientists (including a collaborator) in the research
cruises. The project will also organize a 2-week summer school in Madagascar.
Undergraduate WHOI summer interns will be supported each summer, including
funding for their participation in scientific meetings. The proposed research
will be a US contribution to the 2nd International Indian Ocean Expedition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To observe fluid parcel pathways of the detached EMC, the
project will simultaneously release surface drifters and subsurface
acoustically-tracked isopycnal RAFOS floats within the EMC four times over a
year. This Lagrangian experiment, the first of its kind in the EMC, will be
paired with particle tracking simulations to investigate surface and subsurface
pathways associated with the detached EMC, its connectivity with the Agulhas
Current and the South Indian Countercurrent, and respective transit times. The
research will assess the impacts of EMC strength, downstream propagating eddies,
and seafloor topography on the detached EMC pathways. The specific objectives
are to 1) determine the advective pathways and transit times of the EMC
extension at surface and pycnocline levels and investigate the physical
mechanisms that control those pathways, 2) characterize the evolution of any
EMC-originated eddies that transit westward, 3) evaluate potential EMC
retroflection modes and investigate controls on them, and 4) determine the fates
and advective transit times of EMC originated parcels following measured and
modeled potential paths. This knowledge will inform understanding the ITF water
journey within the South Indian Ocean, the Southeast Madagascar Bloom
development, southern Madagascar coastal upwelling cells, and impacts on the
Agulhas Current and the GMOC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.