* 2122560
* Aspirar, An Integrated Program of Enhanced Advising and First-Year Experiences to Improve STEM Recruitment and Retention of Hispanic Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Loeser, Yakima Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 496,694.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to enhance faculty
advising and first-year student experiences, with an emphasis on attracting and
retaining Hispanic students in the STEM Pathway programs. Yakima Valley College
(YVC), a Hispanic-Serving Institution in Washington state, provides primarily
2-year degrees and certificates focused on workforce development and
preparedness for four-year college programs. Although 60% of YVC students
identify as Hispanic, this proportion drops by half for students enrolled in
STEM core courses. To address this under-representation this proposal will draw
upon multiple student support strategies published in the literature. The
evidence base for these strategies, predominantly produced by 4-year
universities, is applied in novel ways to YVC a rural, 2-year, Hispanic-Serving
Institution. The Aspirar program will advance knowledge and understanding of the
value of cohort-based training of faculty advisors, accelerating support
services for new students, and increasing access to first-year experiences.
Community colleges represent a key driver of future enrollment in universities
and the Aspirar program is a strategic plan towards achieving a major societal
goal of increasing the participation of underrepresented groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this enormous disparity in student demographics
in STEM courses versus non-STEM courses the Aspirar program will follow two
guiding objectives: 1) Increase Hispanic, low-income, and overall Under-
Represented Minority (URM) STEM recruitment and retention through expert
advising and 2) Increase URM STEM recruitment and retention through first-year
experiences for STEM Pathways students. These objectives will be achieved by
combining high-impact activities of early interventions for new students,
regular one-on-one advising, professional development in culturally responsive
practices, and expanding student access to extracurricular experiences. The
effectiveness of the Aspirar program will be measured through a research-based
design and will be compared with the traditional curriculum and will contribute
to the knowledge of best practices in higher education, particularly for 2-year
colleges. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.