* 2122596
* PFI-RP: Electrochemical Technologies for Pharmaceutical Synthesis via Nickel-Catalyzed Aryl-Alkyl Cross-Coupling
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Shannon Stahl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project led by the University of Wisconsin-
Madison and Merck &amp; Co. Inc. lies in the development of a new
environmentally benign electrochemical strategy for the synthesis of active
pharmaceutical ingredients and their precursors. Electrochemical methods often
bypass the requirement for costly, unsafe, toxic, and/or environmentally
hazardous chemicals used in conventional thermal processes. The electrification
of organic synthesis has potential to revolutionize pharmaceutical
manufacturing. Reduction reactions involve the net transfer to electrons to a
target molecule and they are commonly encountered in chemical manufacturing.
Hydrogen gas, which may be produced from water using renewable energy,
represents an ideal source of electrons for these reactions; However, hydrogen
gas lacks the driving force needed to accomplish many important reduction
reactions. Consequently, alternative reductants, such zinc, magnesium, and other
metals are often used as a source of electrons. This project will develop
electrochemical reactor technologies capable of using hydrogen as a source of
electrons to accomplish reductive cross-coupling reactions that form carbon-
carbon bonds commonly encountered in pharmaceuticals and other industrial
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project targets the development of
electrochemical technologies that will enable nickel-catalyzed, cross-
electrophile coupling reactions to be performed with hydrogen (H2) as the source
of electrons. Several different H2-anode technologies will be evaluated and
optimized for integration with cathodes that drive the nickel-catalyzed
reductive coupling methods. This project will leverage established membrane-
electrode assemblies and gas-diffusion hydrogen anode technologies used in
commercial fuel cells. Technical challenges that must be addressed include the
management of protons and water that migrate across the membrane of the
electrochemical cell, both of which could interfere with the catalytic coupling
reactions. These challenges will be overcome through the design and testing of
various reactor configurations that offer different strategies to address these
issues. By combining the expertise of synthetic chemists, engineers and leading
practitioners from the pharmaceutical industry, this project will elevate the
technology-readiness level of electrochemical carbon-carbon bond forming
reactions using H2 as an electron source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.