* 2122921
* PFI-TT: Ultrafast Electrochemical Capacitors for Electronic and Energy Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Zhaoyang Fan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop an ultrafast
electrochemical capacitor technology, which will act as rapidly responding
energy devices for pulse signal generation and pulse energy storage in sensor
and communication systems or as filtering capacitors to smooth out current
ripples in electronic circuits. The market segment of ripple current filtering
is currently served by aluminum electrolyte capacitors (AECs). However, their
bulky size, low capacity, polarity sensitivity and poor lifetime prevent the
development of miniaturized and advanced electronic systems. In addition, due to
AECs' slow response, conventional supercapacitors do not address the need for
fast pulse power generation and pulsed energy storage in modern sensors and
communication systems. A postdoctoral researcher, a young assistant research
scientist and undergraduate students participating in this project will be
trained in entrepreneurship and leadership development to accelerate the
commercialization of the proposed capacitors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research on ultrafast capacitors is aimed at electrode nanostructure design and
optimization, fabrication process development, and device characterization and
testing. It is expected that addressing these technical hurdles will accelerate
the commercialization of the technology. This PFI project will develop novel
crosslinked carbon nanofiber sheets, which are further anchored with
nanoparticles to achieve both a large electrode surface area and a reduced
electrode resistance. This approach is expected to deliver large capacitance
density and a high frequency response which are required to develop high-
performance ultrafast electrochemical capacitors. In addition, the project is
expected to enable large-scale manufacturing of nanostructured electrodes.
Ultimately, this PFI project will de-risk product prototyping and translate
prior NSF-funded fundamental research into marketable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.