* 2122746
* PFI-TT: Behavior-Based Account Recovery, Trust Assessment, and Continuous Authentication for Strengthening Online Identity
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Schuckers, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 336,777.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in the online fraud detection and
prevention for large populations of users in different industries such as
healthcare, credit card processing or retail banking business. The proposed
project involves the prototyping of a novel software for online fraud detection
and prevention based on behavioral biometrics. US consumers lose $5.1 billion
annually due to account takeover fraud and online shopping presents the greatest
fraud risk. There is strong demand for online fraud detection in sectors such as
e-commerce and financial services. This project includes an entrepreneurial
education and leadership development plan for the graduate students in the team,
that will include customer discovery activities, mentorship from experienced
entrepreneurs in the biometrics business area, and innovation and
entrepreneurship activities at the Center for Identification Technology Research
(CITeR), a NSF Industry University Collaborative Research Center (IUCRC).
Broadening participation activities include supporting underrepresented graduate
students and providing research opportunities for undergraduate students from
diverse groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project involves the
prototyping of a novel software solution framework for online fraud detection
and prevention that is based on behavioral biometrics. The software framework
systematically integrates options for prevention via account recovery, trust
assessment of universal identities, and detection via post-login authentication.
The team will also explore the design and implementation of innovative
features/solutions for intellectual property and user privacy protection, two
deployment options, and additional post-login authentication features paving the
way for integrating behavioral biometrics and post-login authentication into
enterprise systems. Finally, usability considerations including end-user
evaluation of behavioral biometrics in security critical scenarios that matter
the most to consumers will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.