* 2122367
* Development of a culturally relevant pedagogical framework for computer science and computational thinking in high schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lisa Frye, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 484,199.00

This project will develop and measure the efficacy of a Culturally Relevant
Pedagogical Framework for Computer Science and Computational Thinking (CRPF-
CSCT). Students from groups underrepresented in computer science (CS) will
provide input and participate in developing the framework. The development team
will consist of six students, six high school teachers (CS and non-CS), and five
research team members. The framework will be designed over a year and guided by
collaborative dialogues, a form of structured discussion where participants work
together to identify and develop positive change. Once completed, the framework
is intended for use in computer science courses to improve retention. Teachers
in other subjects can also use the framework to introduce high school students
to computational thinking (CT) across the curriculum. The framework will be
designed to encourage inclusivity and collaboration, making the classroom
experience more welcoming for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use
mixed methods to identify how key challenges and barriers to studying CS are
perceived and experienced by students from underrepresented groups in CS. The
project team will develop an instrument to quantitatively measure perceptions
and attitudes toward computer science in high school students. The team will
also develop specific approaches to improve the teaching and learning of CS and
CT for all students. External evaluation will ensure that all project goals are
achieved, and student voices remain central to the process. Results from the
project directly address issues of broadening participation in computing through
early and ongoing involvement by students from underrepresented groups and
through the development of the framework itself. The research is intended to
provide a more welcoming environment in computer science for girls,
underrepresented students of color, and students from lower socioeconomic
backgrounds, at a young age as they are first beginning to consider career
options seriously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the CS for
All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.