* 2122619
* Time Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Maureen Conte, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,644,849.00

This award provides an additional three years of support for the Oceanic Flux
Program (OFP). This program was first established in 1978 to measure the export
flux of particles from the surface to the deep ocean in the deep Sargasso Sea
and represents the longest and most continuous particle flux time-series of its
kind. This program and the time-series record will continue to help the
oceanographic community to answer questions about the relationship between deep
ocean particle flux and climate and biological, physical, and chemical
oceanographic processes. In the past, the OFP has provided evidence for coupling
between the upper and deep ocean processes linked to seasonal, episodic (e.g.,
physical and meteorological forcing) and climate patterns. Looking to the
future, this program will utilize increasingly advanced instrumentation and
analytical tools to address questions about the material that sinks from the
surface to deep ocean and its controls. The OFP provides education and training
for students from the high school to Ph.D. level and supports early career
researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OFP time-series represents a 43-year,
nearly continuous record focused on particle fluxes in the deep ocean. With
increasingly more data available from the lengthening record, investigators can
put observed biogeochemical patterns into perspective to understand the
interplay between climate and ocean functioning. The availability of data from
complementary nearby Hydrostation S, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series (BATS),
the Bermuda Testbed Mooring (1994-2007), the Tudor Hill atmospheric tower and
other Bermuda sampling programs provide additional opportunities to study upper
ocean physics and biogeochemistry coupled with deep ocean biogeochemical
processes. The OFP record is becoming long enough to study deep flux linkages
with gyre circulation and advective processes. The OFPâ€™s archive is an
unparalleled resource for retrospective studies of temporal trends and the
biogeochemical consequences of a changing ocean, including future impacts of
ocean acidification. As the OFP heads into the future, increasingly
sophisticated OFP mooring instrumentation (ADCP current profiling and
backscatter; MicroCAT temperature, salinity, and oxygen measurements) and
advances in digital imaging and analytical tools (both chemical and genomic) to
probe the recovered flux materials continue to reveal novel, fundamental
information about the oceanic particle flux and its
controls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.