* 2122689
* PFI-TT: An Analysis Tool Supporting the Safe Deployment of New Features in Evolving Software Systems
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Jane Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,550.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will develop a tool-supported
environment designed to aid in the safety analysis of software intensive
systems. Developing highly dependable software for medical infusion pumps,
positive train controls, and robotics applications is a challenging process that
requires rigorous and systematic hazard analysis. Such systems are traditionally
developed within a carefully controlled process that emphasizes detailed
planning, upfront design, and phase-based quality assurance gateways. Despite
these efforts, products are recalled for life-threatening safety
vulnerabilities. The challenges of developing safety systems have led to the
phenomenon known as the "big freeze" in which the cost, effort, and risk of
introducing new features inhibit product evolution. The proposed solution will
aid software safety analysts and other stakeholders in identifying system-level
changes while simultaneously building a safety-case for certification or
internal audit purposes. These abilities enable an organization to evolve their
products without sacrificing safety, security, or other critical concerns,
thereby increasing their competitive advantage. The project trains a diverse
cadre of women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in entrepreneurial
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize cutting-edge, deep
learning technologies to train a domain-specific language model that will be
used to automatically generate and evolve accurate trace links between artifacts
such as requirements, design, code, and test cases. The generated trace links
will be used to generate novel visualizations of hazards and their mitigation
pathways (i.e., hazard slices), and to highlight changes that have been
introduced across different versions of the system. In addition, the hazard-
slices will be integrated into existing safety-analysis techniques such as
fault-trees and safety-assurance cases. The novel hazard-based visualizations
are designed to aid analysts and developers in addressing emergent safety
concerns in large, complex, and evolving software projects. Finally, the work
will provide tools for analyzing changes in the software system, generating
explanations to aid in the identification of potential safety problems, and
recommending actions that could be taken to mitigate safety risks introduced by
the changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.