* 2122640
* SaTC: CORE: Small: How False Beliefs Form and How to Correct Them
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Lisa Fazio, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 506,478.00

Modern technologies allow false information to spread faster and further than
ever before. There is currently an urgent need to understand the real-world
effects of misinformation on people’s beliefs and how to best correct false
beliefs. Through a series of laboratory and naturalistic experiments, the
project team is examining the effects of repetition on belief in real-world
settings and how to more effectively counter-act misinformation. This project
will inform real-world practices aimed at reducing the impact of misinformation.
Fact-checking practitioners are consulted to help guide the research, and
results will be discussed with them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of studies
examines how repetition affects belief in daily life. Findings will determine
whether the commonly observed effects of repetition on belief are generalizable
to real-world repetition or if they are an artifact of widespread use of
laboratory tasks and materials. The studies explore why repetition increases
belief more for some types of information than others. By examining these basic
psychological processes in the primary domain within which they affect daily
life – misinformation on social media – this work will have implications for
real-world practices aimed at reducing the impact of misinformation. Leveraging
core principles of cognitive psychology, another series of studies investigates
how to best correct false beliefs. Using predictions derived from existing
theories within memory, language, linguistics and communications, the project is
testing various design features hypothesized to improve the effectiveness of
misinformation debunking strategies. Findings will reveal the cognitive
mechanisms underlying successful misinformation debunking, and how fact-checkers
should best present their findings. Overall, the results will inform and
constrain current theories of how beliefs form and can be
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.