* 2122652
* Institutional Transformation through Large-Scale Implementation of Departmental Action Teams
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Miguel Gonzalez-Meler, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,624,177.00

This project aims to establish an institution-wide imperative to improve
classroom climate, instructional quality, and degree pathways in all Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics departments at the University of
Illinois-Chicago, a broad-access Hispanic-Serving Institution. Many
institutional transformation efforts do not yield broad impact on an entire
institution due to their focus on a single course or small cadre of teaching
faculty. To accomplish institutional transformation at a large, decentralized
university, the project will implement departmental action teams that involve
over 100 faculty across the university who will investigate the barriers to
student success in their classrooms with close attention to institutional data.
Departmental action teams will develop and implement individual action plans to
address identified barriers through curricular, instructional, and policy
reforms. The work of these teams will be complemented by a campus-level
initiative that disseminates high-quality faculty professional development with
a concerted focus on helping faculty implement evidence-based inclusive teaching
practices. Supported by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-
Serving Institutions (HSI Program), this project will transform the university
to achieve an inclusive and highly productive campus environment for both
students and faculty that reflects an institutional culture where students see
faculty as advocates for their success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
institutional transformation that lies at the heart of this project will present
an opportunity to study both the efficacy of interventions proposed by the
departmental action teams and the resulting institutional change processes. The
project will contribute to theories of change in organizations in ways that have
not been systematically studied in the context of a large, public, minority-
serving research-extensive university. Project researchers will study the
evolution of the change effort to identify barriers to change and strategies for
overcoming those barriers as each department improves its capacity to deliver
engaging and inclusive pedagogies by conducting a systematic analysis of the
work of each team and the evolution of the teaching culture at UIC in response
to project programming. Using surveys, observational protocols, and interviews,
project researchers will produce an evidentiary basis for institutional
transformation following a teleological theory of change. This will include
demonstrating the unique and common change processes across multiple academic
departments units at the same university and how those processes are facilitated
or hindered at other institutional levels. Finally, the dissemination plan calls
for the production of an online roadmap to provide guidelines for launching
data-driven change efforts that are attentive to local contexts. The HSI Program
aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.