* 2122115
* Integrating the fossil record with computer simulation to reconstruct posture and locomotor evolution in the ancestors of mammals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephanie E Pierce, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 544,317.00

A distinguishing feature of modern mammals is how they stand and move: they hold
their limbs straight underneath their body, and this ‘erect’ mode of locomotion
has profoundly influenced their evolutionary success and ecological diversity.
The fossil record shows that the early ancestors of mammals (~300 million years
ago) looked and moved more like reptiles, using a ‘sprawled’ posture with the
limbs held out to the side of the body. An enduring question in evolutionary
biology is how and when the transition from sprawled to erect posture occurred
during the rise of mammals. This project will use the exceptional fossil record
of mammal ancestors – rivalling that of dinosaurs – and data from modern species
to answer this fundamental question. Cutting-edge biomechanical methods,
originally developed for aerospace and medical research, will be applied to
develop sophisticated computer simulations of locomotion in extinct species,
virtually bringing them back to life and deepening our understanding of a
quintessentially mammalian characteristic. The results of this project will
provide the foundation for a strong program of outreach that targets increasing
diversity in the sciences, and combats misperceptions about paleontologists.
Summer workshops, hosted in local communities, will use both physical and
virtual interactive displays to encourage those from underrepresented groups to
see paleontology, biomechanics, and computer simulation as accessible career
fields, stimulating the next generation of scientists. Paid summer internship
programs involving local high school students will also be incorporated,
providing interns first-hand experience in research, museum collections
management and public communication activities. Students will also act as near-
peer role models in helping to deliver workshops in surrounding communities.
Research outcomes will be disseminated to the scientific community through
conference presentations, open-access publications, and online webinars
dedicated to showcasing interdisciplinary research in paleontology and
biomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern mammals display remarkable locomotor
diversity, which has been facilitated by profound transformation in anatomy and
function that occurred in their extinct ancestors, the non-mammalian synapsids.
Fundamental to this was a shift in stance and gait, from a reptilian ‘sprawl’ to
the ‘erect’ mode used by living terrestrial mammals. Despite its pivotal
importance in mammal evolution, how and when the sprawling-to-erect transition
occurred remains poorly understood. Furthermore, it is unclear what anatomical
and mechanical factors facilitated or constrained this transition. This project
will address these issues by synthesizing the exemplary fossil record of non-
mammalian synapsids with cutting-edge analytical and simulation approaches in
biomechanics to unravel the history of locomotor transformation on the line to
mammals. The project will: 1) tackle locomotor function at multiple scales, from
structural transformation in individual bones through to whole-organism
functional integration and performance; 2) produce rigorous and quantitative
assessments of limb function, performance, and versatility; 3) develop dynamic
simulations of three-dimensional gait cycles in a range of extinct species; and
4) recreate the sequence of events and adaptive drivers that culminated in
modern mammalian locomotion. By leveraging exceptional fossil material, detailed
anatomical data from modern species and sophisticated computational
biomechanical methods, the project will produce the first broad-scale, physics-
based assessments of posture and locomotor performance in numerous key taxa
spanning the sprawling-to-erect transition. The methods used and insights gained
will provide a powerful, new perspective on how anatomical and mechanical
factors can shape macroevolutionary change in a lineage and give rise to new
major clades of animals, paving the way forward for rigorous investigation of
other major evolutionary transitions in vertebrate
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.