* 2122130
* EAGER: SAI: Developing Effective and Culturally Appropriate Alaskan Housing: Performance metrics for future builds based on an interdisciplinary ethnography of past projects
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Stacey Fritz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI EAGER award supports an
interdisciplinary team of anthropologists, educators, builders, and engineers
investigating the successes and failures of past housing projects in remote
Alaskan communities. They are working with local research assistants to combine
building diagnostics, local insights, socio-economic data, and culturally
specific housing design. The team is working towards the creation of a
repository of designs and findings that is available on an open-source platform.
The data produced from this study will inform and strengthen future Alaskan
infrastructure investments, and the research methods will lay the groundwork for
similar research investigations in dozens of communities. The project broadens
participation in engineering through collaborative research activities,
makerspace activities, and community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
housing security crisis in rural Alaska, exacerbated by climate change and
highlighted by the recent pandemic, places immense burdens on resource-strapped
communities. While large-scale investments to address these problems may be on
the horizon, there is a clear need for cutting-edge research and socially rich
data on rural Alaskan housing to guide future projects and avoid mistakes of the
past. This research project tackles this knowledge deficit with an experimental
collaboration of experts and community members from inside and outside Alaska
who are developing integrated techniques and ethnographically informed
understandings of the infrastructural impacts that recent cold-climate
demonstration homes have on the lived experiences of Alaskans. The research team
is investigating the successes and failures of cold-climate demonstration homes
in two distinct eco-regions (inland Brooks Range and coastal Yukon-Kuskokwim
Delta). They are integrating ethnographic data with building diagnostics using
human factors and engineering methods to assess the performance of construction
practices. Data will be shared and co-analyzed during online participatory
design workshops involving experts and community stakeholders who are invested
in rural Alaska housing security issues. The community approach will reveal
experiential knowledge of housing affordances, burdens, and expenses, and will
result in a collection of post-design data related to housing security in rural
Alaska. Data is also being used to develop performance metrics and guidance for
future building projects in formats that meet the needs of communities or
agencies. Taken together, these materials are providing content for an eventual
design repository. Finally, the integrative methodology developed in this
project lays the foundation for longer term research examining additional post-
design sites. This project’s focus on the effects of the built environment on
communities and the generalizability of the methods from the case studies will
be replicable not just in other regions of Alaska, but in other appropriate
regions of the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.