* 2122067
* PREM: Collaborative Research and Education in Energy Materials (CREEM)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Frank Wise, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 840,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;North Carolina Agricultural and
Technical State University is a large public HBCU and leads the nation in
numbers of undergraduate, masters, and doctoral engineering degrees awarded to
African Americans. The University is also the leading producer of African
American female engineers at the baccalaureate level. The aim of the NSF
Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between NCAT and the
Cornell Center of Materials Research (CCMR), an NSF Materials Research Science
and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Cornell University is to broaden the
participation of underrepresented minority (URM) students and faculty members in
renewable energy research and to create opportunities for graduate studies in
materials research at NCAT and Cornell. Providing clean and renewable energy is
among the most critical challenges of the 21st century. Overcoming the energy
challenge requires new conversion technologies that can meet the growing global
energy demand. This PREM includes innovative concepts to increase the
participation of URM students in materials research such as reciprocal exchange
of students and faculty members, development of new courses in the field of
energy, creation of research opportunities for K-16 students/teachers, and
keeping the public informed about the advances in materials research and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NCAT-CCMR PREM seed team has formulated a
research plan to develop low-dimensional (LD) titanium oxynitride (TiNO)-based
materials capable of supporting energy conversion reactions. The project will
also develop a fundamental understanding of materials’ physical and chemical
properties across different length scales. The attraction of TiNO over more
widely studied transition metal oxides is rooted in the polarizability,
electronegativity, and anion charge of nitrogen versus that of oxygen, which
induces an enormous change in the physical and chemical properties of the
resulting compounds. The LD material research begins with a baseline thin-film
synthesis, advancing to the more complicated synthesis of zero-and one-
dimensional structures of titanium oxynitrides. Controlled modification in the
electronic structure of the titanium oxynitride realized by changing the oxygen
content as well as by manipulating its geometry and size will allow the
production of materials with tunable conductivity and energy gap. The proposed
research will establish the effectiveness of thin film-based methods for the
synthesis of TiNO materials in epitaxial 2D, 1D, and 0D geometries. The
convenience of making TiNO multilayers by merely changing the oxygen pressure
during the growth, with each layer differing in the oxygen content and
consequently bandgap, may prove to be a gateway capability in the fabrication of
TiNO thin-film devices free from any organic layers for visible-light-harvesting
applications. Dissemination of both research and education findings of the PREM
seed project will involve open-access and traditional journals, conferences and
a strong social media presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.