* 2122807
* A Partnership to Implement the Inclusive Computer Science Model of Professional Development and a Digital Platform for PK-6 Computer Science Teaching for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Amy Hutchison, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 999,985.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). With an increased focus on computer science education
at all grade levels, many instructional leaders are working diligently to
determine how to align and integrate computer science standards and content into
existing curricula. However, many school districts have not yet systematically
prepared teachers to use these curricula or design their own. Further, computer
science curricula are often not designed with the needs of students with
disabilities in mind and do not address the particular challenges that students
with disabilities may face in learning computer science. Thus, through a
Research-Practitioner Partnership with Fairfax County Public Schools, this
project will prepare teachers to both implement and design inclusive computer
science curricula for all students, including those with high-incidence
disabilities. To do so, the investigators will use the Inclusive Computer
Science (ICS) Model of professional development (PD) and a universally-designed
tool, created by the researchers, called the Digital Effective Platform for
Inclusive Computational Thinking and Computer Science (DEPICT-CS). For the
purpose of this project, students with high-incidence disabilities include
students with learning disabilities, emotional-behavioral disorders, mild
intellectual disabilities, high-functioning autism, or attention-deficit
hyperactivity disorders. The following question will guide the work: What
conditions are necessary for the ICS Model of PD to be effectively implemented
on a district-wide scale to increase and sustain computer science instruction
and interest for all students, particularly those with high-incidence
disabilities in PK-6 inclusive classrooms? This work will be conducted with
approximately 275 teachers who instruct about 6,000 students across
approximately 60 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' professional
development model and digital tool, DEPICT-CS, are informed by research on self-
regulated learning strategies, teaching self-efficacy, and universal design for
learning (UDL). Theoretically and conceptually, the proposed research will
contribute to pedagogical strategies and approaches for making computer science
accessible and understandable for students with high-incidence disabilities.
Through this three-year mixed-methods study we aim to improve teachers’ self-
efficacy and skill related to developing and implementing computer science
instruction that is effectively scaffolded for students with high-incidence
disabilities. Further, the investigators aim to prepare teachers to use their
digital learning platform with embedded self-regulated learning strategies and
UDL support (known as DEPICT-CS) and determine how it best addresses the diverse
learning needs, computational thinking, and coding skills of students with and
without disabilities in inclusive classrooms. The investigators will also
explore how participation in computer science under these conditions enhances
elementary grade students’ interest in computer science, especially those with
disabilities. Finally, this project will contribute to the sustained integration
of CS for students with disabilities by determining what conditions are
necessary to effectively implement the ICS Model of professional development on
any scale. The project will collect data via student, teacher and administrator
interviews, field notes from observations, teacher and student assessment &amp;
survey results, teacher lesson plans, video data, and student work samples
across three phases of research. Data will be analyzed after each phase of
research and quantitative analysis will be informed by qualitative results. Data
from each phase will also inform understanding of any adjustments that need to
be made for subsequent phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
through the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.