* 2122155
* CNS Core: Small: Principled Methodologies and Systems Support for Automated Cost-Effective Service Blending in the Emerging Public Cloud
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* George Kesidis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A growing number of individuals and organizations rely on public cloud providers
for their information technology (IT) needs. Many of these cloud users are
budget-constrained and, therefore, interested in ways to reduce their cloud
bills while still meeting their applications' performance needs. Cloud providers
offer myriad service types (spanning infrastructure-, platform-, and software-
as-a-service and diversity within each of these) and blending these can offer
significant cost savings to users over prevalent techniques that tend to be
limited to a small number of service types. However, getting such blending right
is non-trivial and may itself pose significant effort and cost. This project
aims to help users overcome such hurdles by significantly automating the process
of cost-effectively blending and sizing cloud services. In particular, this
automation will be realized via a cloud cost optimizing compiler called CoCo. A
framework for application code annotation will allow users to convey blending-
related hints based on their domain expertise. CoCo will require fundamentally
novel optimization techniques and heuristics to transform user code into its
cloud-ready form which will be cost-effective while meeting performance
requirements. Finally, a runtime system for continual adaptation to dynamic
workload changes will also be developed. All of these ideas will be prototyped
on state of the art public cloud platforms and open-sourced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to significantly simplify
the task of migrating user applications to the public cloud with attendant cost
savings. Perhaps more importantly, the transformed code is expected to incur
lower recurring cloud bills owing to careful blending and sizing of cloud
service types that adapts to dynamic conditions. These innovations are likely to
be especially useful to small/medium-sized users for whom cloud migration can
pose significant technical and cost hurdles. The educational and outreach
components of the project will create awareness of such cost savings offered by
service blending and, in combination with our open-source prototypes, will help
spur further innovations on related themes within the cloud computing research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.