* 2122117
* EAGER: SAI: A Study of Mitigation Decisions for America's Coastal Residential Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Debra Javeline, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 291,775.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines the perspectives and
decisions of homeowners who reside in coastal communities that are subject to
extreme weather events, such as hurricanes. Residents have opportunities to
strengthen their homes against the risk of hurricanes, and the decisions to make
these investments depend in part on their assessments of the risks and possible
consequences. To make informed decisions, homeowners need to know not only the
risks of extreme weather, but also how different types of homes and building
materials are impacted by extreme weather. In order to assess the cognitive
basis for these decisions, the researchers aim to assess perspectives and
experiences via a diverse, representative survey of homeowners in a coastal
region that includes residents who have been directly impacted by hurricanes.
This study supports the development of sustainable residential infrastructure in
regions that are subject to extreme weather. The study also provides
opportunities for the training of graduate students in the methods of scientific
data collection and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By drawing on
interdisciplinary methods and data archives, this project develops a new
methodological framework that identifies features of homes in the study region,
the damage they sustained in a hurricane, and the inferred characteristics of
residential households. Equipped with these data, which allow for robust
sampling methods, the researchers aim to administer a standardized survey with
modules suitable for testing site-specific and event-specific hypotheses
regarding homeowner decision processes following a major hurricane. These
sampling and survey data enable researchers to efficiently deploy this
methodology following major hurricanes across different coastal communities. The
responses of survey participants allow the researchers to examine multiple
research questions. For instance, do homeowners perceive the risk of
catastrophic loss, or have building codes unintentionally fostered a false sense
of security? How do experiences of direct losses versus indirect impacts
influence risk perceptions and voluntary uptake of enhanced construction
standards among homeowners? How do household economic and social dynamics
influence the decision to reduce hurricane risks through enhanced construction
standards? The answers to these questions can help local stakeholders to craft
policies that incentivize homeowners to strengthen residential infrastructure in
areas that are subject to natural disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.