* 2122903
* HSI Implementation &amp; Evaluation Project: Alverno College STEM Community Impact Program (SCIP)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Angela Frey, Alverno College
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 499,983.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to increase retention and
graduation of STEM majors through focused community engagement activities to
enhance STEM identity. As a women’s college serving primarily first-generation,
low-income students, more than half women of color, Alverno College will use
this project to broaden participation of underrepresented minorities and women
in STEM, who lag in STEM degree attainment and STEM workforce participation.
Increasing racial/ethnic and gender diversity in STEM is a recognized strategy
to expand the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes
evidence that women and underserved students in STEM are motivated by directly
experiencing the ways that STEM benefits their communities. The project will
directly engage 400 students enrolled in STEM courses, including approximately
125 STEM majors, in activities that connect supportive communities to STEM
curricular and co-curricular experiences. The project engages all STEM majors in
introductory and capstone community-service activities. It extends peer
mentoring to all STEM majors and raises the profile of community engagement. The
project engages our external community in a cooperative relationship,
recognizing the intersection between STEM and students’ social/community
identities. The project will leverage the importance of family support to
students of color and women in college success, choice of major and career. A
professional mentorship network between current STEM students and alumni will
capitalize on evidence that professional Latinx/ Hispanic role models influence
STEM success. Ongoing faculty development in culturally responsive teaching and
a formalized administrative support structure will expand project impact across
the college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Alverno’s project will advance knowledge by
investigating the impact of a community engagement program on STEM identity,
improving retention and graduation into STEM careers. The program will measure
the association between level of engagement in project activities and college
retention, and will analyze participant reflections to understand STEM identity
development. This work will identify which aspects of the program had the
greatest impact on decisions to enter and remain in STEM and to pursue STEM-
related careers. It is anticipated that 100% of STEM majors will participate in
community engagement activities and that graduates will develop realistic
expectations of STEM which is critical in meeting community needs. Alverno’s
project will provide a scalable, replicable model for other HSIs to adapt. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation
in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.