* 2122350
* The power of storytelling: creating videos to broaden participation in science, enhance STEM education, and facilitate exchange of scientific information.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sarah Goodwin, Science Communication Lab, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,809,717.00

This grant explores how communicating science through a variety of video
production techniques can be used to educate students, inform the scientific
community, and engage the general public about the process and discoveries of
current scientific research. Digital technological advancements and the wake of
the global pandemic have created new opportunities for formal and informal
learning through asynchronous viewing of videos. Understanding how various
audiences respond to a spectrum of production styles and approaches will provide
new strategies for improving science literacy through video, including among
groups traditionally underserved by science communication and education.
Furthermore, this project will assess how training early career scientists,
particularly those from underrepresented groups, can elevate the science
communication skill set of the next generation of STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use both remote and in-
person video recordings to combine interview footage, on-scene recording, and
science talks with animation, music, and other post-production elements to tell
the stories of science using the full palate of video production techniques. The
resulting products include: videos and curricular resources for undergraduate
biology students developed in collaboration with educators, short films for
broader audiences, and science communication training for early career
researchers from diverse backgrounds. The video products and trainings will be
matched with evaluations, including validated surveys, focus groups, and novel
assessment tools developed by the research team. Evaluating engagement and
learning across diverse audiences will help identify fundamental principles of
effective communication through science videos. This proposal was funded with
support from the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.