* 2122890
* Collaborative Research: Modeling organismal responses to changing ecological regimes via investigation of stress, growth and reproduction in the longest-lived mammal
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Charles Buck, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 632,366.00

This project uses new techniques to analyze historical museum specimens of whale
baleen (long vertical strips of keratin that grow slowly from a whale's upper
jaw) to investigate how environmental change affects long-lived animals.
Environmental change can have dramatic effects on wildlife, but these effects
often unfold slowly across many years, challenging scientists' ability to gather
data across sufficient stretches of time. It has recently been discovered that
baleen contains hormones that are deposited as the baleen grows, such that one
piece of baleen contains a detailed record of individual whalesâ€™ reproductive
history, stress and general health across decades. Baleen also contains carbon
and nitrogen signatures that enable reconstruction of the whale's diet as well
as its migration history. This project will use these new techniques to analyze
museum baleen collected from the 1800s to the 1980s from bowhead whales (Balaena
mysticetus), which can live &gt;200 years, to investigate long-term, multi-year
impacts of environmental change on stress, growth and reproduction in a long-
lived mammal. Statistical modeling will put results into a broader context,
illuminating how whales, and by extension other long-lived mammals, respond to
environmental change over time. The project will engage ~40 undergraduates in
Smithsonian-based research, train a postdoc and PhD student, result in numerous
public talks at participating museums, involve Native Alaskan communities whose
ancestors originally collected the specimens, and distribute results at
scientific conferences and in peer-reviewed publications, thus contributing to
broader societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Environmental change causes
physiological impacts that can last years in long-lived species, yet there is a
dearth of methods for quantifying such impacts and their population effects
across the necessary decadal timescales. This project employs recently developed
analytic techniques for whale baleen to address this data gap, testing the
hypothesis that sudden changes in marine conditions cause subsequent multi-year
impacts on stress, growth and reproduction of individuals, and that this
information can be used to model population-level responses to current and
predicted environmental change. The project utilizes archived museum specimens
of baleen from bowhead whales (Balaena mysticetus), selected due to their slow-
growing baleen, exceptionally long lifespan (&gt;200 years), large range, and
well-documented environmental shifts in their North Pacific winter and Arctic
Ocean summer habitats. Fifty-six specimens of baleen collected from 1859-1989
will be sampled at 2-cm intervals for stable isotopes and 4-cm intervals for
adrenal, thyroid and reproductive hormones, enabling reconstruction of
individual histories across decades with approximately monthly resolution.
Specific objectives include: (1) Determine lifetime endocrine history of
juveniles before and after a well-documented 1977 North Pacific ecological
regime shift, using a panel of four hormones to assess stress physiology; (2)
Assess potential impacts of such stress on juvenile growth rate; (3) Expand a
long-term dataset on historic patterns of stress and reproduction in adults in
eras characterized by varying anthropogenic and environmental impacts; (4) Use
the resulting data to model linkages between ecological change, individual
physiology, and potential population impacts, using the Population Consequences
of Disturbance framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.