* 2122944
* PFI-RP: Development of a powdery mildew control product for grapes
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Mary Wildermuth, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 09/30/2024
* USD 691,997.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to reduce agricultural losses due to
powdery mildew infection of grapes. The wine and grape industry is a multi-
billion dollar US industry which is heavily impacted by powdery mildew disease.
Powdery mildew disease in grapes can dramatically reduce grape yield and product
quality. Every grape-bearing acre is treated with pesticides throughout the
growing season, with powdery mildew control accounting for 89% of California
grape pesticide costs. Because of increasing powdery mildews resistance to
current pesticides and increasing powdery mildew disease pressure due to climate
change, new methods to control powdery mildew in grapes are required. The team
has developed a technology for powdery mildew control in grapes. The technology
takes advantage of a naturally occurring process called RNA interference (RNAi)
in which small RNAs, specific to a target, can prevent the target protein from
being made. RNAi products are biodegradable and highly specific with minimal
off-targets making them attractive as more environmentally benign alternatives
than current treatments. The powdery mildew control product in development has a
novel mode of action with the added benefit of multiple effective targets,
compatibility with commercial spraying practices, and enhanced safety compared
to current pesticides. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the
pressing and widespread problem of powdery mildew disease in agriculture,
focused on grapes. The research team brings together a multidisciplinary group
to develop a prototype RNAi powdery mildew control product with performance
features required by end-users in the field. This product development includes
target and delivery optimization and assessment of end-user minimal viable
product features in the greenhouse and field. The project may result in
intellectual property, a refined commercialization plan, and strengthened and
new partnerships between academia and industry. Training in entrepreneurship of
women and minorities is an important component of this project, which is led by
women and will include women and minority Agriculture Innovation Undergraduate
Interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.