* 2122499
* Promoting Computational Thinking Through Middle School Music Technology
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jason Freeman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 08/31/2024
* USD 648,891.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As computational thinking (CT)
and computer science (CS) are becoming increasingly critical in technology jobs
and across the entire workforce, the deployment of K-12 courses that address
these issues continues to lag. Additionally, diverse student populations
continue to face barriers in accessing such courses. To counter this trend, the
Georgia Institute of Technology, in collaboration with Gwinnett County Public
Schools, will develop curricula and professional development to increase the
capacity for computer science education in middle schools. This project will
leverage music technology classes as vectors through which to promote and
develop computational thinking. As an essential part of many studentsâ€™
identities, culture, and self-expression, music presents a unique opportunity to
engage students in computing during this critical time of identity and interest
formation, to include students historically underrepresented in the field. At a
time when initiatives and legislation in Georgia have set ambitious goals for
the expansion of computing education in middle schools, this approach will also
enable schools or districts in Georgia (or nationally) to scale computing
education capacity via existing music teachers. The project team will design a
middle school curriculum that simultaneously addresses learning standards in
both computing and music technology and professional development designed for
middle school music teachers with no prior experience in computing or music
technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the following
research questions: 1) How can computing education be effectively integrated
into music technology courses to increase access and interest across diverse
middle school student populations?; and 2) How does the introduction of
computational thinking within a middle school music technology class impact the
acquisition of computing content knowledge, the formation of interest in
computing, attitudes towards computing, and the intent to persist in computing
across different student populations? The project will add fundamental knowledge
regarding (a) effective approaches for developing middle-school courses that
address both computing and music technology learning objectives; (b) best
practices for professional development for music teachers to gain the content
and pedagogical content knowledge they need to deliver such courses; and (c) the
degree to which such a course increases student interest, attitudes, and
intention to persist in computing for students with different backgrounds and
demographics. The researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) will provide
information to the field on the successes and challenges of engaging in this
work and a program that is evidence-based through rigorous efficacy research.
This project is supported by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.