* 2122421
* PFI-RP: A Development of zero-power optical sensor platform for the detection of toxic gases
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Torsten Hegmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop and refine the technology
for an advanced sensor platform in the form of wearable or remote, zero-power
sensors that save the lives of and avoid harm to firefighters, military
personnel, and members of hazardous materials management (HAZMAT) teams.
Exposure to harmful chemicals in the air that firefighters and other first
responders breathe is a concern. The focus of the proposed activities is to
advance technology development of optical text, image and dose × time sensors
that detect toxic gases and vapors in the environment as well as monitor inhaled
or exhaled vapors in disease treatment or disease progression. In addition to
chlorine, phosgene, hydrazine, and aliphatic amines, the intrinsic capabilities
of this sensor platform are expanded to metallic mercury, hydrogen cyanide, and
oxides of nitrogen, all posing significant health risks and imminent danger to
the professionals in the target markets. Furthermore, extended in-depth business
and entrepreneurial training in collaboration with industrial partners will
support market entry, strengthen commercialization efforts, create jobs, and
facilitate an increasing economic footprint for toxic gas sensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on toxic gas and vapor sensors. This
project describes the development of a chemical sensor platform technology that
uses precisely engineered chemical functionalization of and chemical reactions
at patterned nanoparticle surfaces controlling the alignment of nematic liquid
crystals. Combined with the implementation of gas permeable, size-selective
polymer gaskets, the proposed technology advances to a sensor platform for the
simultaneous quantitative and qualitative detection of multiple toxic gases and
vapors at parts per million and parts per trillion levels. In cooperation with
industry partners, this technology development includes analytical testing of
sensitivity and selectivity of as-prepared sensor prototypes as well as analysis
of pain points, limitations of existing technologies, market potential, and key
approaches to market introduction. Key technological hurdles further the
development of a minimum viable sensor product that shortens of the response
time and enhances the sensitivity and selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.