* 2122400
* CIF: Small: Service Rates of Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Emina Soljanin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Distributed storage platforms support major systems that operate under high
uncertainty but have strict, low-latency requirements. Such systems include
health (remote surgery), finance (electronic trading), commerce (online
shopping), cloud gaming, self-driving cars, and augmented reality. In most of
these emerging applications, users’ instantaneous and expected numbers and their
data interests extensively fluctuate. Therefore, traditional storage solutions,
designed and provisioned to satisfy specific expected demands, are inadequate.
This project first postulates a new metric that should be an essential
consideration in designing efficient distributed storage that must provide low
latency for time-sensitive applications and remain stable under high
uncertainty. It then offers optimal storage solutions. Besides that, it advances
fundamentals of coding theory, optimization on graphs, and real and finite
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redundancy increases the robustness of storage
systems. Comparatively, erasure coding can efficiently service changing dynamics
and requirements in data access. It is therefore essential to determine which
data-access rates a redundant storage scheme can support. These rates make up
its service-rate region. This project has two primary objectives: 1) For a given
(implemented) redundancy scheme, it asks what its service-rate region is. 2) For
a given (desired) service-rate region, it asks which redundancy scheme has the
service-rate region that includes the desired one under some optimal cost or
some required properties. In connection with the first question, the project is
characterizing the service-rate regions of well-known classes of codes, as well
as of those in use in storage systems to provide other desirable features. In
connection with the second question, the project is designing codes to support
desired service rates in resource-constrained
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.