* 2122189
* Medium RPP, High School Strand: Collaborative Research: AccesCSforAll: Making High School Computer Science Accessible
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Richard Ladner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,076.00

The University of Washington and the University of Nevada Las Vegas will
collaborate on AccessCSforAll with the goal of including more K-12 students with
disabilities in computing classes. The CS for All initiative must address the
approximately nine million K-12 students who are identified as having a
disability under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) or
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. These students should have access to
quality computer science education, but there are often significant barriers to
their participation. Some of these barriers include inaccessible tools and
curriculum. Building on the team's previous work with developing an accessible
version of AP Computer Science Principles (CSP) and leading the professional
development for teachers who specialize in students with disabilities,
AccessCSforAll will develop new tools and curricula that can be adopted by a
variety of development and curriculum providers. In addition, AccessCSforAll
will extend its researcher practitioner partnership (RPP) to include CS
curriculum providers, in-service and pre-service providers, and organizations
that support K-12 CS teachers. This partnership will lead to the adoption of
more accessible tools and curricula in the teaching of computer science
nationally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes partnerships with
developers of accessible tools and curricula for K-12 students and will work as
a national resource for CS teachers to help them better include students with
disabilities in their classes. It will create and deploy an age appropriate
accessible blocks-based programming environment for the web called Quorum
Blocks. Quorum Blocks will allow students to code accessibly in blocks mode or
text mode. Curriculum providers and teachers can embed it into any curriculum of
their own design. The primary goal of the project is thus to scale up past
efforts to make computer science classes equitable and welcoming to all students
in the United States. This expansion will work towards reaching the
approximately 16% of high school students who have a disability. AccessCSforAll
represents one of the first comprehensive steps to provide that scaling up to
include these students in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.