* 2122092
* EAGER: SAI: Understanding and Bridging the Smart Technology Infrastructure Divide in Rural America
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Ruopu Li, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 278,812.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of computer and information
technology to support public and private services in many cities is nearly
absent in rural communities. This divide may further widen as so-called “smart”
technologies continue to mature. Developing smart rural communities requires
advanced and networked technological infrastructure, digital applications, and
social supporting infrastructure. For rural communities to be smart, social
infrastructure should be integral to the core functioning of technological
infrastructure. This project advances our understanding, and strengthening, of
the interplay of technological and social infrastructures in rural America. This
project helps synergize and prioritize federal, state, and entrepreneurial
investment, and develop policies to advance smart rural development. The project
allows healthcare providers, educators, technology developers, and policy makers
to better serve rural citizens for healthcare and education during and after the
COVID-19 pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing gaps in information and
communication technologies and social infrastructures, without intervention,
theoretically evolve into a new form of social inequality — a smart divide.
However, it is unclear what gaps exist in technological and social
infrastructures in rural areas, what social infrastructure may be critical to
support smart rural development, and how technological and social
infrastructures can co-develop and co-balance to increase rural “smartness”. The
goal of this project is to fully understand and characterize social-technical
ontology, contexts, and implications of low availability and access to smart
technologies and to develop strategies for strengthening information and
communication technologies and social infrastructures in rural communities. The
focus of this project is on the infrastructural and social support of telehealth
and remote education using testbeds in two rural towns in southern Illinois with
highly diverse populations and social inequalities. The project develops a
theoretical social-technical foundation to understand the availability of and
accessibility to telehealth and online education, and characterizes the gaps and
interplay of information and communications technology and social
infrastructures using interviews and mail surveys. It also seeks to identify and
manage technological adoption niches for innovative solutions to increase rural
accessibility to telehealth and online education. The approaches, based on
interdisciplinary research efforts and community engagement, are meant to
enhance rural communities’ smart development. The outcomes are expected to not
only facilitate innovative strategies to bridge the smart divide but also
theoretically inform the next-generation design of rural smart and connected
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.