* 2122673
* CS for Oregon:  Antiracist Teacher Leadership for Statewide Transformation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* James Hook, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,968.00

Portland State University, the University of Oregon, and Oregon State
University-Cascades propose to continue the CS for Oregon project to develop and
promote antiracist Computer Science Education in Oregon. The project builds on
the success of the 2017 CS for Oregon award (Award# 1738883), which provided
Exploring Computer Science professional development to over 67 teachers to bring
Exploring Computer Science classes to 49 schools in 36 school districts. The
project team’s past efforts also initiated the training of three new ECS
facilitators in the state. The new project continues to expand the learning
community of equity focused CS educators by continuing to offer the ECS
Professional Development to teachers across the state, particularly in districts
that serve historically excluded from commuter science. It will also cultivate a
group of Computer Science Social Justice Teacher Leaders who are building upon
what they learned in ECS and applying it to developing antiracist curriculum and
equitable programs of study in their schools and districts, and learning how to
engage in district, regional, and statewide efforts to advance equity in
Computer Science and STEM education. In addition, the project team will work
with the Oregon Department of Education to develop a computer science equitable
learning outcomes report card to help statewide leadership celebrate the
successes of schools that are broadening participation in the CS courses and
programs of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team brings together
expertise in Computer Science Research, Education Research, and High School
teaching practice. In addition to faculty from the three universities, the team
includes a Computer Science Pathway teacher from McMinnville High School, who is
an ECS teacher and an ECS facilitator. Two team members have extensive
experience working with Oregon’s regional STEM hubs, which are charged with
improving outcomes and reducing equity gaps in STEM education. The team works
closely with key personnel from the Oregon Department of Education (ODE) as the
Oregon team participating in the Expanding Computing Education Pathways (ECEP)
BPC Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.