* 2122661
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the relationship between rural environments characterized by industrial agriculture and the timing of puberty
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Mecca Burris, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 16,495.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Puberty is known to be affected by nutritional status
and psychosocial stress, but less is known about the role of rural environments
and, specifically, exposure to chemicals that disrupt the endocrine system. This
biocultural doctoral dissertation project explores how living in rural
communities shaped by industrial agriculture impacts human growth and
development. The investigators compare pubertal timing in agricultural
communities that have high levels of endocrine-disrupting chemical exposure to
non-agricultural communities in low-exposure areas. The research contributes new
knowledge about variation in patterns of human reproduction, growth, and
development. The findings can inform public health policy and public science
outreach. The project includes the design of K-12 curricula on human biology and
pesticides. Individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM include
participants in the study as well as researchers who will be trained and
mentored by the investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Endocrine-disrupting
chemicals like pesticides can disrupt hormones that regulate puberty, are
energetically costly to detoxify, and increase chronic disease risk in
adulthood. The investigators use silicone wristbands and gas chromatography to
measure exposure to endocrine-disrupting pesticides through skin or respiration
among girls in communities with high and low pesticide use. The researchers
evaluate and control for the roles of nutritional status, assessed using
anthropometry and 24-hour dietary recalls, and psychosocial stress, measured
using a variety of validated instruments. Participant observation is used to
understand the local sociocultural context and differences in lived experiences
between girls in the agricultural and non-agricultural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.