* 2122898
* HSI Pilot Project: Promoting Virtual Experiential Learning to Support Part-time and Nontraditional Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Erron Gonzalez, Palo Alto College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to create virtual experiential learning opportunities that are
specifically aimed at part-time and non-traditional students attending Palo Alto
College, an Hispanic-serving community college in the greater San Antonio area.
The project team is focusing on these particular students for several reasons.
Internships and undergraduate research opportunities are essential for students
to gain real-world experience and improve their competitiveness upon entering
the STEM workforce, while also increasing academic engagement. However, non-
traditional and part time students often encounter significant challenges when
they are pursuing such co-curricular experiences. Moreover, career services that
assist in preparing students for internships are typically optimized to support
traditional full-time students. This project will pilot the provision of quality
career preparation using a virtual format to improve both access to, and the
quality of, professional experiences for part-time and non-traditional student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key driver of the project's investigators is
to capitalize on employersâ€™ recent adoption of remote working and virtual
internships as part of their response to COVID-19. Remote and virtual
internships may be more accessible to part-time and non-traditional students
that may be unable to make a daily commute to an office building or lab. The
project will create partnerships with STEM employers and 4-year universities to
establish virtual internships and undergraduate research opportunities. New
Career Support Services for part-time and non-traditional students will include
streaming presentations from industry speakers, access to peer mentors/embedded
tutors, and online platforms for building essential professional skills. Three
goals guide the project. First is to increase participation in internships and
undergraduate research. Second is to improve access to professional networking
and high-engagement activities. Third is to increase the availability of virtual
mentoring/tutoring for part-time and non-traditional students. Research from
this project will generate new knowledge about effective approaches that will
increase retention and graduation rates of undergraduate students pursuing
degrees in STEM fields at HSIs and two-year colleges. Project outcomes will be
disseminated regionally, statewide, and nationally, through conferences,
submissions to peer-reviewed journals, and sharing with existing NSF-HSI
projects. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.