* 2122199
* PREM: Cal. State Univ. Long Beach and Ohio State University Partnership for Education and Research in Hard and Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* P. Chris Hammel, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;California State University Long Beach (CSULB) is a
comprehensive urban university with various terminal Master’s (MS) degrees in
STEM fields and a Hispanic-serving institution with underrepresented minority
students making up 47% of the student body. CSULB Physics &amp; Astronomy is one
of the largest terminal MS granting departments nationally with about 50 active
MS students. The PREM partnership with Ohio State University (OSU) and OSU’s NSF
MRSEC: Center for Emergent Materials will impact the matriculation of these
students into PhD programs at OSU, and elsewhere, by providing structured and
sustained research, mentoring, and professional development opportunities. PREM
students will participate in frontier areas of materials research in magnetic,
thin film, and biomaterials—the research will form the basis for MS and
undergraduate thesis work. During the award period, up to 4 CSULB students (MS
and undergraduate) will be directly funded per year, with another 6-10 students
at CSULB and OSU impacted indirectly through increased research and
collaborative activity. Building on the track records of post-baccalaureate
Bridge programs at both partner institutions, there are several pathways for
CSULB PREM students to transition to graduate studies depending on their
preparation and research interests. The CSULB-OSU PREM will also provide
professional development opportunities for CSULB and OSU junior faculty and
postdoctoral researchers, including networking, seminar/colloquia and
instructional development. The results of the PREM partnership will be
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and conferences, and to the general
public via a dedicated web portal and outreach presentations to local K-12
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Collaborative and
interdisciplinary PREM research is organized around three Partnership Research
Groups (PRGs) focused on cooperative phenomena in solid state,
organic/inorganic, and biomaterials, with strong interdisciplinary cross-over
between materials science, chemistry, mathematics, physics and aspects of
biophysics in living systems. PRG-1 is focused on topological aspects of
magnetism where the interplay between magnetism and geometric properties of
materials supports non-trivial magnetic phases. PRG-2 is focused on tuning
magnetic properties in thin film magnetic heterostructures, comprising 2D
materials with intrinsic magnetic order and molecular magnets. PRG-3 is focused
on aspects of topology in biomaterials with a focus on translating mathematical
theories on, e.g., knot formation to molecular structures realized utilizing DNA
origami techniques. OSU’s NSF MRSEC: Center for Emergent Materials will enhance
PRG activities by directly supporting student exchange and subsidizing access to
state-of-the-art OSU research facilities. PREM efforts will be guided by
formative evaluation providing feedback on project implementation, and summative
evaluation to assess the overall impact of the project on PREM participants. In
this way the PREM will provide, and continuously strengthen, a scaffold for
students from diverse backgrounds to contribute to STEM fields of national
priority and take leadership roles in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.