* 2122967
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: Building Capacity in Data Science through Biodiversity, Conservation, and General Education
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Oliver, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,040,507.00

Solving environmental challenges relies heavily on computer science and
statistical skills applied to large data sets. However, these knowledge, skills,
and abilities are not evenly distributed across colleges, students, or faculty
in the United States. This project works to transform environmental education by
creating, implementing, and evaluating a data science training program for
undergraduate students who are interested in conservation and management in
urban and wild areas. Faculty from both the University of Arizona and Lewis and
Clark College co-teach a foundational data science course that utilizes public
data and addresses pressing environmental concerns relevant to student interests
and identities. Exceptional students subsequently participate in a more focused
cooperative course as data science interns for conservation stakeholders.
Professional development workshops in data science education for instructional
faculty, some of whom work in institutions serving primarily low-income students
and students of color, prepare faculty to implement data science educational
modules at their respective institutions. These critical resources and pathways
allow broad communities to harness the data revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workforce demand for data analysts and data scientists exceeds the current
capacity for higher education to produce this skilled workforce. The overall
goal of this project is development of scalable, portable data science education
that can be readily incorporated into existing programs concentrating on STEM
(science, technology, engineering, and mathematics), with a focus on ecology,
biodiversity, and conservation. The project achieves this goal by creating
multiple curricular data science on-ramps for a broad range of students early in
their undergraduate training, through general education courses and foundational
major courses using inclusive and expansive pedagogy techniques more common in
liberal arts education. The expected outcomes from these activities are (1)
development of reusable data science modules and courses that can be deployed
into existing undergraduate general education and major curricula, (2) the
ability for a broad range of conservation interested students to access real-
world data science training they are passionate about at an early stage of their
education, and (3) training and support mechanisms for undergraduate educators
who wish to add data science to their curricula. The products of this proposed
multi-institutional Data Science Corps program are designed to be generally
extensible to other higher educational institutions and majors through open data
and open science, providing capacity to rapidly deploy data science
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.