* 2122157
* Demand-driven science: the role of knowledge partnerships in improving the public value of conservation science
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Leah Gerber, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 07/31/2024
* USD 403,097.00

In recent years, conservation scientists have recognized the importance of
partnerships with stakeholders outside of academe to innovate and realize
measurable conservation outcomes. Knowledge partnerships represent a form of
knowledge production that can advance public value outcomes. While public value
is an important concept in science and innovation policy research and
management, there is little research on how partnerships between institutions
can deliver public value, especially in conservation science. We propose to
study how and when the supply of and demand for conservation knowledge are
linked. In particular, we seek to examine, 1) What are the mechanisms by which
the demand for knowledge informs the production and supply of science in
conservation?; 2) What role do knowledge partnerships play in linking the supply
of and demand for conservation knowledge, and what effect does the design of
these partnerships have on their ability to deliver public value?; and 3) How
can research projects and knowledge partnerships be designed to avoid public
value failures, improve the connection between the production and use of
science, and thus increase the public value of scientific activity? Our proposed
research builds on our recent work on determinants of the supply of public value
outcomes in conservation science. By analyzing experiences of knowledge users
and the possibilities inherent in knowledge partnerships as a distinct
organizational form, we aim to understand the organizational configurations best
suited for facilitating demand-driven conservation science. Our proposed
research will provide a model and tools for achieving and enhancing public value
outcomes in conservation science and related fields. The identification of
indicators of public value success is directly translatable and adaptable to
governmental, private and non-profit organizations. This research will provide
guidelines on how to design knowledge partnerships for public value and will
offer new models of institutional partnerships to address complex social and
ecological aspects of biodiversity conservation, thus enabling solutions that
are relevant, culturally sensitive, economically viable and
nimble.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed research will provide an evidence-
based approach for maximizing public value outcomes in the production of
conservation science. Realizing public value outcomes in research entails
structuring scientific research collaborations to meet established knowledge
needs rather than producing knowledge for which there is no demand. Public value
outcomes in research also entails structuring institutions to provide incentives
for public value outcomes; and structuring and scaling research programs and
collaborations for impact based upon approaches documented to have the best
potential for success. In examining the communication and translation processes
that link knowledge users to knowledge producers, we will focus specifically on
those who often have not been included in these processes. With public value
creation as the guiding principle, we will uncover lessons for the design of
research projects, partnerships and knowledge-producing organizations. We will
produce a framework for understanding how the processes of scientific research
can be transformed to be more inclusive of stakeholders and improve the
connection between the production and use of science, thus increasing the public
value of scientific activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.