* 2122232
* SCISIPBIO: Constructing Heterogeneous Scholarly Graphs to Examine Social Capital During Mentored K Awardees Transition to Research Independence: Explicating a Matthew Mechanism
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Xiaozhong Liu, HEALTHPARTNERS Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 498,088.00

Despite efforts at diversification, an outsized proportion of prestigious NIH
R01 awards go to a circumscribed group of individuals and institutions. How and
why does this happen? The Matthew Effect, whereby success begets success, is
thought to be responsible: applicants with even small advantage at the outset
may have their advantage multiplied many times over following initial success.
Evidence is consistent with the presence of a Matthew Effect in R01 funding, yet
no study has illuminated the specific nature of the advantage, nor detailed the
means by which advantage is multiplied and accumulated. This project will answer
questions about which aspects of social capital and scholarly achievement
contribute most to R01 success, and whether gender or timing of scholarly events
contribute, by examining the individual career trajectories of awardees of NIH
Mentored Career Development Awards (MK awards). Project results will help design
effective interventions to avert unintended funding disparities, while
maintaining a rigorous peer review system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be
the first empirical test of a Matthew Mechanism during transition to research
independence and the first to leverage heterogeneous scholarly graphs (HSGs).
The first aim is to capture complex relationships between each MK awardee, their
scholarly achievement and social capital, and R01 success during their quest for
research independence. Existing bibliographic and NIH award data will be
combined in the construction of a “global” HSG database - relating all MK
awardees to their associated scholarly objects. The result will be a
comprehensive graph structured database in which nodes represent all MK awardees
and their associated scholarly objects (e.g., published articles, journals,
primary academic institution, coauthors, coauthor’s scholarly objects), and
edges represent relationships of various types (e.g., author of, cited by,
affiliation, research topics). Relationship context will be captured for all
scholarly objects in the HSG through global, local, and hyper-local graphical
feature extraction to comprehensively characterize MK awardees’ scholarly
profiles. Second, survival models will be developed to predict R01 success for
MK awardees from latent and observed variables of scholarly achievement and
social capital, and global, local, and hyper-local HSG features. The study
offers a novel approach to studying complex social processes that marries social
capital theory with heterogeneous scholarly graphs and network science methods.
This study will go beyond previous studies in providing a multidimensional
characterization of scholarly social capital (beyond coauthorship and citation)
and will examine differential social capital accumulation as a mediator in MK to
R01 transition. Empirically-grounded predictive models will be designed to probe
existing theory and yield insights on social capital’s role in R01 funding
success. This study will yield actionable knowledge to inform strategies aimed
at improving efficiency awards and increasing the diversity of the awardee
pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.