* 2122078
* FIU-2D Crystal Consortium Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Cheng-Yu Lai, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,058,003.00

The FIU-2DCC Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between
Florida International University (FIU) and the 2D Crystal Consortium Materials
Innovation Platform (2DCC MIP) at The Pennsylvania State University (Penn
State), will function as a science and education platform between FIU and 2DCC
with the ultimate goal of increasing diversity in materials research. FIU, a
premier Minority Serving Institution located in Miami, Florida, enrolls 58,928
students combining all levels of academic instruction, with 79% of students from
an underrepresented minority in STEM (more than 65% Hispanic or Latino and more
than 12% Black or African American), and 57% women, is uniquely positioned to
promote broadening participation in STEM fields. FIU-2DCC PREM will integrate
transformative research with innovative education and outreach to promote
recruitment and implement participation of over 30 Ph.D., over 20 M.S. and over
40 B.S. students, the majority being from underrepresented minority groups in
STEM and women. The students will be immersed in a research-intensive
environment to gain expertise in quantum materials research and will be provided
with a 360-degree toolkit for success, comprising dual mentoring by faculty at
both institutions, access to experts and instrumentation, and career skills
training. Through the student exchange initiative, the team will grow in
diversity and drive innovative problem-solving. Through the PREM, FIU will
become a materials research hub in South Florida while enriching the
collaborative partnership with 2DCC MIP at Penn State. The research outcomes
will be disseminated through peer-reviewed articles and conference
presentations, and the student success will be publicized through the dedicated
project website and outreach events. The project will lead to a sustainable
pipeline of minority students and women joining the materials science
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research of FIU-2DCC PREM
will enable uncovering of phenomena related to quantum emission in two-
dimensional (2D) materials, the realization of 2D-materials based quantum
converters, and understanding of the mechanical properties governing the
interfaces between the 2D quantum materials and the substrates supporting their
integration into future quantum devices. The PREM team will focus on fundamental
and practical aspects of new 2D materials and processes that can be
transformative in the emerging field of Quantum Science and provide advanced
characterization methods to ensure long-term 2D resilience in future quantum
devices. Organized in three major thrusts, the collaborative research will focus
on: (1) novel 2D quantum dots for developing Single Photon Emitters useful in
Quantum Science; (2) layered crystals with optical nonlinearity for developing
2D quantum frequency converters; and (3) mechanical behavior of stand-alone and
substrate-deposited 2D materials, assisted by predictive models to support 2D
materials discovery and atomic-level characterization of 2D materials. The user
facilities at 2DCC MIP of Penn State, along with unique equipment at FIU, will
accelerate quantum materials discovery and enable cross-disciplinary student
training. Ultimately, this research partnership will increase the understanding
of fundamental mechanisms governing room-temperature 2D quantum emission,
generate layered crystals for miniaturized quantum converters, and pave the way
for scalable quantum computing, with potential to deliver significant societal
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.