* 2122309
* MCA: New approaches to the detection of niche differentiation patterns in ecological communities
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Annette Ostling, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 404,316.00

Biodiversity in nature can be puzzlingly high in the light of competition
between species, which arguably should eventually result in a single winner.
Coexistence mechanisms shape the dynamics of communities and ecosystems, and the
services ecosystems provide. Uncovering what these mechanisms are has been a
long-standing challenge in ecology, as the experiments that would reveal them
are logistically challenging to carry out in real-world ecological communities.
For example, trees can live longer than researchers, so carrying out experiments
long enough to assess competition among tree species is quite a challenge.
Hence, one approach ecologists use to reveal what “niche differences” are
allowing competing species to coexist is to look at patterns of which types of
species are present together. This project will significantly advance this
approach in ecology, by tailoring new modern machine learning tools from data
science to detect the patterns in ecological communities. Additionally, this
study would result in the training of graduate students, including individuals
from under-represented groups, and outreach to female middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project
will develop tools that account for recent advances in the theoretical
understanding of what patterns niche differentiation will create in communities.
Historically, ecologists expected coexisting species to be distinctive in traits
indicative of their strategies. Recently ecologists have realized that when more
species are present than can coexist stably through their niche differences,
additional coexistence is enhanced by similarity. Hence, they have come to
expect clusters of species in trait space, especially in highly diverse
communities. Modern data science offers a host of potential approaches for
detecting species clusters. However, it does not provide a one-size-fits-all
approach. This project will tailor cluster detection tools to the detection of
clustering indicative of niche differences, and ground-truth them on simulated
communities. It will involve training in data science of an ecologist who has
contributed to recent theoretical developments in our understanding of
competitive communities, and support initial collaborative work by the ecologist
with a data scientist to build new pattern detection tools for
ecologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.