* 2122717
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Creating Connected College Research Communities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Franziska Sandmeier, Colorado State University-Pueblo
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 699,442.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP will integrate curricular, co-
curricular, and programmatic activities to enhance the quality of undergraduate
STEM education and to increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates
of students pursuing associates or baccalaureate degrees in STEM for large
numbers of Hispanic, rural, and low-income students at Colorado State
University-Pueblo (CSU Pueblo) and regional community colleges. The curricular
activities consisting of redesigned coursework with a focus towards increased
access and inclusion will be integrated to the co-curricular activities
involving undergraduate research opportunities, mentorship, and student
services, and the programmatic activities consisting of professional
development, scientific literacy, community engagement, and bridges to BS
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes undergraduate research as a
pathway and catalyst for increasing the number of Hispanic/Latino, rural, and
underrepresented student groups receiving degrees in STEM fields. Through a
unique triad of partnerships with regional community colleges, high schools, and
CSU Pueblo which serve underrepresented minorities in Southern Colorado and
bordering states, this project will build around shared research projects to
recruit, retain, and graduate students into STEM fields. It integrates a
streamlined and innovative pathway towards STEM fields of study, particularly in
biology and wildlife and resource management, via exciting experiential learning
experiences within a culturally sensitive learning environment. This
undergraduate research will create communities that provide intensive
mentorship, student support, and a sense of belonging to transition students
from secondary education to undergraduate education in STEM degree-granting
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve : 1) Recruitment –
by harnessing students’ inherent interest in biological and wildlife regional
issues/problems and recruit them into research projects; 2) Retention - through
intense mentorship and community research teams which provide students wrap
around services and support; 3) Mentoring &amp; Coaching – via faculty research
mentors and coaches at CSU Pueblo and Central Community College fostering
students’ presentations, publications, and attendance at national meetings; and
4) Partnerships - with high schools to provide concurrent enrollment offerings
and with Central Community College to provide seamless transfer articulation
agreements and develop programs to prepare students for immediate and smooth
transition into the BS degree programs in Biology and/or Wildlife and Natural
Resources at CSU Pueblo. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.