* 2122034
* EAGER: SAI: Illuminated Devices: A Sociotechnical Approach to Empowering Digital Citizens and Strengthening Digital Infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Leo Ureel, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,617.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newcomers to our nation’s digital
infrastructure need training and support. Community institutions like libraries
can help digital learners, but COVID showed that progress is difficult without
face-to-face access. This project aims to make the benefits of a community-based
digital tutoring program available anywhere by having learners connect to tutors
simply and directly through their digital devices, with available support at
every step. The project will develop a lightweight digital portal that offers
the learner a direct connection to human tutors that will be accessible even to
those with no previous experience with digital devices. These services will
improve digital knowledge and skills, increase confidence, and decrease digital
anxiety.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The designed system will involve a lightweight,
cross-platform digital portal that offers the learner a connection to human
tutors. To allow personalized help, the portal will allow the tutor to see what
the person is trying to do on the device. Learners will also be able to use the
camera to show a tutor what they are looking at in order to receive help with
other digital devices. For the learner, all features will be designed in a way
that reduces distraction and keeps the focus on learning. While the project will
concentrate on direct tutor-learner interaction via the portal, the system will
be designed to allow future AI-based automated supplements to human tutoring.
The project team unites researchers in human factors psychology, sociology, and
computer science with library and workforce development professionals who are on
the front lines of helping citizens navigate information infrastructure.
Development of the Illuminated system will follow a Design-Based Research
approach, where test results from real users inform and drive new changes to the
system. Testing will include feedback from a number of underserved digital
groups: rural residents, older adults, and Native American
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.