* 2122151
* Howard-Columbia Partnership for Research and Education in Superatomic and 2D Materials (PRES2M)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kim Lewis, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Howard University is a private,
federally chartered historically Black University in Washington, DC with more
than 10,000 students pursuing 120 areas of study; and currently classified as a
High Research Activity Institution. Materials science and engineering (MSE)
related research at Howard focuses primarily on quantum materials, optics and
photonics and quantum technologies (computing, communications, and sensing). The
research focus of this Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
(PREM) with Columbia University Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center (MRSEC) is on interaction of light with matter for new optical and
electrical devices for the quantum information age. This collaboration, namely
Partnership for Research and Education in Superatomic and 2D Materials (PRES2M),
is to establish the framework needed to pursue new PREM-Pathway for faculty and
students at Howard University in MSE. In particular, the following is
envisioned: an integrated research and education program that increases
participation of undergraduate students in MSE-related research mentored by
graduate student trainees and teacher-scholar postdoctoral associates in MSE to
strengthen existing diversity efforts at Columbia and provide a foundation for
the MSE degree-granting program at Howard. The PREM pathway focuses on
matriculation of undergraduate students in MSE-related disciplines to allow for
significant growth in the total number of Black students that attain degrees.
Furthermore, the collaboration between Howard and Columbia University MRSEC is
aimed at impacting current diversity efforts at Columbia with respect to K-12
outreach, undergraduate student research opportunities, and graduate student
admissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal of PRES2M is a better
understanding of the quantum phenomena within functional materials, such as, 2D
materials and superatomic molecules through a cyclic interplay between materials
synthesis, processing, analysis, and theory. The research is aimed at altering
material properties to manipulate light-matter interaction including new
experimental techniques for thermal tunablity of ultra-strong coupling in 2D
nanopatterned films and plasmon-enhanced conductance. This research builds on
the materials science of 2D and superatomic materials and applications of
quantum phenomena, currently pursued at the Columbia University MRSEC. The goal
of this partnership is to fundamentally impact condensed matter physics and
materials science and engineering. Through the MRSEC, Howard faculty and
students have access to infrastructure, new materials, and expertise in quantum
materials research. With the PRES2M, there is an expanded collaboration between
both institutions and additional opportunities for co-mentorship of students and
postdoctoral associates, joint projects and publications as well as
student/faculty exchanges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.