* 2122274
* Infrastructure Capacity for Biological Research: Biological Collections: Growth and Development of the Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* David Somers, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 400,001.00

The Arabidopsis Biological Resource Center (ABRC) at The Ohio State University
stores, amplifies and distributes seeds, plasmid clones and other resources of
Arabidopsis thaliana, a key model system for plant research. These have included
DNA libraries, cDNA collections, various mutant seed populations and germ plasm
from across the globe that represent the immense natural genetic variation of
the species. For 30 years, the ABRC has had a global role in facilitating
essential and fundamental plant research. ABRC resources have promoted discovery
in photosynthesis and all aspects of plant development that have been
instrumental in promoting agricultural improvement, green technology, and basic
medical research. This award will support the ABRC's core mission to
inexpensively distribute DNA and seed resources to the plant biology community,
and to support plant science education by providing seeds and teaching resources
free-of-charge to K-12 teachers. This project continues the mission of the ABRC
to enlarge and expand the collection though acquisition of new resources while
at the same time increasing the efficiency of the operation. Substantial
outreach and education efforts will allow the ABRC to be a leader in local,
national and international outreach and education, providing opportunities to
inspire and train future generations of plant
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will maintain and increase the
current high levels of resource distribution, particularly for seed stocks. The
ABRC will maintain quality control testing with an emphasis on stocks that are
ordered frequently, stocks in long term storage, and those known to require
special storage conditions. The Center will expand the collection through the
collaborative inclusion of additional Brassicaceae species, especially Thlaspi
arvense (pennycress), a species that has potential oil crop and biodiesel
applications. Outreach activities, both local and national, will include the
development and solicitation of new education resources and that expands the
reach of our successful outreach programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.