* 2122709
* Expanding Girl Power by Design: Continuing to Broaden Participation in Information and Communication Technology Pathways
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Deidre Sessoms, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 996,427.00

Incorporating students’ cultural identities into computer science teaching has
been shown to support student learning and address issues of power, race, and
gender. This is particularly impactful for students who are underrepresented in
computing to imagine, or reimagine, their futures. This partnership between
California State University, Sacramento (Sacramento State) and the Elk Grove
Unified School District (EGUSD) will build upon their prior work in creating a
high school computing pathway that is more inclusive for African American and
Latina girls. The team will continue preparing teachers in the school district
through a culturally responsive professional development program and aims to
increase the number of girls enrolled in the district’s Information and
Communication Technology courses by 51%. This project will also create a
holistic network of support for the girls participating in the program that
engages families, community organizations, and industry partners. The project’s
focus on engaging and retaining high school girls in computing courses will
identify best practices that can help inform school districts on how to remove
systemic and historical barriers in computing pathways and
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-practitioner partnership between
California State University, Sacramento (Sacramento State) and the Elk Grove
Unified School District (EGUSD) will build upon prior work to improve the
representation of high school girls in computer science (CS). The project team
aims to increase the number of girls enrolled in Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) Pathways in EGUSD by 51%, from 155 to 300, by focusing on
recruiting and retaining African Americans and Latina girls into the ICT
pathway. The project team will also scale a culturally responsive computing PD
program for teachers and engage parents and guardians as a holistic support
network. The team’s use of linguistically responsive recruitment will deepen
knowledge about how to broaden the participation of high school girls in CS by
building on their cultural and linguistic assets. The project will also generate
substantial evidence on the impact of teachers' professional development and the
use of culturally responsive computing in increasing equity in CS for
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.