* 2122825
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Unified Community of Support - Building Capacity for STEM Transfer Students’ Success (UCS-STSS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Sandra Metoyer, Galveston College
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,918,002.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 3 ITP project aims to (1) build intra-
institutional capacity through a Unified Community of Support; (2) create
systemic and sustained institutional change that supports STEM Mentors in
implementing evidence-based practices that enhance equitable student outcomes in
STEM; (3) build inter-institutional capacity across a Regional Transfer Alliance
to enhance STEM student transfer rates and transfer success; and (4) implement a
theory-guided iterative research design focused on improving the understanding
of how actors and institutions in higher education work within a systemic
context to build capacity and on how to increase equitable participation and
success in STEM using an intersectionality framework. This work will advance new
knowledge of systems of domination and resistance in higher education within the
context of HSIs. It will explore how to disrupt social reproduction of
educational inequity. Broader impacts of the project will include improving the
participation and success of underrepresented minorities in STEM, increasing
authentic collaboration and partnerships among academia, and enhancing the
infrastructure and capacity for STEM education research and its application to
STEM education policy in higher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific aims
of the project are to address institution and system-wide structural change to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and improve STEM transfer success through
theory-guided research. This will be accomplished through an iterative research
design that is grounded in Lewin’s Theory of Change, an intersectionality
framework (Núňez 2014), a model of Unified Community of Support (Kezar &amp;
Holcombe 2017), and Shlossberg’s Transition Theory. Expected results will be
improved STEM advising, improved STEM teaching and mentoring, enhanced
opportunity for co-curricular activities, more equitable participation and
outcomes, improved student success, and long-term sustainable intra- and inter-
institutional structural change. Findings resulting from this project will be
disseminated in a variety of ways. The research findings will be shared through
conferences and submitted for publication to peer reviewed journals. Findings
from the action research, conducted by the STEM faculty, will be shared locally
through a public-invited poster session held annually and these faculty members
will be encouraged to submit their findings to a peer reviewed journal. Project
resources will be shared on the project website, including transfer plans and
policy documents such as the Honors Program structure. These resources will be
freely available to the public. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.
Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.