* 2122289
* MCA - Application of quantitative imaging methods to identify molecular components of multi-vesicular body fusion sites
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michelle Knowles, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 335,720.00

All cells communicate with one another by sending out packets of molecules that
relay information to other cells, both near and far. The regulation of how these
packets are sent is currently unknown but this mechanism of communication can
affect a wide range of biological processes, such as aging, immunity, neuronal
health, and cell migration. This project focuses on identifying how cells
control the secretion of these packets. The packets, called “exosomes”, are
formed by sorting molecules into membrane envelopes, and then sending many
exosomes to the cell surface to be released simultaneously. Many exosomes are
packed together in a multi-vesicular body (MVB), a larger membrane envelope,
that is transported to the cell surface and releases exosomes upon fusing with
the cell membrane. To make this happen, cells organize molecules on their
membranes to ensure that the necessary proteins are present at the right time.
When all the needed molecules are present, membranes fuse and the packets of
molecules are released from the donor cell into the extracellular space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the proteins that regulate the
exosome secretion process will be identified and mapped in time to determine
when and where essential proteins are needed. Recently designed fluorescent
probes allow for the direct visualization of membrane fusion between MVBs and
the plasma membrane using total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy. The
low pH of the MVB quenches an exosome enriched, pH-sensitive fluorescent protein
and the unquenching of these probes during fusion leads to a flash of
fluorescence that can be spatially and temporally localized. SNARE proteins,
well-established regulators of membrane fusion, will be screened for their role
in the MVB fusion process. SNARE proteins on the cell membrane are predicted to
cluster beneath MVBs to aid in both docking and fusion. Microscopy will be used
in conjunction with computational modeling approaches to identify the molecular
components necessary for SNARE cluster formation. Beyond the research
activities, this work will also lead to collaboration, training, and mentorship
for female faculty performing research in the biomolecular sciences at the
University of Denver.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.