* 2122665
* Promoting Successful Outcomes for Diverse Computer Science Students through Mentored Professional Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Melanie Flores, National-Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 488,600.00

This project will apply innovative approaches to professional mentoring and
early workplace experiences to increase the success of diverse undergraduates in
computer science programs. While the number of undergraduate computer science
(CS) programs have skyrocketed over the past decade, the rates at which Black
and Latinx students successfully complete CS degrees falls below the national
average. Research points to the well-known ‘digital divide’ as a factor, with
Latinx and Black youths less likely to have had computer science classes, or in
some cases even extensive exposure to computers. Students from these groups who
enter computer science programs report lower confidence in their abilities to
succeed, which is often magnified by a sense that they do not belong in the
field. This project addresses these issues by providing students with
purposefully structured contact with CS worksites and professionals. With
support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, National Louis University and industry partners will
design and offer opportunities for mentored experiences in professional
settings, with follow-up mentoring sessions to reinforce the experiences and
provide continued encouragement and support. These experiences will take place
in advance of senior internships, which can be students' first exposure to the
realities of CS professions, providing early students with important tools and
perspective to enrich their academic and professional experiences in the
workforce. Computer science industry partners will be provided with training in
culturally-responsive mentoring and will regularly meet to discuss their
mentoring experiences and refine strategies. This partnership model will develop
a cadre of STEM companies that have the commitment and capacity to support
diverse STEM undergraduates as interns and early professionals, providing a
model of rich university-to-workplace collaborations that can be replicated at a
breadth of institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the
hypothesis that increasing students' early exposure to culturally-responsive
professional experiences and increased participation in academic and external
communities will strengthen their academic agency and improve academic outcomes.
Academic agency is a student’s belief that they can be effective in their work
and have the knowledge of strategies and resources needed to succeed. A mixed
method research effort will study the development of academic agency as
participants progress through the project’s mentored industry experiences.
Training materials and other systems developed by the project team with industry
and community partners will be shared widely, supporting replication of the
project model at institutions nationwide. Over 300 undergraduates in computer
science and information systems will participate in mentored industry
experiences and an estimated 160 of those students will enter the workforce over
the course of the project. Project alumni will be invited to share their
perspectives and experiences at meetings with partners, which will support
efforts to continuously improve the project activities and promote diversity in
the STEM workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.