* 2122895
* RECONSTRUCTING PAST ECOLOGIES USING PEPTIDOMICS
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Keil, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,588.00

The project will try to understand what the ocean was like in the past by
looking at proteins in mud found at the bottom of the ocean. When marine
organisms die they sometimes sink to the bottom of the ocean and their carcasses
accumulate in the mud. This happens even for very small organisms, and some of
their proteins are left behind. Like the rings of a tree trunk, sediment at the
bottom of the ocean slowly accumulates and acts as a recording of the past. The
deeper you go into the sediment the older the proteins are. The study will
extract protein from sediment that goes back about 150,000 years. The proteins
will be sorted by the functions the proteins had when they were in the living
organism, and by the organisms that they came from. The study should discover
hundreds of ancient proteins. Those proteins will provide information about the
types of organisms living in the past at that spot and what they were doing.
Those data will make it possible to reconstruct the ecology of the past ocean.
The study will use sediments from the Pacific coast of Mexico where conditions
are good to preserve proteins, and where the community of microscopic organisms
living in the past is expected to be dramatically different from today. The
project will support a Mexican-American woman postdoc and a high school
internship program. In that program three high school students from groups
underrepresented in the earth sciences will be paired with undergraduate and
grad student mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past ocean environments are often
evaluated using specific organic proxies that are linked to important oceanic
processes such as primary production. A new tool for reconstructing the past
ecology of the water column (e.g. estimating community structure and
composition) is proposed. Peptides extracted from a well-characterized marine
sediment that extends back into the Last Glacial Maximum will be used to
reconstruct the past community ecology of the overlying water. Simultaneous
assessment of the diagenetic status of extracted peptides provides a built-in
measure of how much degradation has occurred, allowing for back-calculation of
primary production. The development of new peptide-based biomarkers will allow
for past oceanic conditions to be assessed in much greater ecological detail,
thus enabling better prediction of future change. Peptides will be extracted
from a well-characterized varved sediment core collected in the Eastern Tropical
North Pacific along the Baja peninsula. A novel de novo-directed peptidomic
approach based on computational analyses of resultant tandem mass spectra will
be used to identify peptides in subsamples of the core from the Holocene and the
LGM. These are believed to be among the first successful peptide extractions
from marine sediments. The peptides to be evaluated include highly conserved
peptides that are found only associated with photosynthesis but are universal
across kingdoms. Because these peptides are universal but unique to autotrophs,
they serve as a proxy for the total chloroplast (e.g. chlorophyll, primary
production) of a sample. Peptides that identify other community functions such
as nitrogen fixation and denitrification will also be sought. The overall
peptide composition records a slice in time of the overlying water. The core has
a well-constructed age model and has already been analyzed for biogenic silica
and pigments, thus providing other measures to compare against. Modern samples
of plankton and sinking particles collected at and near the ETNP core location
will also be assessed. The intent is to develop a quantitative understanding of
the paleo record that can be extracted from the peptides in the core and relate
it back to the processes in the overlying water that deliver the signal to the
sediment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.