* 2122120
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Accelerating Disability Inclusion in Workplaces through Technology
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2021,02/28/2022
* Nils Hakansson, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/28/2022
* USD 110,000.00

The labor market participation rate of persons with disabilities (PWD) is
significantly lower than persons without disabilities. There are more than one
billion PWDs in the world and constitute a source of talent for employment
towards the development and offering of products and services. The challenges
faced by this population in contributing equally in our society has implications
not only to our economies, but also human rights, equality, equity, and
diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop is innovative
in that it is forward-looking (pre-emptive as opposed to reactionary) in
creating a research agenda encompassing various emerging and expected
developments in technology in conjunction with human factors, and social and
behavioral sciences. In addition, by taking a comprehensive and universal design
view, it plans to consider all the major disabilities (vision, hearing,
cognitive and intellectual, physical and mobility, and combinations of these.
The workshop will focus on developing specific assistive technologies to be
designed to integrate PWD in future workforce and the associated education and
training initiatives that will be required. The project will be informed by
participants that span nonprofits serving PWD, employers of PWD, workforce
training institutions, national disability inclusion advocates individuals with
disabilities, researchers from academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:Societal broader impacts include: 1)
development of work tools and technologies (and associated tech transfer), that
increases the workforce participation and productivity of people with
disabilities and the general population; and 2) creation of a model for other
similar future efforts (beyond work) to address disability
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.