* 2122070
* Collaborative Research: Revealing the Role of Structural Modulations on the Electronic Properties of Hexagonal Chalcogenide Perovskite Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Rohan Mishra, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 239,999.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Chalcogenides that contain sulfur, selenium, and
tellurium are functional semiconductors with broad applications in information
storage and processing, and in energy conversion. A subset of these materials
with hexagonal symmetry demonstrate strong light-matter interactions with
potential applications in sensing and communication. This project employs an
integrated theoretical and experimental approach to establish axioms elucidating
the role of subtle changes in composition and structure in these materials on
electronic properties, and to achieve desired properties such as optical
anisotropy by controlling composition and structure. Graduate students are being
trained to use a mix of theory and experiments to address fundamental problems
in materials science and engineering. Education activities focus on preparing
graduate and undergraduate students for a workforce needed to realize advanced
energy and information technologies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The project seeks to unravel the role of non-stoichiometry and structural
modulations on the electronic structure of hexagonal chalcogenides perovskites,
and control their physical properties including optical anisotropy and
electronic transitions, by changing their composition and structure. The
research employs vapor-transport single crystal growth and pulsed laser
deposition to grow chalcogenide perovskites. A combination of x-ray, neutron,
and electron-based probes are used to characterize structure and composition at
multiple length scales. Physical properties are characterized using optical
spectroscopy and electrical transport studies. First-principles electronic
structure calculations are used to establish atomic origins of the
experimentally observed properties. Education aspects include training of
graduate and undergraduate students to use an integrated theoretical and
experimental approach to investigate and design materials. This project supports
the development of course modules on atomic-scale modeling and atom-by-atom
growth of functional materials, and the organization of symposia at national
meetings on functional semiconductors and chalcogenide
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.