* 2122417
* Preparing the Next Generation of Environmental Scientists through Research-based Coursework and Community Internships
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Elizabeth Dvorsky, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

There is a critical need for a more robust environmental workforce in Puerto
Rico that mirrors similar demands across the United States in multiple sectors,
including energy generation, food cultivation, and environmental protection.
Additionally, a larger cohort of well-prepared professionals could positively
impact the island’s future ability to respond to unexpected environmental
catastrophes including increased frequency and intensity of hurricanes,
flooding, coastal erosion, coral reef mortality, and reduced biodiversity. To
address this opportunity, this project - with support from the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program) - aims
to provide experiences that will engage undergraduate students in the study of
environmental science and lead to an expansion of this critical workforce. In
particular, the project targets students during their first two years as
undergraduates, which are known to be crucial in fostering positive student
perceptions towards the discipline and successful academic outcomes. Incoming
freshman will participate in a summer research project that will provide hands-
on experiences to build excitement and contribute to a more thorough
understanding of future careers. Throughout their course of study, students will
engage in four content-rich courses with substantial field work components and
will have opportunities to participate in community-facing internships. The
proposed courses and experiences will be embedded in the regular environmental
science undergraduate curriculum, thereby enriching the current degree
requirements while providing innovative academic strategies for students through
practical experiences created with the purpose of improving student
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has three main objectives.
First is to create annual El Verde Field Station (EVFS) Summer Research
experiences to attract 30 incoming freshmen. Second is to design an
Environmental Analysis Training curriculum to improve technical skills. And
third is to develop a paid internship program to bring environmental science
undergraduates and local employers together. A longitudinal, quasi-experimental
study will be employed to evaluate the hypothesis that the treatment sequence in
the program will contribute to improving environmental science student
retention, enhancing content knowledge, and expanding students’ technical
skills. Quantitative and qualitative approaches will provide evidence-based data
to determine if there is an individual and/or additive effect of the project
components on participant students’ attitudes and persistence in environmental
science undergraduate studies. Expected products include student-generated
environmental science research videos demonstrating techniques and documenting
their experiences in the program, conference presentations, journal
publications, and meetings and workshops at University of Puerto Rico-Rio
Piedras with high school teachers and counselors to share project outcomes.
Furthermore, curricula, educational resources, and research instruments will be
available for sharing with teachers and researchers. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.