* 2122783
* Implementing Guided Inquiry Learning and Peer-Led Tutoring in Online Algebra and General Biology Laboratory Courses to Increase Student Retention and Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sarah Wyatt, Indian River State College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,517.00

The post-COVID movement of first-year courses to virtual environments led to
increased underrepresented minority student enrollment but decreased student
engagement. In this project Indian River State College aims to improve student
engagement by piloting the use of high impact teaching practices, specifically
in an online environment. In particular, the project seeks to increase
enrollment, persistence, and successful completion of College Algebra and
General Biology lab, two gateway courses that are fundamental for further
progress in STEM disciplines. This project will modify techniques used in the
in-person environment to improve online student success. Peer learning
assistants will be placed in virtual courses to increase support for online
learners. Content will be taught using process-oriented guided inquiry learning,
a method shown to increase student engagement and improve processing skills in
face-to-face courses. Using these practices, the college expects to increase the
number of students retained through the next science and math classes and
improve the likelihood that they will complete a STEM
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how embedded peer
learning assistants and guided inquiry methods can be used in virtual modalities
to promote student engagement, persistence, and completion for students pursuing
their degrees at a community college. Two goals guide the work of the project's
investigators. First is to increase the percentage of students enrolled in
online College Algebra and General Biology lab courses with embedded peer tutors
and guided inquiry teaching techniques. Second is to increase the percentage of
Hispanic students persisting from first to second semester Mathematics and
Biology. The project will increase the number of minority students that pursue
STEM careers and the number of graduates from groups whose participation in STEM
is proportionately less than their representation within the general population.
The project’s results and pedagogical best practices will be shared through
publications, a website, and the college’s Open Education Resource depository.
The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.