* 2122850
* PFI-RP:  Clinical Decision Support Tool to Identify Patients Diagnosed with Heart Failure Who are at High Risk of 30-day Hospital Readmission
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Ralph Etienne-Cummings, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to reduce the burden of heart failure
across the healthcare system. Heart failure is the most common cause for
hospital admission and readmission in the US (&gt; one million patients
annually). Many heart failure readmissions are thought to be preventable. To
reduce readmissions, healthcare organizations are penalized for high rates of
30-day hospital readmission. Excess readmission penalties were ~$560 million
across all hospitals in the US in 2020, with ~2,500 hospitals incurring
penalties. Customer discovery interviews, conducted with numerous stakeholders
of healthcare organizations, suggested a strong interest in a Clinical Decision
Support tool to identify patients diagnosed with heart failure and who are at
high risk of 30-day hospital readmission. By accurately stratifying risk for
30-day hospital readmission, this software tool empowers clinicians involved in
discharge planning to make more informed decisions about the timing of hospital
discharge and the efficient use of post-discharge follow-up services, including
allocation of remote monitoring hardware. This solution can improve patient
outcomes while reducing costs associated with avoidable hospitalizations and the
corresponding penalties for hospitals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
focuses on the development and commercialization of a novel, machine learning-
based clinical decision support software tool to predict 30-day readmissions for
hospitalized patients diagnosed with heart failure. The proposed technology
includes higher frequency physiologic data in the predictive algorithm and the
software tool will be capable of processing this data in combination with
clinical variables with low latency (&lt;3 seconds) to quantify each patient’s
risk of 30-day hospital readmission at the point of care. This technology has
the potential to assist with the identification and management of high-risk
patients diagnosed with heart failure and improve the quality of care for this
vulnerable patient population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.