* 2122214
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Incorporating Research-Related Activities in Developmental Math to Increase A.S. STEM Graduates
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jackeline Webb, San Jacinto College District
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 995,417.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: IEP aims to increase the number of
Associate of Science degree STEM graduates. This will be achieved through
revising a developmental math course onto a problem-based learning theory, which
is supported by research to increase course success and student retention. The
project is led by San Jacinto College (SJC), a Hispanic Serving Institution two-
year community college located in the Houston metropolitan area where academic
attainment is low. STEM education is a priority and students of Hispanic or
Latino origin comprise 59% of all STEM majors. Houston’s energy, medical, and
aerospace industries rely on STEM graduates, and need a more qualified and
diverse STEM workforce. This project will pilot redesigned curriculum for a
development math course which has an in-class transition from a non-credit
bearing developmental introductory algebra course to a credit bearing college
algebra course. The intent is to retain STEM majors and influence their
progression in STEM pathways. Expected outcomes include improving pilot course
completion success rates for minority students; increase graduation rates of
STEM majors; increase percentage of students enrolling in a STEM pipeline
science course after pilot course completion; engaging more students in STEM
research; increase project impact through the Rice University Summer Institute
in Math that provides math faculty professional development in problem based
learning techniques and hosting a public website of project results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project hypothesizes that community colleges that
adopt curriculum built on the problem-based learning theory co-designed by a
four-year research university will improve student engagement, retention, and
academic success for underrepresented minority STEM students. The project has
three goals: (1) provide science-based learning strategies in developmental math
to improve student engagement and retention, (2) improve faculty awareness of
teaching and learning strategies in a unique co-teaching model, and (3) increase
student success rates to positively impact the students’ decision to persist
into science courses for STEM majors. Two core components are the (1) creation
of a Summer Institute in Mathematics (SIM) for SJC faculty, facilitated by Rice
University’s Tapia Center for Excellence and Equity and (2) implementing a new
SJC math curriculum, where student participants’ classroom involvement grows and
an increased focus on key math content needed for subsequent science coursework
is employed. SIM will focus on evidence-based theories via intensive pedagogy
sessions for SJC math faculty, provide dedicated time for curriculum
development, and offer research lab tours at Rice to observe math principles in
current research advancements, with the intent to implement innovative
curriculum early in the STEM pathway. A mixed-methods evaluation will be
facilitated to gauge the effectiveness of the intervention to assist program
administrators to identify the most advantageous aspects of this intervention
for SJC faculty and students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.