* 2122950
* FMitF: Track I: End-User Programming with Synthesis-Guided Interaction Models
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Rastislav Bodik, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 781,739.00

End users of software such as spreadsheets and other data-analysis tools often
want to solve problems that go beyond the features built into those tools. Such
users face a "programmability gap": to solve their problem, they need to write a
program, but they lack the multi-faceted expertise necessary to design an
algorithm and implement it in a particular programming language. This project is
about flattening the steep learning curve of programming by developing tools
that assist people in writing programs. The interaction between the tools and
users will revolve around programming by demonstration, where the user provides
examples of what the program should do when it sees a particular input and the
tool generalizes this demonstration into a working program. The project will
extend programming by demonstration into a bidirectional communication between
the user and the tool. First, the tool will explain the synthesized program to
the user, freeing the user from having to learn a new programming language.
Second, when the tool incorrectly generalizes the user's demonstration, the tool
will ask the user questions to produce a correct program. Finally, the tool will
help teachers author so-called microworlds of programming exercises for novice
users. The team brings together expertise in programming languages and human-
computer interaction to develop both the underlying synthesis techniques and
effective interfaces for people to use them, focusing on the domains of data
visualization and creative AI programming. By developing new end-user
interaction models and end-user programming tools, the project aims to increase
people's ability to solve problems and potentially broadening participation in
computing to include those who previously viewed programming as
inaccessible.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The work is framed around fundamental
challenges of enabling iterative exploration with code when the specification is
not known a priori. The proposed work targets these open challenges directly,
envisioning ways for synthesis to enable more flexible, iterative, and
exploratory workflows. To do this, this project will first develop a foundation
for interactive synthesis as an extension to solver-aided programming techniques
that have enabled automatic construction of verifiers and synthesizers. The
foundation will include a small set of primitive queries on top of which one can
implement common interactive tasks such as computing alternative explanations of
a synthesized program. Next, leveraging the recent results in synthesis of
language constructs, the researchers will develop methods for synthesis of
programming primitives that are explainable in a given domain, are sufficiently
powerful, and gradually teachable. These techniques will be evaluated in the
context of existing tools the team has developed to support data analysis and
creative programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.