* 2122142
* Partnership for Research and Education in Materials:Fueling Opportunities for Successful and TransformativE Retention of Chemistry Majors (PREM to FOSTER-Chem) in Graduate Programs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Maren Roman, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The overarching purpose of PREM to FOSTER-Chem alliance between
Florida A &amp; M University (FAMU) and Virginia Tech (VT) GlycoMIP is to
increase the number of underrepresented minority students (URM) from FAMU
Masters of Science (M.S.) in Chemistry program enrollment, retention, and
attainment of doctoral degrees in chemistry and related fields. The proposed
partnership with GlycoMIP will use novel polymeric materials as the foundation
for FAMU students to work jointly with junior and mid-career faculty at both
universities to build a new research platform to connect more strongly with
students. Linking PREM to FOSTER-Chem affiliates (faculty, students, and staff)
through research, teaching, and mentorship will create a pipeline to recruit and
matriculate more URM students into graduate programs in STEM. Ultimately, this
project will allow FAMU to grow toward leadership in polymer research and toward
a national standard to form programs for URM students to successfully transition
into PhD programs and obtain advanced degrees. The major impact of this PREM to
FOSTER-Chem initiative will be the production of three cohorts of graduate and
undergraduate URM students (~6 graduate and 6 undergraduate students) completing
a MS in chemistry at FAMU and enrolling in PhD programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PREM to
FOSTER-Chem research team from FAMU chemistry and GlycoMIP at Virginia Tech will
create hybrid semi-synthetic materials using phenolphthalin
(PPLn)/phenolphthalein (PPL) monomers and polymers to prepare grafts and blends
with glycans such as cellulose and dextran. The inclusion of these monomers in
poly(arylene ether sulfone) (PAES), as well as the polymer microstructures will
be varied to achieve distinct structural/functional features using glycans (GLY)
with versatile chemical, physical, and architectural properties for a wide range
of applications. The PREM to FOSTER-Chem will allow FAMU and GlycoMIP faculty to
merge expertise to accomplish the following research aims: 1) Prepare graft and
blended PAES and GLY polymers with enhanced properties; 2) Determine the effect
of graft content on phase morphology and physical properties; 3) Electrospin of
PAES-g-GLY materials and study conformational changes and nanostructure
formation; 4) Develop coarse-grained models for solvated and microphase
separated PAE-GLY systems; 5) Assemble layered PAES-g-GLY/photocatalyst
nanocomposite from electrospun heterojunction nanofibers. GlycoMIP will support
FAMU Department of Chemistry faculty by collaborating on research projects,
assisting with use of GlycoMIP/VT facilities, co-advising students in MS
program, and providing support for undergraduate students to carry out research
at VT. The graduate students budgeted in current work will be given the
opportunity to be part of GlycoMIP and spend time at collaborators' labs. The
planned research, incorporation of GlycoMIP, and formed partnerships will
enhance further understanding of semi-synthetic composite materials for various
applications such as water purification, fuel cells, or energy
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.