* 2122875
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Through Family-Centered Pedagogy
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jose Gutierrez, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,488,737.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE):
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 Institutional
Transformation Project (ITP) aims to evaluate and implement a novel Family-
Centered Theory of Change Model for enhancing Latinx Students’ success in
undergraduate STEM disciplines. Specifically, the project will dismantle deficit
thinking systems, policy, and practices that continue to marginalize Latinx
students from STEM fields. This project is interconnected with the University of
Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) as the organization and the Rio Grande Valley as
the community being served. UTRGV is one of the largest “enrolling” HSI and this
project will transform it to a truly Hispanic “Serving” Institution utilizing
the proposed Family-Centered Model for partnerships between higher education and
families from the community. This will create learning opportunities in
undergraduate STEM education, programming, infrastructure, and collaborations
with other HSIs, such as the South Texas College in the Rio Grande Valley.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By utilizing curricula, pedagogies, and learning
frameworks that are typically used in the Mexican American Studies courses, this
program will address diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) through the
multidimensional intersectional framework for multiple social identities,
domains of power, and historicity. Existing STEM courses in mathematics,
chemistry and physics that are required for the General Education core will be
revised to include a Family-Centered class project that is culturally relevant
and addresses DEI in STEM disciplines paving the way towards higher student
learning, persistence and degree attainment. The goal of this project is to
increase Latinx STEM students’ institutional integration and sense of belonging
to UTRGV and the Rio Grande Valley community by partnering with family leaders
and community organizers to create educational opportunities and environments
that capitalize on the students and families cultural wealth and assets.
Research questions include: 1) how and to what extent do partnership dynamics
between family and university leaders dismantle deficit thinking practices and
policies; and 2) how and to what extent do family-centered projects impact
students, families, and faculty. Data will be analyzed using a mixed methods
approach. Qualitative and quantitative methods will be used to triangulate
evidence found in the qualitative student, faculty, and community partners
interviews, reflections, and in audiotaped and videotaped observations. Results
of this study will be used as a basis for institutional transformation through
the implementation of new curricula, pedagogies, and faculty development and
evaluation processes. Findings will also be disseminated nationally through
presentations and publications. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.
Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.