* 2122269
* A Numerical Framework to Study and Design the Mechanical Response of Configurable Elastic Rod Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Sigrid Adriaenssens, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2024
* USD 385,708.00

This grant supports research to develop an efficient and easy-to-implement
numerical framework that allows for parametric studies of the mechanics of
elastic rod networks and promotes the design of novel elastic networks with
target geometries and mechanical properties. Due to their light weight and high
flexibility, networks consisting of thin elastic rods or strips can morph into
3D surface structures through customized design of their joints and rods. They
can find wide applications at different scales, ranging from metamaterials, soft
robots and deployable space antennas, to long-span deployable shelters.
Understanding and designing their mechanical behavior is challenging due to
their large deformations, multi stability, and intricate bifurcations. This
research project will develop a numerical framework that describes their static
equilibria and bifurcations and a design method that assembles network cells
into functional morphing systems for mechanical, civil, and biomedical
engineering as well as architectural applications, promoting the advancement of
science, national health, prosperity, and welfare. The project will also provide
research experiences for high school and undergraduate students through summer
programs and research training for one graduate student, and outreach to the
K-12 community through a science fair and exhibition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the research is to design materials and structures capable of
controlling their shapes and mechanical properties by tailoring the topology,
connections, and rod design of elastic networks. The research sub-tasks include:
(a) derivation of a general numerical framework for conducting parametric
studies of the mechanics of elastic rod networks, (b) development of a conjugate
point test that determines the stability of the equilibria obtained in (a), and
(c) construction of functional elastic networks from elastic polygonal cells
used as building blocks. This work relates to research topics in soft matter and
nonlinear mechanics, including the numerical modeling and design of deployable
lightweight architectural and space structures, flexible soft robotic arms, and
mechanical morphable metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.