* 2122681
* PFI-RP:  Mobile Technology to Improve Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) College and Career Awareness for Underserved High School Students
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Barbara Schneider, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 382,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project lies in its ability to expose underserved
students to postsecondary possibilities through mobile games and allows students
to envision themselves in educational and occupational spaces. Low-income,
minority, and first-generation (first-gen) students in the U.S. often have
inadequate academic preparation and an unrealistic understanding of the
education and career opportunities for their future lives. This lack of
knowledge can have severe long-term consequences for job opportunities, wages,
health and well-being in adulthood. While some educational technologies have
been used to assist minority and low income students with navigating their
college and career pathways, serious mobile gamification in this field is ripe
for development and systematic evaluation. This project is unique in that it
develops a mobile application that focuses exclusively on college and career
planning to further personalize a student’s goals, timelines, and resources.
Given the cost-effective nature of mobile app technology, this project has the
potential to quickly disseminate information with instant feedback not readily
available in formal classrooms, career counseling, or informal settings outside
of school while keeping expenses to a minimum, making it a valuable resource for
underserved students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop
a digital intervention for underserved low income and minority students that
creates unique learning opportunities where students can build knowledge and
skills related to education and career pathways as they play a series of mobile
games designed for that purpose. This innovative educational resource has shown
to facilitate synergistic, informational partnerships among schools, community
organizations, local businesses, and postsecondary institutions to share and
provide resources that advance students’ awareness and progress in STEM college
and career pathways. Further empirical evaluation of the game will contribute to
the growing body of research and practice to expand STEM career pathways for low
income and minority students and allow the research team to iterate the game
prototype. Data derived from this project will support the inclusion of
application-based technology and strategic planning for high school programs
that can enhance and improve participation in STEM while directly supporting
efforts of business plan development, customer discovery, and commercialization
services to bring the prototype to market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.