* 2122924
* Engaging Teachers and Neurodiverse Middle School Students in Tangible and Creative Computational Thinking Activities
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Xin Wei Sha, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 998,712.00

Students with disabilities, particularly those with autism, experience unequal
outcomes in STEM education and employment. Despite frequently reported strengths
and interests in STEM disciplines, individuals with autism often do not receive
the support—those related to communication, transitions, and flexibility—needed
to succeed. In working with teachers, parents, and employers, this project will
create pathways to position students with autism spectrum disorder for success
in school and also the larger community. Researchers from Arizona State
University and the Neurodiversity Educational Research Center (NERC) and
practitioners at Science Prep Academy (SPA) and Temple Grandin School will
collaborate on the development of learning activities and workshops that engage
middle-school aged children, community members, and employers in activities that
integrate music, technology, and computational thinking. For the employers and
community members, participation can lead to increased respect for neurodiverse
children and job applicants and changes in STEM field’s hiring practices and
workplace accommodations. Teachers engaged in the process of co-designing the
learning experience and additional teachers engaged in workshops will be able to
learn new approaches for supporting learning. Finally, this project aims to
build pathways of support and facilitation for neurodiverse individuals that
increase employment potential of students with autism in a more inclusive
economy, where neurodiversity is a baseline rather than an exception.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on embodied learning and cooperative
learning approaches that inform the team’s development of Telematic Embodied
Learning (TEL) activities: activities that engage participants in using movement
and their bodies to understand concepts, and can be conducted in hybrid or
remote teaching situations when students and teachers are in different
locations. The project’s iterative co-design process and practitioner model are
designed to provide data on the kinds of support and training teachers would
need to equip neurodiverse students with computer science concepts. The
project’s researchers will use a convergent mixed methods design to investigate
the experiences of approximately 25 middle-school-aged children, 24 teachers, 15
parents, and 10 future employers through a combination of surveys, observations,
interviews, and focus groups. The research aims to investigate how Telematic
Embodied Learning approaches enriched with computational media foster
computational thinking; how teachers who participate in the TEL workshops modify
and diversify their teaching practices; how TEL approaches can be adapted in
other schools; and how TEL approaches augment the learning of CT in computer
science with developing socio-emotional skills impact future employment for
neurodiverse children with autism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
through the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.