* 2122581
* PFI-RP: A high-performance, low-cost chip-scale platform for medical imaging
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnership (PFI-RP) project is to democratize optical coherence
tomography (OCT), an optical imaging technology that has enabled several medical
diagnosis applications. Conventional OCT systems are assembled from bulk optical
elements, making them bulky and costly, which severely hampers their adoption by
the broader medical communities. The project aims to develop a transformative
chip-scale platform. By leveraging standard silicon microfabrication
technologies – like those used for computer chip manufacturing – the new chip-
scale platform may provide more than an order of magnitude reduction in the OCT
system cost while improving imaging quality and diagnostic accuracy. The high-
performance, low-cost, miniaturized device will transform OCT from a high-end
diagnostic technique to an easily and broadly accessible screening tool. The
proposed OCT system, once realized, is anticipated to open fast-growing markets
including point-of-care diagnosis, at-home disease monitoring, medical
inspections in small clinics or community healthcare centers, affordable care
for economically disadvantaged groups, and medical services in developing
countries, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to
pioneer a chip-scale OCT engine to overcome the large size and high cost of
existing systems. The intellectual merits of the proposed solution are two-fold.
First, unlike conventional OCT systems which involve a beam scanner, an
interferometer, and a spectrometer, all assembled from bulky optics, the
proposed OCT system will assume a transformative single-chip architecture
integrating all three functional modules on a silicon chip. This approach
eliminates complex assembly and alignment steps and leverages standard silicon
foundry infrastructure to facilitate scalable, low-cost manufacturing. Second,
while prior work has explored integrated photonics as a solution to miniaturize
OCT, the on-chip components were down-scaled versions of their bulky
counterparts. This project will pursue a cohort of architectural innovations to
expand the OCT imaging depth and improve scanning speed and field-of-view while
enhancing the axial resolution and signal-to-noise ratio, fully unleashing the
potential of photonic integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.