* 2122112
* RUI: Mechanisms Underlying the Development of Social Categorization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Lei, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 628,630.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children divide the world into
groups in various ways, including race and gender. The way children represent
these groups in their minds often serves as the basis for negative outcomes such
as stereotyping and biased behavior. However, the people children interact with
do not belong to only one group; they are simultaneously part of multiple
groups. This perspective is not often recognized, and even more rarely adopted
in prior research. Recognizing and incorporating this perspective in research is
important because it illuminates unique forms of bias faced by people who have
multiple marginalized identities. This project will investigate how children
integrate information about multiple groups and how the processes underlying
that integration may differ across early childhood. Specifically, the project
will examine how low-level perceptual cues (e.g., facial femininity) and higher-
level conceptual knowledge (e.g., beliefs about the category) shape how children
integrate information about multiple categories in their representations of
others. Investigating these processes is critical in order to develop a
framework for predicting at what ages different types of interventions to pre-
empt bias might be most effective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests the
hypothesis that perceptual cues (e.g., facial features) are more influential in
shaping categorization processes for younger, preschool-aged children, but that
conceptual knowledge about groups is more influential for older children. The
project uses novel adaptations of social-cognitive methods used with adult
samples for use with children. Children will be shown pictures of peopleâ€™s faces
that differ in gender and racial background and asked to make a gender
categorization. This project will help spur theoretical innovations about how
children parse the social world, as well as create pipelines for research
dissemination and community involvement via partnerships with community-based
institutions. The project will also provide training in social psychology and
developmental science for a diverse group of undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.