* 2122158
* Partnership for Research and Education in Soft Matter Research &amp; Technology and Quantum Confinement Materials Design (SMaRT QD)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2027
* Thomas Epps, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2027
* USD 799,058.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;This Partnership for Research and Education in Materials(PREM)
is a collaboration between two Historically Black College &amp;Universities,
Delaware State University (DSU) and Claflin University (CU), highlighting a
strategic partnership with University of Delaware (UD) and a network of partners
committed to strengthening STEM diversity, equity, and inclusivity through novel
materials research and education. The PREM project brings together a diverse and
talented scientific community with expertise in polymers, physics, inorganic
chemistry, and computational-based techniques to develop a fundamental
understanding of advanced quantum confined materials and soft matter
interactions in complex environments. Our collective efforts aim to build the
infrastructure (facilities and human resources) at Historically Black Colleges
and Universities (HBCUs) to solve grand challenges related to data-driven
materials design in the areas of soft matter and quantum confined materials that
would otherwise not be achievable without a center approach. SMaRT QD
facilitates a Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) integrated, team-based model
that links computation, data science, and experimentation crossing research
boundaries between academia, national laboratories, and industry with the goals
to: (1) enhance participants’ research capacity, scientific productivity, and
training in the field of materials; (2) promote recruitment, retention, and
degree attainment of minority students and other researchers in materials
science; (3) increase the number of underrepresented minorities (URMs)
knowledgeable in MGI related activities; and (4) create a world- class, next-
generation materials science workforce. Our combined efforts with the UD
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) are focused on
developing a multi-institutional operational framework that can be modeled
broadly to build research capacity and expand their success to support diversity
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;A synergistic
interdisciplinary research approach to the advancement of the basic
understanding of soft matter and quantum confinement materials will be
conducted. In this project, an innovative, student- centered, inter-
institutional program called "SMaRT QD PREM" will be created to manage the
scholarly activities of the participating students. The PREM team will focus on
the following key fundamental aspects of soft matter and quantum confinement
materials research: (1) ‘bottom-up’ assembly of building blocks to design with
specific composition, morphology, and structural properties to hierarchical
systems and the control of such systems; thereby facilitating the manipulation
of properties through structure- function; and (2) colloidally synthesized
quantum dots, group IV and transition metal dichalcogenide nanocrystals, and
non-centrosymmetric crystals, including innovative tools to reveal the subtle
forms of emergent and topological order. The world-class instrument facilities
at UD will enable and catalyze the rational design, synthesis, and
characterization of smart materials incorporating the MGI approach to inform the
synthesis of soft matter and quantum confinement materials with ‘tunable
properties.’ SMaRT QD aims to build from machine learning studies using the MGI
approach in the ‘bottom-up’ assembly of building blocks to design with specific
composition, morphology, and structural properties to hierarchical systems and
controlling such systems; thereby facilitating the manipulation of properties
through structure-function. SMaRT QD’s unique integration of partnerships,
mentoring, and outreach efforts will be the model for URM early-engagement for
institutional partnerships that link high schools and four- year institutions.
In the preparation of an MGI workforce, participants gain an education enabling
them to work productively in teams whose expertise covers the broad materials
spectrum from synthesis and characterization, theory and modeling, to design and
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.