* 2122188
* Development of a User-Friendly, Low-Cost, Low-Power, Low-Noise, Lightweight, Self-Contained Infrasound Logging System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Johnson, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 373,789.00

Boise State University will develop a new geophysical instrument to help study
volcanoes, earthquakes, and mass movements such as landslides. These events
create seismic waves in the ground and pressure waves in the air, which contain
valuable information that can be analyzed to understand these often-hazardous
processes. However, data gathering in these fields are currently impaired by an
instrumentation gap: available recording instrumentation is typically expensive
and can be burdensome to install as it is usually specialized to record waves
either in the ground or air but not both. Although recording ground and air
propagating waves using many spatially dispersed sensors could provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the geophysical processes that create them, it is
currently not practical due to lack of affordable instrumentation. In this
project, we propose to develop an instrument to facilitate simultaneous
recording of seismic and pressure waves that is easy and economical to install
in large numbers. Additionally, we will disseminate the benefits of this
instrument by operating an instrument lending pool for the duration of the
project. This will help geophysicists record more comprehensive datasets that
yield a clearer understanding of powerful, hazardous events. Our project will
include 4-6 undergraduate and graduate assistants in roles like electronics
construction and repair, instrument testing, programming, documentation, and
fieldwork.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geophysical data logger will have an
integrated sensors to simultaneously record seismic and infrasound signals; its
low cost, low power consumption, and ease of use will permit users to install
dense recording networks and perform detailed analyses. Infrasound studies may
elucidate many phenomena in earth science including volcanoes, explosions,
earthquakes, debris flows, lahars, and avalanches. However, most infrasound
studies are limited by instrumentation due to its high cost, high power
requirements, and specialized training needed to deploy them. These issues are
particularly problematic for “large-N” campaigns (where excellent resolution is
achieved by recording very large numbers of sensors), as well as projects in
sites that are remote, sensitive, hazardous, or theft-prone. The Gem infrasound
logger-- the only available integrated infrasound sensor-logger--addresses these
issues and has supported several field projects that would not have been
practical with other instruments. Additionally, the Gem’s ease of use helps non-
specialists incorporate infrasound study into multi-disciplinary projects,
leading to innovative new applications. Developing a next-generation Gem model
with simultaneous seismic and acoustic recording capabilities (2 channels, with
200 Hz and 24 bits/channel) will result in another one-of-a-kind instrument that
will provide infrasound scientists with seismic context with no additional
effort, and vice-versa. The proposed instrument lending pool will satisfy an
unmet need in infrasound science: unlike the related field of seismology in
which field campaigns can borrow instruments from PASSCAL, no institution
currently lends infrasound sensors. Our proposed lending pool will promote
infrasound science and recording possibilities for scientists that don’t have
their own field instrumentation and for infrasound specialists conducting
large-N campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.