* 2122940
* Closing STEM Student Academic Performance Equity Gaps Through Student Research Exposure and Faculty Professional Development in Pedagogy and Curricular Innovation
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Carol Hood, Riverside Community College District/Riverside City College
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,968.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 Implementation and Evaluation project
will implement evidence-based faculty development leading to an institutional
culture supportive of diversity, equity, and inclusion within STEM disciplines
at a minority serving community college. Further, it will demonstrate the
combined impact of such pedagogical and curricular practices with sustained,
multi-faceted student supports, and enhanced exposure to undergraduate research
experiences for building STEM identity, leading to improved student academic
performance and successful transfer to baccalaureate STEM degree programs.
Annually, RCC serves more than 30,000 students. Students from traditionally
underrepresented ethnic backgrounds represent 73% of students enrolled at RCC,
of which Hispanic students are the majority group (63%). For the students of
RCC, education, especially STEM education, offers the promise of improving their
social mobility and quality of life. However, these disciplines are among the
most rigorous, and have high course failure and attrition rates. There are
notable equity performance gaps in core STEM course performance, persistence
within STEM, and transfer to four-year universities for Hispanic, African
American, and other underrepresented groups in higher education. We seek to
change that through sustainable improvement in teaching and learning. To
accomplish this goal, we are partnering with California State University San
Bernardino (CSUSB) to replicate work they have done with faculty development
around inclusive and responsive STEM pedagogy, and to expand targeted student
support, mentorship and exposure to student research opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two complementary sets of activity will be implemented:
(1) peer-led faculty professional development focused on pedagogical and
curricular improvements in STEM; (2) expansion of student experiential learning
and research within and across STEM disciplines, and through exposure to summer
research experiences at a transfer destination university. Those activities will
result in (1) increased STEM faculty knowledge, skills, and utilization of
culturally sensitive, inclusive, and active learning pedagogy; (2) increased
STEM student retention, term-to-term persistence, course success, and transfer
rate, and closing of student equity gaps; (3) contributions to the knowledge-
base about diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI) in STEM. The project will
create a STEM faculty learning community (FLC) to develop and implement equity-
minded, evidence-based practices proven effective for supporting Hispanic and
other underrepresented students to succeed in postsecondary STEM education.
Research will contribute to the knowledge on STEM education within minority
serving institutions by employing a mixed-methods approach to holistically
assess the project’s implementation and outcomes at multiple levels. The project
will measure changes in FLC participants’ awareness and implementation of high-
impact practices and knowledge of DEI issues in STEM, and changes in students’
STEM-related identity, belonging, and career plans, as well as their academic
performance and trajectory. The project results will be informed by and
contribute to the literature on underrepresented minority student persistence
and success in STEM disciplines, as well as STEM faculty professional
development focused on high-impact teaching practices. Results of this work will
be disseminated to multiple audiences via disciplinary conferences, and
presentations at conferences specific to community colleges and Hispanic serving
institutions. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.