* 2122041
* TxState-UT PREM Center for Intelligent Materials Assembly (CIMA)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Edward Yu, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,113,046.00

Texas State University (TxState) is one of the largest Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) in the U.S., the fourth largest university campus in Texas,
and the flagship of the TxState University System, with nearly 38,000 students
(&gt;33,000 undergraduates). The current representation of 39% Hispanic, 11%
African American, and 46% first-generation students reflects the population of
the state of Texas. As a Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
(PREM), TxState is collaborating with The University of Texas at Austin (UT)
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC), namely, the Center
for Dynamics and Control of Materials (UT-CDCM). This ensuing TxState-UT
partnership will create the PREM Center for Intelligent Materials Assembly
(CIMA). The PREM CIMA will promote recruitment, retention, and degree attainment
of a diverse student cohort with a pathway into advanced degrees and careers in
materials science. The PREM CIMA will offer students high impact research
experiences, mentorship by TxState and UT faculty and students, personnel
exchanges including biannual joint research conferences, professional
development opportunities and a supportive community. A key element of building
a robust pipeline will be early recruitment of first- and second-year STEM
majors to become ‘PREM Associates.’ Students will develop confidence and a
materials science identity through effective mentorship, research engagement and
community development. Retention will be augmented by the students’ transition
to ‘PREM Researchers’ status where career development workshops, exposure to the
R1 research environment at UT, and experience in presentation and publication of
research results will prepare students for interdisciplinary materials careers
following degree attainment as ‘PREM Graduates.’ Over 60 undergraduate students
(20 Researchers and 40 Associates) and 15 graduate students (10 Researchers and
5 Associates) will participate annually, supported by the PREM CIMA. Research
results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, professional
conferences, online presence, and community outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of the PREM CIMA is to create new materials based on the assembly
of organized molecular and nanoscale structures. The TxState-UT PREM CIMA will
utilize a collaborative model in which “PREM Researchers” are the unifying link
between the TxState and UT research teams. The geographic proximity of the
partners will facilitate collaborative projects and exchange. The proposed
research has been organized into two main thrusts. Thrust 1, entitled
‘Reconfigurable Soft Materials’ centers on the templated assembly of
macromolecular and nanocomposite systems through reversible covalent bonding or
non-covalent interactions to form materials whose equilibrium states can be
modulated via photothermal effects, photoisomerization, redox processes, or
nucleic acid-enabled remodeling. Thrust 1 aligns with one of UT-CDCM’s
Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs), specifically IRG 1, with focus on
multifunctional, reconfigurable networks of nanoparticles, polymers and organic
molecules that respond to external stimuli. Thrust 2, entitled ‘Control of
Nanostructure for Energy and Electronics’ concentrates on the use of chemical
synthesis, laser-based materials processing, and epitaxial growth to control
solid-state nanostructures to develop materials for catalysis, energy storage,
memory, electronics, and photonics. Synergy in Thrust 2 is derived from
collaboration with UT-CDCM IRG 2 faculty with expertise in nanocrystal
synthesis, molecular beam epitaxy of semiconductors, and solid-state device
fabrication. The proposed research will create advanced materials for
applications that include biomedicine, water purification, chemical fuel
generation from renewable energy sources, and
nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.