* 2122866
* fMRI Reverse Correlation as a Novel Method for Revealing Computations Underlying Perceptual Grouping
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Adam Greenberg, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 695,051.00

How do we segregate the distinct objects in a complex visual scene? Since most
real-world objects are opaque, and therefore partly occlude one another, the eye
receives a patchwork of overlapping surfaces, and the brain is then left with
the task of determining how to perceptually group these various surface patches
into unified objects. Although we do this effortlessly every day, we still do
not understand the underlying neural computations that accomplish this scene
analysis. Perceptual grouping cues (e.g., two surface fragments moving together
or possessing the same texture) provide important clues that can be used to
organize the visual scene into complete objects, but the specific computations
performed, and the brain regions involved, are largely unknown. This project
employs brain imaging to quantify the relative strength (and “pecking order”) of
the many possible perceptual grouping cues used in constructing perceived
objects from their component structures. This has been achieved by the
development of a novel method for visual stimulation and analysis using noise-
based image classification (i.e., reverse correlation) during functional brain
imaging. This method has been used extensively in behavioral laboratory testing,
but until recently, has not been practical for application to brain imaging
because it typically requires a very large number of trials. However, by
optimizing this technique to achieve reverse correlation during brain imaging,
it is possible to uncover the brain regions driving the perception of objects in
our environment. A more complete understanding of the brain mechanisms
underlying perceptual grouping will lead to optimized designs for visual
displays in our environment including street signs, occupational safety
warnings, medical equipment instructions, and virtually all dynamic displays of
visual information, as well as better artificial intelligence and robotic visual
scene analysis, crucial for new technologies such as driverless cars.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Neuroscientific studies of object perception have previously focused
primarily on the specificity of object representations in the brain. In
contrast, the new approach in this research is to study the psychological and
neural underpinnings of the formation of these object percepts. A key innovation
is the development of a novel quantitative metric to reliably and quantitatively
measure perceptual grouping that is flexible enough to be used both behaviorally
and during functional magnetic resonance brain imaging (fMRI). Using this
approach, it is possible to determine the critical grouping cues for object
perception and detail their dominance relations in careful behavioral testing,
and then to adapt the reverse correlation method to be used with brain imaging
data and optimize the algorithm to reduce the number of trials (and total brain
scan time) required. Finally, this new technique, comparing internal templates
of neural structures to behavioral templates, can be utilized to specify the
network computations driving brain-behavior relations during perceptual
grouping. The results of this research will advance our understanding of visual
cognition, and resolve where in the brain, and specifically at which level of
the visual processing cortical hierarchy, the visual grouping cues are
operating. This research will reveal computational algorithms used by the human
brain for perceptual grouping and scene segregation that can also be utilized to
enhance artificial intelligence (AI) visual scene
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.