* 2122023
* Digging into Soil Carbonate Formation Processes with Triple Oxygen Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Naomi Levin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 360,667.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drylands are water-limited
ecosystems that cover 40% of Earth's land surface, are home to &gt; 2.5 billion
people, and are particularly vulnerable to climate change. Carbonate-forming
soils, which are common in dryland ecosystems, are important components to the
carbon cycle and critical for building records of past climate, but we do not
fully understand how they form. This project will investigate the role of water
loss from soils as a mechanism for soil carbonate formation. The team will use
the three stable isotopes of oxygen, 16O, 17O and 18O, to distinguish between
the role of soil water loss via evaporation vs. uptake by plants. While ratios
of oxygen isotopes 18O to 16O are commonly used to study soil carbonate and
other climate archives, 17O, the 3rd stable oxygen isotope, is far less abundant
and has not been fully developed for studies of soils and past climate. This
project will develop triple oxygen isotope distributions (comparing all three
oxygen isotopes) as tools for investigating soil formation processes in modern
and ancient climates through field work across major ecological and aridity
gradients in the U.S., including sites in the Drylands Critical Zone Network.
The results from this work will improve reconstructions of past climate, with
particular attention to detecting drought and aridity in ancient ecosystems. The
project will provide training for a postdoctoral scientist in preparation for
building her own analytically intensive laboratory and research program, filling
the need for more laboratories and PIs who are capable of making analytically
challenging triple oxygen isotope measurements. Training of undergraduates at
three institutions will be integral to the field components to this research.
The undergraduate component to this work will broaden participation in the
geosciences and include recruiting participants through the University of
Michigan Earth Camp program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased variability in the
hydrologic cycle due to modern climate change will potentially lead to feedbacks
in water and carbon storage. At the same time, modern climate change enhances
the need for tools to identify water stress in ancient climates as analogues for
our future world. This project uses triple oxygen isotopes to evaluate the role
of evaporation and transpiration in soil dewatering during soil carbonate
formation in the U.S. This work will include a study of triple oxygen isotopes
in carbonate in soils and in their parent meteoric waters. Our field work will
focus on four sites in the US that include the hyper-arid Mojave Desert of
California, the subhumid deciduous forest in Michigan, and two intermediate
sites in arid environments, Reynolds Creek, Idaho and the Jornada Basin in New
Mexico. The outcomes of this work will include tools for stripping away the
effects of evaporation on pedogenic carbonate delta 18O to reveal meteoric water
delta 18O, which is the holy grail for paleohydrology and paleoaltimetry. This
work will improve our understanding of how abiotic and biotic processes each
control pedogenic carbonate formation; this understanding is necessary to be
able to predict how and where pedogenic carbonate will precipitate in natural
and agricultural soils under the predicted increased hydrological variability,
with implications for carbon sequestration and water storage in dryland critical
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.