* 2122930
* HSI Planning Project: Amplifying Climate Resilience Curriculum Using Informal Learning Opportunities for Undergraduates
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Edmonds, NSHE Board of Regents on behalf of Nevada State College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 Planning Project will build critical
institutional structure and facilitate thoughtful planning for the future
creation of STEM learning experiences that draw on the cultural capital of
Latinx students at three HSIs (Nevada State College, University of Nevada Las
Vegas, and College of Southern Nevada) in the field of climate change. The key
to academic persistence and commitment to a science career is feeling a sense of
belonging and confidence in one’s abilities, and students from marginalized
groups often have little experience with messaging that is accepting of their
self-identity and is encouraging of their ability to achieve careers in STEM
fields. This project will discuss the use of engaging informal learning
activities and innovative gamification of science content in collaboration with
peers, for the future design of curriculum that promotes Latinx students’ STEM
identities and increases student excitement regarding careers related to climate
change science and education. Moreover, these informal learning experiences will
increase the baseline level of understanding of climate change, as well as
allowing the students to share their knowledge with the community and challenge
misconceptions about what it means to be a “STEM
person”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project will conceptualize four
components, including 1) institutional support structure, 2) internship
collaboration, 3) learning outcome development, and 4) technology platform for
evaluation, dissemination of results, and program assessment. Particularly, it
will solidify learning outcomes through collaborative discussions and workshops
with stakeholders. With the lens of regenerative agriculture, this project will
plan for the eventual design of culturally relevant, problem-driven informal
activities in a self-paced curriculum to challenge students to evaluate their
own lifestyle choices in the context of climate resilience. The expected results
of this project include supporting Latinx student understanding of foundational
science concepts underlying climate change and creating institutional
relationships and a curricular framework upon climate equity and sustainability.
Broader impacts include advancing understanding of how informal learning
experiences can increase the diversity of students choosing careers in STEM,
particularly through the inclusion of a wide diversity of stakeholders in
designing learning outcomes. Results will be disseminated through published
manuscripts, website design, social media outreach, and a workshop to finalize
the next steps in the project. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate
STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs.
Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.