* 2122072
* Mechanisms of Genomic Change in Budding Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Lovett, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 565,123.00

The overall goal of this project is to study how cells maintain the stability of
their genomic DNA. Mutations can arise in genomes due to natural failures during
DNA replication or can be induced by environmental factors such as radiation and
certain chemicals; mutations promote cancer, aging, neurodegenerative and other
diseases, hence it is important to understand their genesis and processing. Some
frequent “hotspot” mutations arise during stalled replication, when the nascent
DNA strand wanders and finds a wrong strand to copy. This “template-switch”
event is the main subject of this project. The aims are to determine what genes
influence the frequency of such mutation events and what chemicals or other
environmental factors might promote them. A broader impact goal is to train
students from diverse backgrounds on how to conduct scientific research, using a
simple organism, budding yeast, that can be easily grown and genetically
manipulated in the laboratory. A project lab will be developed to introduce
students with no prior experience to research practice and techniques, in a
supportive and mentored environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic assays for
template-switch mutations at imperfect inverted repeats in DNA have been
engineered in yeast and will be used to identify genes that influence
mutagenesis. Preliminary evidence suggests that double-strand DNA breaks
frequently undergo template-switching during repair. The HO endonuclease-induced
mating-type switching system will be used to study template-switching during DNA
replication events that accompany double-strand break repair. Template-switching
during normal replication will also be examined for comparison. Finally,
potential mutagens will be screened using the template-switch reporter system.
The outcomes will increase knowledge about the mechanisms of mutagenesis and its
avoidance, and provide valuable information about DNA processing associated with
replication difficulties and how replication is coordinated with
repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.