* 2122080
* EAGER: SAI: SmarTrail: An Infrastructure Services Framework for Sustainable Trail Management
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Shalini Misra, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 10/31/2024
* USD 307,350.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More than 200,000 miles of foot trails thread
through protected areas in the U.S. They represent an important piece of the
country’s transportation infrastructure. Not only do these trails connect
places, they also provide abundant recreation opportunities for tens of millions
of Americans every year. They promote nature appreciation and health benefits as
well. Yet, high trail use also brings negative impacts. These include the
unplanned expansion of existing trails and campsites, and the creation of new
ones. Such proliferation can invade pristine areas and spread human waste and
garbage across natural landscapes. The high use also can erode soils that
degrade water quality. One means to minimize these negative impacts while still
allowing people to enjoy their time on the trail is by strengthening trail
infrastructure to deliberately serve both the supply of and demand for trail
services. This SAI project lays the groundwork for such strengthening.
Specifically, smart phone and other digital technologies are used in an
information system to match long distance hikers’ needs with conservation
objectives in protected areas. This blends digital information flows with
spatial, social, psychological, and cultural dimensions to understand and
improve infrastructure performance beyond the trail environment. The research
aims to illuminate the barriers and opportunities to using digital technologies
to address the ecological, economic, and social dimensions of sustainable trail
infrastructure on the ground. It draws from the fields of recreation ecology,
human-computer-interaction, social psychology, and public policy to mitigate
visitor impacts and improve visitor experiences in protected
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart, sustainable trail infrastructure management
requires the integration of spatial, social, psychological, and ecological
information across multiple technological platforms. This project pursues that
aim by using a mixed method participatory design approach that integrates social
media, interpretive, ecological, and survey data. The concept of trail
infrastructure services from both the hiker and conservation managers
perspectives is first developed. This phase of the project seeks to understand
what hikers want from their trail experiences and what resource managers need to
conserve the landscapes through which they pass. The project then examines the
role that existing cyber infrastructure, such as smart phone navigation apps,
already play on the trail. This project considers additional digital
opportunities that might be available to hikers and to resource managers to use
information on the location of hikers and to share conservation messages
digitally across the hiking community. The spatial, socio-cognitive, and
behavioral aspects of long distance hikers’ movements are identified to
understand how digital technologies mediate psychological and social experiences
in protected areas. The ultimate aim of the project is the development of a
prototype app-based trail infrastructure messaging system for experimental use
and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.