* 2122027
* Interactions at the protein-lipid bilayer interface: quantitative characterization via single-molecule force spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Ioan Kosztin, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2025
* USD 790,842.00

Proteins are important components of cells, which are the building blocks of all
living things. Everything that enters and exits a cell (e.g., nutrients and
pharmaceuticals) must go through membranes. Yet, little is known about how
proteins and membranes interact with each other at the molecular scale. To
better understand protein-lipid interactions, we will attach individual proteins
to the sharp tip of an atomic force microscope, which is an extremely powerful
microscope that is able to reveal interactions at the molecular scale. We will
then bring these proteins into the proximity of membranes and use the microscope
to record the resulting forces. Measuring these microscopic-level interactions
will reveal details that depend on the specific proteins employed. More
generally, the work will provide a deeper and quantitative understanding of
fundamental activities that take place at the biological membrane. In terms of
broader impacts, the project aims to improve STEM education and public science
literacy. Several activities are planned to support these goals including
developing and implementing a laboratory module for Missouri high school physics
students; implementing and refining a new hands-on undergraduate course at the
University of Missouri-Columbia targeted to non-science majors; and engaging in
direct dialogue with general audiences in mid-Missouri through the Science Caf√©,
which is an informal venue that encourages questions from audience members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research project
is to elucidate interaction strengths, energy landscapes and kinetic pathways of
model lipophilic proteins as they negotiate fluid lipid bilayers and thus to
provide an improved and quantitative understanding of protein partitioning and
folding at the lipid bilayer membrane interface. This will be achieved by
combining high precision atomic force microscopy (AFM)-based force spectroscopy
methodology with analytical modeling, computer simulations, and biochemistry.
The central experimental observable (force) will be measured with state-of-the-
art spatial-temporal precision. The project tackles fundamental questions in
membrane biophysics such as: How do the protein sequence and the emergence of
secondary structure affect the strength of a protein-lipid bilayer interaction?
Three model protein systems of differing structural complexity will be employed
in conjunction with supported lipid bilayers. Specific research goals include:
(i) correlate peptide sequence with peptide-lipid bilayer interaction strength,
energy landscape and kinetic pathway; (ii) deconvolve protein secondary
structure from primary structure contributions in a model polypeptide-lipid
bilayer interaction; and (iii) quantitatively characterize a critical peripheral
membrane protein-lipid bilayer interaction underlying protein export activity in
E. coli. By directly probing the repeated association and dissociation of model
proteins from the lipid bilayer interface, this project is poised to provide an
improved understanding of protein partitioning and folding in membranes, a
fundamental biophysical process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.