* 2122941
* Collaborative Research: HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Commitment to Learning Instilled by Mastery-Based Undergraduate Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* David Raymond, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 699,999.00

Grading practices have been identified as one of the main culprits in the
persistence of equity gaps. Traditional grading methods can be inequitable,
ineffective, and even damaging to first-generation students, including Latinx
students. To address this issue, a team of faculty from California State
University, Los Angeles, in partnership with colleagues from East Los Angeles
College and Pasadena City College, will work to transform student learning and
assessment in second-year engineering courses. The project will develop and
study a three-year professional development program to support the
implementation of mastery-based grading, a form of grading that centers on two
main concepts. First is that eventual mastery of the material is what counts,
not artificial checkpoints during a term. Second is that multiple opportunities
to show mastery should be available to students with no penalty for failed
attempts. Mastery-based grading will be implemented at the aforementioned
schools (three very-high enrolling Hispanic-serving institutions) with a goal of
improving teaching and learning and promoting fundamental research on engaging
student learning and engineering identity development. That research effort will
be led by the portion of the project team at Arizona State University. The
project will begin with a course redesign phase in which faculty will receive
instruction in restructuring courses for mastery grading through a course
redesign process. Faculty will then pilot the redesigned courses in the
following semester, allowing for additional fine tuning of the redesign.
Additional faculty will be brought into the redesigned courses, after being
trained on the use of mastery-grading while engaged in an ongoing, cross-
institutional faculty learning community. An embedded, student-centered research
effort will investigate whether participation in a mastery-based learning
environment shifts first-generation college students’ academic motivation,
mindset, and attitudes over time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three goals will guide
this project. First is to redesign courses using mastery-based grading to
improve rates of transfer and course completion for sophomore engineering
“gateway” courses. Second is to foster and measure shifts in student attitudes
towards learning, confidence as learners, and engineering identity. Third is to
create a sustainable, multi-institutional faculty learning community and
professional development program for faculty to utilize mastery-based grading.
Project research will advance understanding of the effect that mastery-based
grading has on post-secondary engineering students. It will advance
understanding of how the new learning environment impacts first-generation
college engineering students’ achievement motivation, affective state, identity
development, mindsets about their abilities to learn, and persistence beliefs
(i.e., academic profiles). Achievement goal theory is a prominent theoretical
framework in achievement motivation, yet there is a dearth of research using
this framework within the context of a predominantly minority student
population. This project will fill this gap by empirically examining first-
generation college students’ achievement motivation and advance understanding of
how first-generation college students’ achievement motivations support the
development of their engineering identity. Major data sources include student
surveys, student and faculty interviews, and examination of student outcomes in
the transformed courses. In addition to dissemination through conference
presentations and journal publications, a hybrid faculty development course for
using Mastery-Based Grading will be developed and made available to project
faculty and disseminated to facilitate broader adoption. The Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI Program) aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.