* 2122757
* PFI-TT:  Novel Designs and Manufacturing Process for High Performance Reflectionless Radio Frequency Filters at 40 GHz and Above
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Matthew Morgan, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project stems from the increasing need to filter
and clean up radio frequency signals. The number radio frequencies used and data
bandwidth needs of wireless devices and systems have rapidly expanded in several
commercial sectors (e.g., 5G/6G, autonomous vehicles, Internet of Things,
satellite communications, defense, test and measurement equipment, etc.). To
ensure that all of these high throughput data lanes remain interference free,
devices must include better filtering to minimize the noise they broadcast. This
filtering must be accomplished in a way that does not adversely impact size or
cost. The proposed reflectionless bandpass filters aim to meet these
requirements. The filters are being developed for high frequencies (28 GHz for
5G wireless communications for example) and offer a millimeter sized footprint
that meets industry expectations for high reliability and low cost. The project
aims to build on existing patents and industrial expertise to develop multi-
stage, highly complex filter topologies, then perfect the manufacturing process
to ensure that the devices meet both the performance and price expectations of
commercial customers. Interest and feedback from the industry sectors charged
with testing and certifying the current and future wireless devices indicates
the potential for commercial success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
seeks to combine two state of the art technologies with proven track records,
namely reflectionless radio frequency bandpass filters for signal-conditioning
and Low Temperature Co-fired Ceramic (LTCC) based circuit board level
components. The team seeks to quantifiably demonstrate that much higher
frequency devices can be designed and manufactured in smaller and lower cost,
maintaining the hermetically-sealed industry standard package types. These novel
topologies and devices are increasingly necessary now that wireless
communications and sensing devices are rapidly expanding into the already
crowded frequency ranges above 20 GHz. The technology requires new, more complex
layouts with multiple layers, as well as new LTCC manufacturing methods that
yield reproducible and reliable results. While shown to work in theory, these
higher complexity topologies require extensive computer modelling to ensure that
the higher number of levels achieve the industry-provided target specifications
and gains in performance. The LTCC manufacturing process will then have to be
customized for the new layouts and materials and a small prototype run
undertaken. The metrics for success will focus on achieving performance numbers
(higher frequencies, high rejection, low insertion loss, etc.), reliability,
manufacturing reproducibility, and yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.