* 2122917
* Establishing a Journey of Inclusion, Identity and Intersectionality through Guided Pathways to Enhance Latinx Success in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Nandika D'Souza, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 799,904.00

This project will bring together the University of North Texas (UNT) and North
Central Texas College (NCTC) to decrease the time to graduation for transfer
students in engineering and computer science (ECS) and better meet the needs of
Latinx students. The project leadership takes an asset-based approach to promote
racial and gender equity and inclusion for students in Latinx communities in
engineering. Major project components include guided pathways designed for co-
enrollment at both NCTC and UNT, experiential learning opportunities paired with
research experiences, and a faculty and staff fellows program. In addition, the
project features co-hosted events for NCTC and UNT administrators, students,
faculty and staff to increase the recruitment, engagement and support of Latinx
students. The multi-level project design supports the participating
institutions' embrace of the strengths, experiences, and perspectives of Latinx
students as part of an effort to create a broad, cohesive community. Funded by
the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI
Program), the project will disseminate a collection of best practices arising
from their collaborative effort that can serve as a model for partnerships
between community colleges and universities designed to increase representation
of the Latinx community in the engineering and computer science
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiple project components are designed to
embody the spirit of "servingness," whereby an HSI grows from being merely
"Hispanic enrolling" to more deeply embrace its designation as "Hispanic
serving." The project will explore aspects of Inclusion, Identity, and
Intersectionality (the three I’s) and how they combine to support three major
goals. First is to broaden the recruitment and transfer opportunities for Latinx
students to study ECS majors. Second is to build a shared institutional identity
among faculty, student allies, and advocates at an HSI. Third is to promote
persistence among Latinx students with intersecting identities by developing
their engineering identity. Three research questions will guide the project
efforts. 1) How do Latinx students navigate the engineering fields at an HSI and
how do their opportunities and experiences at an HSI relate to their outcomes?
2) How do faculty and staff incorporate Latinx students’ collective cultural
wealth into their curricular and co-curricular programs? 3) How do the community
college experiences of Latinx students inform their pathways through engineering
and computer science programs at an HSI? Through the project, UNT and NCTC will
offer new programs to incorporate an asset-based approach to promote the success
of Latinx students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.