* 2122588
* A Multi-District Collaboration to Develop Justice-Focused Computational Thinking Pathways for Middle School English Language Arts
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Tinukwa Boulder, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,652.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Often computational thinking (CT)
and computer science (CS) instruction is approached as an isolated or
extracurricular activity, limiting exposure for many students. In many cases,
these activities focus on specific STEM-related domains such as robotics, where
girls and students of color are underrepresented and marginalized. As a result,
school-based CS classes and programs often continue to marginalize girls and
students of color. Teaching CT/CS as part of literacy instruction offers one
solution to engage historically underrepresented students in both subjects. The
project instructional materials will be developed to build on and value
students' diverse literacies, cultural resources, interests, and identities. The
project will explore the impact of this instruction on historically
underrepresented groups in CS (specifically, female and Black students) and
advances knowledge on transforming CS education and practices in building
diverse partnerships. The project's long-term goal includes creating innovative
justice-focused curricula and related teacher professional development (PD)
materials for integrating CT/CS into middle school literacy instruction. The
outcomes from this grant will support STEM and literacy educators and curriculum
developers to rethink methods of integrating CT/CS across disciplines.
Additionally, the project will develop strategies to help build CS identities
among those who feel least connected to it, such as girls and students of color.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Research to Practice Partnership (RPP) project
establishes a network that includes four school districts in Pennsylvania,
middle school educators, University of Pittsburgh faculty, and a regional
educational support center (Allegheny Intermediate Unit) collaborating to
develop a justice-focused CT/CS curriculum for Middle School English Language
Arts (ELA). The project goals include the design and development of justice-
focused CT/CS curricular materials for middle school ELA classes focused on
increasing computational identity, CT/CS knowledge, and digital empowerment
among students historically underrepresented in CS, specifically, female and
Black students. Additionally, the curricular materials will be iteratively
revised and tested in a subset of classrooms, assessing students' responses to
the materials and sense of belonging in CS through surveys, assessments of
learning goals, and STEM career identity instruments. Finally, the project will
strive to equip underrepresented middle school students with the knowledge,
skills, identities, and agency to succeed in high school computer science
courses and beyond. In this project, the partner school districts all face the
"problem of practice" of ensuring culturally relevant CS instruction that is
meaningful to students and can be embedded into the existing curriculum to
ensure equitable CS access. The first stage of the project will focus on
partnership-building, knowledge-building, and co-designing preliminary research
questions. The second stage will focus on rapid co-designing CS/ELA curriculum
materials and PD for teachers, testing the materials in classrooms, and
assessing students' responses to the materials. An external evaluation of the
RPP will be conducted at the end of phase 2. This project is supported by the CS
for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.