* 2122670
* PFI-TT:  Acousto-Electric Semiconductor Amplifiers to Expand Wireless Connectivity to a Larger Population of End-Users
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Reza Abdolvand, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,503.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in empowering a more affordable
expansion of wireless connectivity for a larger population of end-users. This
project investigates the interaction of acoustic phonons and charge carriers in
a hybrid piezoelectric-semiconductor slab and could inspire a variety of
discoveries and innovations in related disciplines. The project is expected to
provide an invaluable entrepreneurial training opportunity for a new generation
of early-career engineers including, but not limited to, the students supported
by this project. The resources available through this project will also directly
impact the team's ongoing involvement in undergraduate/minority mentoring
programs by creating opportunities to include student communities in a
technology commercialization process from the early stages of concept
development and market evaluation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
aims to substantially enhance the performance of acousto-electric lithium
niobate-semiconductor amplifiers and to evaluate the commercial potential of
such devices in the wireless transceiver market. The targeted micro-scale non-
reciprocal filter/amplifier may significantly assist Ratio Frequency (RF)
designers and manufacturers by enabling full-duplex communication and relaxing
the requirement on the front-end acoustic filters. Such non-reciprocal RF
components have substantial merits over alternative devices, including: ease of
scalability to higher frequencies compared to the competing surface acoustic
wave-based devices; feasibility of fabricating dispersed-frequency devices on a
single chip in contrast to bulk thickness-mode devices; feasibility of
continuous-wave operation due to the excellent thermal conductivity and elastic
linearity of the semiconducting substrate (e.g. silicon); and fabrication of
small form factors on a silicon substrate which makes the device a candidate for
integration with other RF components that are currently included in the current
RF front-end modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.