* 2122186
* EAGER: SAI: Understanding Social and Cultural Processes to Improve Transportation Infrastructure Planning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leaf Van Boven, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,988.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal
opportunity, protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and
fuels American leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across
the science and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human
reasoning and decision making, governance, and social and cultural
processes enables the building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that
improves lives and society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frequency and magnitude of flooding is
increasing in the United States. Flooding heavily impacts the structural
integrity of roads and transportation infrastructure. Transportation planners
are starting to implement mitigation strategies aimed at proactively enhancing
infrastructure to reduce or eliminate risk from such potential hazards. One
challenge is that not every flood risk can be mitigated. As a result,
transportation planners must decide which communities should receive highest
priority. Traditional engineering and planning approaches base these decisions
mainly on technical criteria and do not incorporate social and psychological
impacts of damaged transportation infrastructure. This research seeks to better
understand the behavioral, psychological, and social consequences of damaged
transportation infrastructure. Anticipated results will support the creation of
metrics that planners can use to prioritize investing in transportation
infrastructure in a way that mitigates both flood risks and adverse socio-
behavioral impacts on individuals and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is organized in three modules. The first examines how flooding events
have historically impacted community mobility by using large-scale aggregate,
anonymized mobility data collected from smartphones and other devices. The
second module examines the social and psychological consequences associated with
disrupted travel. These impacts include emotional consequences, cognitive
functioning, and time poverty. The final module explores how flood risk,
mobility impacts, social vulnerability, and psychological consequences can be
integrated into comprehensive metrics, what factors are associated with public
acceptance of such metrics, and how transportation planners consider the use of
such metrics. The multi-method research includes analyses of aggregated mobility
data, large-scale survey of respondents in flood prone areas, statistical
analysis of aggregating metrics, and qualitative interviews with transportation
planners. This SAI project demonstrates how research in social-behavioral
science and civil engineering can be integrated to provide a more comprehensive
understanding of the social, psychological, and built environments, and how
decisions about managing risks to transportation infrastructure can be
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.