* 2122060
* EAGER: SAI: Understanding Misperceptions of Cyber Risks to Model and Secure Transportation Infrastructures
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 309,890.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goal is to understand cyber-
risks to the U.S. transportation system that are affected by people's behavior.
Although sophisticated security technologies aim to protect cyber
infrastructures, people's underestimation of cyber risks, and their risky
behavior, can increase these risks. For example, personal vehicles are commonly
connected to drivers' personal data available from personal accounts, in-vehicle
entertainment systems, and communication systems. If people reveal personal
information such as passwords, while driving or connecting with others,
attackers can gain access to that information and control essential automotive
functions. The impact of these risks may include congestion, collisions,
disruption of communication and denial of service within connected vehicles,
injury, or even death. This project tests vulnerabilities in cyber security for
individual users, their connected devices, and the transportation
infrastructures to which those devices are linked.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;One
part of this project is testing whether individual attitudes about choice, risk,
and deviant behavior predicts cyber-risks. A diverse team of scholars apply eye-
tracking technology to test the degree to which individual differences affect
the use of base rate information about cyber-attack risks to inform their
behavior. The project is using these results to create an agent-based network
model to simulate human risk behaviors and study their impact on the
transportation infrastructure. The model is tested on traffic in Manhattan to
simulate the impact of poorly-calibrated drivers' risk assessments and stolen
credentials, and study the consequences for road accidents and congestion if an
attacker takes over the control of a connected automotive vehicle. The project
leverages knowledge of individuals' attitudes to better calibrate risk, reduce
the odds of attack, protect the transportation infrastructure. By integrating
behavioral data and computer science, the project aims to provide improved
security of the U.S. national transportation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.