* 2122135
* EAGER-SAI: Exploring Pathways of Adaptive Infrastructure Management with Rapidly Intensifying Hurricanes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Pallab Mozumder, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 02/29/2024
* USD 307,980.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI project is led by a team of
investigators. Along with Pallab Mozumder, collaborators Nafisa Halim (Boston
University) and Samiul Hasan (University of Central Florida) are co-leading
research efforts. The focus of their SAI project is to improve understanding of
emergent individual, social, and agency behaviors for evacuation traffic
management during rapidly intensifying hurricanes (RIH). Extreme weather events
(e.g., hurricanes, storm surges and flooding) threaten the status,
sustainability and security of coastal communities. The drenching rains, gusty
winds, and storm surges during a hurricane event force people to evacuate on
short notice. Moreover, these events bring down power lines and trees, which in
turn, disrupt critical infrastructure and utility services. Climate change is
not only making hurricanes stronger, but also making them rapidly intensify and
putting vulnerable populations at risk. In recent years, Atlantic hurricanes
have shown unusual upward trends in rapid intensification (an increase of at
least 35 miles/hour of windspeed in a 24-hour period) making critical
infrastructure management more challenging during these extreme weather events.
Concentrating on RIH, the project analyzes the dynamics of risk information
processing and decision making to inform the design, development, improvisation,
and overall evacuation management for critical transportation infrastructure.
How infrastructure operators, emergency management personnel, and general public
interact during coastal hazards, especially for evacuation during RIH, is
critical for building resilient coastal communities. The insights from this
project facilitate safer evacuations and help efficiently organize risk-averting
behaviors during RIH.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI EAGER project develops a
multidisciplinary, data intensive and integrated framework to explore the
pathways of adaptive infrastructure (transportation) management with RIH. The
project integrates individual and agency level perspectives of evacuation during
RIH. To understand emergency management challenges from infrastructures
perspectives, the research team analyzes existing data of hurricane evacuation
and mobility patterns available from transportation systems databases and social
media. To gain further insights on these key challenges, the research team is
conducting interviews with infrastructure and emergency management personnel and
other stakeholders. The project develops analytical and scenario-based models to
evaluate best practices, both short-term and long-term, for addressing emerging
infrastructure and mobility management challenges. The research explores
potential avenues for scaling-up best practices relating to improvisation
(short-term) and adaptation (long-term) in an effort to develop more resilient
infrastructure within coastal communities. The project offers an innovative,
active learning environment and gives priority to the disadvantaged and
underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.