* 2122654
* PFI-RP: Additive Manufacturing for Scalable Metalens Fabrication
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Watkins, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 548,305.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the design and fabrication of high
performance metalenses using an innovative, cost-effective approach that will
enable a superior product that cannot otherwise be manufactured in a scalable
manner. Metalenses (or flat lenses) are ultrathin planar lenses that use
nanofeatures patterned on the surface to efficiently control light. thereby
eliminating the bulkiness of traditional glass and plastic lenses while
providing more utility and function in a substantially lighter and smaller
volume. Lens miniaturization and the introduction of wide fields of view and
corrections for distortion and color aberration, all possible with metalenses,
have enormous economic potential for consumer products, medical, defense, and
space applications. Technology insertion points include cell phone cameras,
augmented reality / virtual reality (AR/VR), heads-up displays, medical and
scientific imaging, precision optics, and high-resolution imaging satellites,
with associated markets exceeding $100 billion. The PFI RP team addresses the
critical elements of the supply and technology chains enabling domestic
commercialization of an emerging technology with substantial societal impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is a novel but achievable additive
manufacturing approach for all inorganic, titanium oxide metalenses that
involves a variation of nanoimprint lithography using crystalline nanoparticle-
based inks. By enabling direct “printing” of the lenses, the additive process
stands. The proposed technology is in contrast to current multi-step subtractive
fabrications of all-inorganic visible metalenses that are based on technologies
and processes developed for the semiconductor industry. The team’s unique
materials and process developments enable rapid cycle times, tunable refractive
index (up to 2.1), and high aspect ratio features for highly efficient, all-
inorganic flat lenses. State-of-the-art and innovative lens design and
simulation are applied to take advantage of these unique and flexible
fabrication capabilities and deliver outstanding lens performance, as confirmed
by prototype testing. Key innovations in fabrication include developing stable
nanoparticle inks, a unique pulsed UV light cure approach that provides intense
but localized heating to rapidly stabilize the imprinted structures and remove
organics without increasing bulk temperatures, and post-manufacturing treatments
that further enhance the refractive index. While innovative, the process is
scalable and will be demonstrated on full-scale manufacturing tools using
commercially accepted solvents and process flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.