* 2122169
* TSU-Fisk – Illinois-MRSEC PREM: Ferro-, Magneto-, and Opto-electronic Nanostructures and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Warren Collins, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION:
Tennessee State University (TSU) is a comprehensive, land-grant historically
black university located in Nashville, Tennessee, that was founded in 1912. The
student enrollment exceeds 7,500 students, where most of the students are
African American. Fisk University, founded in 1866, is the oldest institution of
higher education in Nashville; it is also a historically black university and a
long-time research and education partner of TSU. The University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign (UIUC) is a large public land-grant institution that ranks 13th
nationally for earned doctorates, and is home to 29 top-ten ranked engineering
degree programs, including the number two ranked undergraduate Materials Science
and Engineering program, and the number-one ranked condensed matter physics
graduate program. The TSU-Fisk-Illinois (TSUFI) PREM vision is to foster a long-
term, collaborative research and education partnership with the Illinois
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (I-MRSEC) at UIUC, which has
the research infrastructure and educational resources to significantly enhance
recruitment, retention, and degree attainment of minority students through
collaboration with TSU and Fisk. TSUFI students are developing cross-
disciplinary collaborations and skills to address cutting-edge challenges in
materials science, particularly related to developing new flexible sensor
technology. TSUFI is addressing the PREM pathway by creating strategic research
opportunities and exchanges, structured within a supportive framework of
education, career preparation, and cross-institutional mentoring, that will 1)
increase access of advanced materials facilities and training to
underrepresented minority (URM) undergraduates; and 2) build recruitment
pathways to increase the enrollment of URMs in materials-related graduate
programs at TSU, Fisk, and UIUC, ultimately increasing the number of minority
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) graduates prepared for
materials science careers in industry, government, and academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The TSUFI PREM research collaboration
combines the strengths of TSU and Fisk in the areas of ferroelectric polymeric
materials synthesis and sensory fabrication with the I-MRSEC expertise on active
interfaces between highly deformable nanomaterials and magnetism. The
interdisciplinary teams are uniquely focused on the combination of deformable,
widely adaptive, highly functional ferro-, magneto- and optoelectronic materials
in low dimensions interfaced with 2D materials to enable new flexible devices
with enhanced sensing functionalities. The teams have identified two major
thrust areas: 1) Low-dimensional (nanofibers and films) polymeric materials
synthesis and characterization, and 2) Production and modeling of
heterostructures with 2D materials. The combined fundamental research and
technology efforts stands to produce emergent mechanical, electronic, and
chemical behavior distinct from the individual constituents. The heterogeneous
interface research and engineering are opening opportunities to explore a new
regime of 1D, 2D, and 3D hybrid systems and architectures. Anticipated are
findings that lead to breakthroughs in our understanding of deformable
interfacial science which create new avenues for
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.