* 2122701
* Computational Thinking Funds of Knowledge: A Culturally-Relevant Assessment for Early Elementary Students
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Florence Sullivan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). It is developing equitable computational thinking (CT)
assessments for historically marginalized Black and Hispanic students in the
early grades. Children and their families engage in CT in their everyday lives,
with such experiences serving as potentially powerful learning and assessment
opportunities. The everyday knowledge of Black and Hispanic families and
communities, in particular, must be interwoven with instructional and assessment
opportunities, as too often they are not reflected in standard instruction and
assessment. Given the lack of diversity in computer science, uncovering the rich
CT resources of Black and Hispanic families through research will aid in the
development of culturally sustaining assessments tools (CSAT) for CT. This will
help educators leverage what students know in order to find ways to support
these underrepresented students. This knowledge will subsequently provide a
foundation for development of more equitable CT assessment materials. This
approach is transformative, in that it puts family and community knowledge at
the heart of assessment development. It addresses concerns related to the
problem of cultural bias in standardized measures of achievement. While focusing
on the lived experiences of Black and Hispanic families in Springfield,
Massachusetts, the team anticipates that the CSAT for CT will be useful for
Black and Hispanic families in mid-sized cities similar to Springfield, and
will, therefore, have a broad national
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational Thinking Funds of Knowledge (CTFoK)
is a research project focused on the development of CSAT for CT for students
from kindergarten to second grade. It seeks to broaden participation in computer
science (CS) by explicitly focusing on the rich resources of Black and Hispanic
families as regards their CTFoK enacted through activities of daily living and
by creating valid assessments that reflect that knowledge and cultural context.
Through classroom observations, family interviews, and teacher interviews,
research in this project will focus on: identifying family and community CTFoK
with which children enter school; the effectiveness of the CSAT for measuring
CT; young students’ conceptual understanding of CT (grades K-2); teachers’
experience on the project, especially as reflected in knowledge of and valuing
of strengths-based approaches to working with Black and Hispanic families and
students, and in integrating CS/CT concepts into these teachers’ instructional
practices. Traditional assessments have been shown to embed cultural bias, thus
perpetuating disadvantage for children of color. Therefore, it is vitally
important that the CS educational research community develop assessment methods
that are equitable. The work is transformative on two levels: first it centers
family and community knowledge as foundational to children’s prior and future
knowledge; and second, it uses this information to create equitable assessment
materials. This work will have a broad impact in providing the results of
research to the CSEd community at large. This project is supported through the
CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.