* 2122510
* PECSI: Pathways for Equitable Computer Science Instruction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Susan Jansen Varnum, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,185.00

According to a recent report from Pennsylvania Governor Wolf, 71% of the state’s
new jobs over the next ten years will require computer science skills. Computer
science is therefore an important knowledge area for K-12 students in the
Philadelphia Metropolitan Area, providing opportunities to economic mobility
through fast-growing and high-paying occupations in a region where the median
family income is 25% lower than the national average and the poverty rate is
double that of the national average. This partnership between Temple
University’s College of Science and Technology and the Montgomery County
Intermediate Unit will prepare high school teachers to teach equitable and
inclusive computer science classes, support current computer science teachers
through professional development opportunities, and provide opportunities for
teachers to receive professional certification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project engages Temple University’s College of Science and Technology and the
Montgomery County Intermediate Unit to develop and implement an integrated,
scalable educational program to build capacity for equitable computer science
(CS) instruction in secondary schools. Building on a history of collaborative
development of professional development programs to improve STEM teaching, the
partners have established relations and trust as well as extensive and
comprehensive reach with respect to recruiting, engaging, and supporting
practitioners (teachers, principals, district administrations, and students).
The new effort addresses three problems of practice: shortage of high school
teachers prepared to teach CS with an emphasis on equity and inclusive design,
in-service teachers in the district lack opportunities for sustained education
in CS content knowledge and opportunities for professional certification. The
curricular elements of the pathway are designed to align with the CS K12
framework and prepare teachers for the Praxis II CS exam, which leads to a
secondary certification for teaching CS in the state of Pennsylvania. Throughout
the pathway, teachers engage in opportunities designed to develop knowledge and
practice application of inclusive pedagogy, with an emphasis on inquiry-based,
equity-focused frameworks and the Universal Design for Learning framework for
developing curricular plans and materials to teach CS in secondary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.