* 2122808
* PFI-TT: Developing a vacuum stripping and absorption system for value-added ammonia removal from wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Wendong Tao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 10/31/2023
* USD 255,326.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to promote the shift of wastewater
treatment from costly ammonia removal to resource recovery. Nitrogen discharge
limits are increasingly added to wastewater discharge permits and have become
more stringent in the National and State Pollutant Discharge Elimination
Systems. This vacuum stripping and absorption process provides an economical,
scalable, efficient ammonia recovery technology. It can be scaled up at
concentrated animal feeding operations to upgrade biosolids and recover ammonia
in animal manure and anaerobically digested manure, thus providing land
application of animal manure. Meanwhile, the technology can efficiently recover
ammonia in anaerobically digested sewage sludge, raising the utility of
biosolids separated from sludge and improving sludge dewaterability, reducing
operating costs and adding revenue streams at wastewater resource recovery
facilities. This PFI-TT project will establish partnerships with wastewater
generators, technology vendors, and a cooperative field station to promote
technology commercialization. The project will also train a postdoctoral
researcher and graduate and undergraduate students in innovation and
entrepreneurship in environmental technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is to advance the recently invented vacuum stripping and absorption technology
through the proof-of-concept stage for value-added treatment of ammonia-rich
wastewater. To scale up from a vacuum stripper that employs single pool boiling,
a 125-gallon stripper configured vertically with 3 boiling pools will be
operated with landfill leachate, sludge digestate, pressate of sludge digestate,
dairy manure, and manure digestate to validate the multi-pool boiling design and
optimize this upscaling approach. The pilot tests will also tune the designs of
a demister and absorption column for effective reflux of water vapor and
recovery of ammonia as granular ammonium sulfate. The enhancement of vacuum-
assisted thermal treatment under the vacuum stripping conditions on solids
solubilization, reduction of biosolids pathogens, and digestate dewatering will
be evaluated along with ammonia recovery kinetics in the pilot tests to
facilitate scale-up design and economic analysis of commercial applications. The
enhancement of solids solubilization and ammonia recovery for high-rate, stable
anaerobic digestion will be assessed at a small scale. To facilitate
certification of the recovered salt as a fertilizer, especially for organic
farming, dual absorption of the stripped ammonia and carbon dioxide in biogas
will be explored for benign production of ammonium bicarbonate
granules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.