* 2122147
* PREM- Emergent Interface Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Xiao-Qian Wang, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,846,314.00

Clark Atlanta University (CAU), a research intensive university and Spelman
College (SC) are two of the four institutions that comprise the Atlanta
University Center (AUC), the nationâ€™s oldest and largest consortium of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. Both institutions comprised a
combined enrollment of over 6,500 students, over 95 % of whom are African
Americans, a large portion of whom are first-generation college students. The
proposed Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between
these two AUC schools and the Platform for the Accelerated Realization,
Analysis, and Discovery of Interface Materials (PARADIM), a National Science
Foundation-funded Materials Innovation Platform at Cornell University, will
promote and enhance the participation and advance degree attainment of over 10
Ph.D. and over 40 B.S. students, most of whom will be from underrepresented
minority groups. Students will develop expertise in the design and creation of
new interface materials - materials that do not exist in nature - with
unprecedented properties for the next generation of electronic,
magnetoelectronic and optoelectronic devices, while acquiring a strong set of
multidisciplinary skills in fundamental research. The participating students
will conduct research at the three academic institutions and will be mentored by
faculty from several disciplines. This PREM project will allow CAU and Spelman
College to significantly accelerate their emergence in materials research and
develop a long-lasting collaborative partnership with PARADIM. The research
results under the CAU-SC-PARADIM PREM will be disseminated in peer-reviewed
journals and conferences, and to the public at large via a dedicated web
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A synergistic interdisciplinary research approach
to the advancement of the basic understanding of oxide-oxide, oxide-covalent
organic frameworks, and oxide-polymer interfaces that is essental for the design
and creation of new interface materials with unprecedented properties for the
next generation of electronic, magnetoelectronic and optoelectronic devices will
be conducted. The PREM team will focus on the following key fundamental aspects
of interface materials research: (1) theoretical calculations to predict
mechanisms and guide the design of new oxide-oxide interface materials that
enable electrical control of magnetism to achieve higher magnetoelectric
coefficients at room temperature; (2) theoretical calculations, design and
synthesis of ferromagnetic oxide/covalent organic framework COF van der Waals
heterostructures and probing proximity-induced interlayer interactions, such as
interlayer electronic coupling, and hybridization-induced charge delocalization
on the COF layer formation; and (3) synthesis and electroconductive properties
investigation of novel ferroelectric polymers/ferroelectric oxide interfaces.
The researchers and world-class instrument facilities at PARADIM will enable and
catalyze the exploration of the basic science of interface materials and provide
unique opportunities for cross-fertilization of ideas, mentoring, and
multidisciplinary training. The collaborative team will foster a high-level of
research intensity and a student-centered environment by holding research-focus
group meetings via video teleconferencing, academic year research, summer school
and REU, and site visits, where students, post-docs, and faculty, are immersed
in seminars and hands-on workshops to learn techniques in interface materials
design, synthesis and characterization. Ultimately, this partnership will
increase understanding of the structure-properties relationships of interface
materials and pave the way for the next generation of oxide-based electronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.