* 2122167
* CNS: CORE: Small: Collaborative Research: Towards Sustainable, Efficient and Secure IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yu Luo, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 188,396.00

To meet the ever-growing need of energy supply for the Internet of Things (IoT)
devices, energy harvesting is emerging as a promising alternative to traditional
power grids and batteries. The goal of this project is to develop energy-
efficient and secure wireless communication systems and protocols for renewable
energy-powered IoT devices. In particular, this project will develop novel
techniques for network synchronization, efficient data transmission, and
security and will tackle the challenges arising from practical issues such as
limited power supply and other unique features of renewable energy-powered
systems. The project will provide a rich environment and platform that will
facilitate educating and training students from high school level to graduate
level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop energy-
efficient and secure wireless communication systems and protocols for renewable
energy-powered IoT devices. This project is organized around three research
thrusts. As part of the first thrust, the PIs will develop a wake-up radio-based
time synchronization method, which can achieve high synchronization precision
and ultra-low energy cost. In the second thrust, the PI will develop a new
nonlinear recursive energy harvesting model that considers practical aspects of
wireless systems. In the third thrust, the PIs will analyze new security threats
caused by malicious energy attacks and will develop novel reinforcement
learning-based intelligent attack and defense mechanisms. This project will
develop a multi-disciplinary approach that brings together multiple fields in
networking, energy harvesting, and security. The project will provide a rich
environment and platform that will facilitate educating and training students
from high school level to graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Computer and Networking System Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.