* 2122828
* HSI Planning Project: Integrative Undergraduate STEM Education at Angelo State University (I-USE ASU)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Paula Kueter, Angelo State University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,597.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: Planning Project: Integrative
Undergraduate STEM Education at Angelo State University aims to identify the
motivations and challenges that promising Latinx students face in their academic
preparation and the impressions of their families, secondary school teachers and
administrators towards STEM education and careers. The findings from this
project will begin the process of guiding the development of new critical
pathways in STEM that will embrace the motivations and address challenges to
increase Latinx enrollment and completion of STEM degrees. Reducing the barriers
and focusing on motivational approaches will help address the growing demand
disparity that exists in the STEM workforce and will create an environment
conducive for Latinx to thrive in their STEM education. Aligning with the
numerous reports that have called for the reform of undergraduate education to
improve student learning outcomes, persistence, and graduation rates for STEM
students and leaders, this project recognizes that improvements other than
coursework and teaching are needed to create student success, especially for
minoritized students. These areas address the critical social and emotional
components and the impact of barriers, implicit bias, and microaggression, which
significantly influence student interest in pursuing STEM majors and careers,
especially in Latinx, female, and historically underrepresented groups. Outcomes
of this work will continue to refine existing supports and create pathways that
meet students where they are in their college careers academically and socially
through pathways that enable rather than disable the motivation of Latinx STEM
students to succeed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
identify the motivations for pursuing STEM at distinct stages of the academic
career and the perception of family and community groups towards STEM education
and careers among Latinx and historically underrepresented groups. The research
questions include: 1) What are the diversion points for students leaving STEM
fields? 2) How do families influence choices in career and education? and 3) How
do community members influence choices in career and education? A mixed-method
approach will ascertain findings from key constituents that will determine the
key metrics needed to redesign the college STEM pipeline to a student-focused
guided critical pathway approach. The expected results will reveal the negative
impact of a traditionally offered STEM academic program on promising Latinx STEM
students. The work will be disseminated through publications, conferences, and
white papers, and through website communication. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.