* 2122313
* Characterizing capacity of controllable DERs to provide energy storage service to the power grid
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Sean Meyn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 359,689.00

The aim of this project is to develop methods to estimate the capacity of
distributed energy resources to provide demand side services to the power grid,
in particular, Virtual Energy Storage (VES) from a collection of flexible loads.
Virtual energy storage refers to small controlled changes in the electrical
power consumption of loads, such as air conditioners, so that the resulting
variation appears like the charging and discharging of a battery to the rest of
the power grid. Virtual energy storage is expected to be cheaper than real
batteries since no new hardware is needed; the only change is software. A
bottleneck in deploying this technology has been the lack of tools to answer
questions about the equivalent battery capacity of large collections of loads,
such as, "How many smart residential air conditioners do we need to provide the
same service as a 5MW/3MWh Li-ion battery?". The project will develop
mathematical techniques to answer such questions and more, and thereby enable
grid operation and planning with smart loads of the future. The project will
thus contribute to increasing the reliability and resiliency of the nationâ€™s
electricity supply. An intellectual merit of the proposed methods is that they
are "future proof" since they are independent of the algorithms used to
coordination the loads. Another intellectual merit is the data-driven methods
proposed, which do not need simple reduced order models of DERs that are
difficult to obtain. A broader impact of the project is to help grid operators
adopt smart load technology by providing computational methods for operation and
planning. Other broader impacts include enhancements to the curriculum in the
PI's institution with research results and attracting underrepresented and
minority undergraduates to STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because each
load must satisfy the consumer's local quality of service in providing grid
support, the capacity of a large collection of loads to provide VES has a
complex dependency on these local quality of service constraints. Apart from
MW/MWh numbers, grid operators also need to determine what kind of demand
deviation is feasible for a collection of loads so that no one has to violate
its local constraints. For instance, the indoor temperature should not become
too hot or cold when an air conditioner is providing demand side service. These
challenges are addressed in two distinct time scales: short term planning (in
hours) and long-term planning (in months). For short term planning, a
deterministic framework is proposed in which feasible demand trajectories are
described via a set of low dimensional constraints. A key innovation is to
reduce high-dimensional integer constraints due to lock-out constraints at loads
into low-dimensional convex constraints for the collection through ensemble
averages. For long term planning, a statistical framework based on spectral
densities is proposed, which enables characterizing all possible samples paths
of feasible demand deviation signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.