* 2122513
* Collaborative Research: Developing crystal clocks in metamorphic rocks: Using lithium in subduction zone garnets to decipher fluid release timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Besim Dragovic, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 314,922.00

Subduction zones are places where one of Earth's tectonic plates dives beneath
another. They are the location of many natural hazards, including volcanic
eruptions such as Mt St Helens (1980) and Mt Pinatubo (1991), and earthquakes
and tsunamis, like Tohoku, Japan (2011). In subduction zones, the release of
water and other fluids plays an important role in generating deadly hazards, but
fluid flow processes and duration are not well understood. Metamorphic rocks
that formed deep in ancient subduction zones and have been brought to the
surface can contain minerals that record the release and movement of such
fluids. These minerals provide a way to directly sample materials formed in
subductions zones. The mineral garnet, found in many of these metamorphic rocks,
grows over a period of time in concentric growth zones. Growth zones are like
tree rings, recording information about the geologic history of the mineral.
Ratios of different masses (or isotopes) of an element called lithium change
across growth zones within a garnet and variations in these ratios can act as a
“stopwatch” for fluid flow. This work will measure lithium isotopes in garnets
collected from six different sites and use laboratory experiments to determine
fluid flow timescales. The results of this work will link fluid flow processes
recorded in the rocks with processes occurring in active subduction systems,
including different types of seismic events. The proposed work includes
development of an online mini-lesson for introductory geoscience classes.
Through this lesson, students will explore crystal clocks in different geologic
settings to better understand the timescales over which geologic processes
operate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to determine fluid flow
timescales using a two-pronged approach. The first approach is to investigate
natural samples from six different subduction-related localities that contain
evidence for fluid flow events. Measurements of lithium isotopes across garnets
from these samples will address the following key questions: 1) Do subduction-
related fluids revisit former pathways and do existing timescales reflect a
single pulse or multiple pulses of fluid? 2) If fluid flow occurs in multiple
pulses, what is the degree of cyclicity of those fluid flow events? 3) What are
the durations of individual fluid pulses? The second approach is to use
experiments designed to determine the diffusivity of Li in garnets. The
experiments will address the following key questions: 4) What is the diffusivity
of Li in garnet? 5) What is the role of oxygen fugacity? Two types of
experiments will be used: sealed silica tube experiments to address the effects
of temperature and garnet composition on diffusion and gas mixing experiments to
address the role of oxygen fugacity on diffusion. The combination of the results
from the diffusion experiments applied to the proposed measurements within
natural garnet will allow us to quantify the duration of fluid pulses described
in question 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.