* 2122779
* PFI-TT: Storing energy in the electric vehicle’s automotive body
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jayan Thomas, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 386,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of a body shell for
electric vehicles (EVs) that addresses the range anxiety, i.e., drivers concern
about the miles per charge. The proposed project seeks to increase the miles per
charge by developing a dual-function carbon fiber composite for the automotive
body. The carbon fiber composite will store electrical energy in addition to
providing the mechanical strength necessary to function as a structural
component. The stored energy achieves enhanced miles per charge, attracting
better acceptance for EVs. The increased EV usage imparts a positive impact on
the environment. Beyond EVs, the energy-storing carbon composite has potential
application as the structural component of space vehicles. The energy-storing
capability may also be used in wearable electronic devices. Finally, the project
develops entrepreneurial and leadership skills for participating undergraduate
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project increases the
miles per charge of electric vehicles (EVs) by storing energy in their
automotive body shell in addition to the existing batteries. Currently, there is
a significant effort to manufacture more EVs to reduce global warming and make
the US less dependent on foreign fuel. A major limitation to achieving the
widespread use of EVs is the low miles per charge. The objective of the research
is to make a 0.5 m2 dual-function carbon composite. The highly enhanced energy
storage ability of the carbon composite is obtained by judiciously engineering
carbon fibers. This project provides the ability to make an energy-storing
composite with aqueous semisolid gel electrolytes. The structural composites
will be safe from fire hazards in case of an accident, unlike organic
electrolyte-based lithium-ion batteries. As carbon composites are already being
employed in vehicles as lightweight structural components, vehicle manufacturers
may be able to easily adopt a dual-function carbon composite as the body
shell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.