* 2122507
* The Zonal Overturning Circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xinfeng Liang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,034.00

Vertical transports in the ocean are an important component of the coupled
climate system because they are able to move heat, carbon, nutrients, and other
tracers into and out of the surface mixed layer, where they can be exchanged
with the atmosphere. Almost all research on the Ocean’s overturning circulation
has focused on the two-dimensional Meridional Overturning Circulation, a two-
dimensional latitude/depth projection. In reality the overturning circulation is
three-dimensional, with large zonal variations in vertical and diapycnal
transports, often at different latitudes, that are connected by zonal flows.
This project would examine this Zonal Overturning Circulation, the three-
dimensional non-zonally averaged aspects of the two-dimensional Meridional
Overturning. The primary focus will be on the expected upwelling along
midlatitude western boundaries, which is expected to mirror the downwelling
along eastern boundaries that has been examined in the past, both associated
with alongshore pressure gradients. This upwelling is found in several models at
significant transport magnitudes, affecting the middle to upper water column and
potentially influencing the exposure of those waters to the atmosphere, air-sea
exchange, heat and salt storage and variability. The project will relate the
magnitude, horizontal, and vertical scales of the upwelling regions to their
fundamental driving mechanisms, surface wind stress, and buoyancy forcing, using
high resolution idealized numerical models, low and high resolution realistic
state estimates, and boundary layer theory. The work will provide insight into
the role of western boundary upwelling in the global climate system, support a
graduate student, contribute to graduate and undergraduate course content,
including the WHOI GFD summer school and classes at U. Delaware, and involve
undergraduates through the WHOI summer student fellow program and the U. Del.
REU program. Public outreach is planned through webpages and the U. Del. annual
Coast Day presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the
proposed study are: to apply a hierarchy of idealized models and boundary layer
theory to gain a fundamental understanding of what maintains the observed
pressure gradient along mid-latitude western boundaries and how this connects to
the three-dimensional ocean circulation and heat transport; to diagnose vertical
transports and buoyancy budgets in realistic low- and high-resolution ocean
state estimates and relate these findings to the idealized modeling and theory;
and to use Lagrangian diagnostics to diagnose the source regions of waters
upwelled near the western boundary and their fate after upwelling, including
possible entrainment into the surface mixed layer and influence on air-sea
interaction. Idealized modeling will be based on the HYCOM primitive equation
model, which can be configured as purely isopycnal, z-coordinate, sigma-
coordinate, or a combination of these coordinate systems. The model will be
applied in increasingly complex configurations in order to better isolate and
understand the physics controlling the source waters for the zonal overturning
circulation. Realistic modeling will include two ocean state estimates from the
“Estimating the Circulation and Climate of the Ocean (ECCO)” consortium: the
low-resolution, non-eddy resolving ECCO version 4 (ECCO v4); and the eddy-
permitting ECCO, phase II (ECCO2). In addition to examining the dynamics
controlling upwelling, the models will also be used to explore the source and
fate of upwelled water, using the introduction of both tracers and floats at a
range of initial depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.