* 2122050
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Tectonic and Petrological Processes Controlling Iron Oxide-Apatite Mineralization in a Mesoproterozoic Collisional Orogen
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Blair Schoene, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 383,551.00

Iron oxide-apatite (IOA) deposits in the New Jersey (NJ) Highlands were an
important source of iron ore in the region for about 200 years, impacting the
local economy and fueling the industrial revolution in the 18th and 19th
centuries. Similar types of deposits occur globally, but there is little
consensus as to how and why they form. As global demand for natural resources
grows, it is increasingly important to better understand the geological
processes that produce critical resources such as those found in IOA deposits.
In addition to their economic and historical significance, the NJ deposits are
found in rocks associated with one of Earth’s largest mountain-building events,
which occurred along the eastern edge of North America approximately 1.3 to 1.0
billion years ago. This project aims to characterize the formation of IOAs using
a variety of tools, leading to better understanding of IOAs worldwide.
Additionally, the proposed study of IOA deposits will provide information about
how massive mountain belts evolve through time. The study location and
historical backdrop also opens many exciting doors for engaging the local
community in regional geology and the impact of geoscience on society. This
project involves organizing a 1-week seminar and a field trip on the regional
geologic setting of New Jersey and the state’s historical iron industry for
local K-12 teachers from underserved communities. This work also engages
undergraduate students in educational and research experiences and supports two
early career scientists from underrepresented identities in
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exhumed metamorphic core of Mesoproterozoic
Grenville Orogeny provides a superb natural laboratory to study the enigmatic
magmatic and fluid-driven processes that concentrate critical elements in
orogenic systems. The widely distributed nature of over 400 Kiruna-type IOA
deposits in the Grenvillian rocks of the NJ Highlands suggest that IOA genesis
reflects regional-scale tectonic processes involved in the crustal evolution of
the orogenic belt. These deposits are hosted by nearly every Mesoproterozoic
rock type in the region, making cryptic the petrologic and tectonic mechanisms
that led to their genesis and the stages of the Grenville Orogeny in which they
operated. This project aims to determine whether mineralization occurred by: 1)
Pre-collisional hydrothermal processes operating in a back-arc basin, 2)
Magmatic processes related to the widespread intrusion of granitic to monzonitic
magmas during arc accretion, or 3) Magmatic and/or metasomatic processes related
to post-orogenic lithospheric delamination and extensional collapse. The key to
discriminating between these hypotheses lies in integrating precise constraints
on the timing of IOA deposition with the unique textural and chemical signatures
of the different petrogenetic processes involved. This project evaluates five NJ
IOA deposits using petrochronology. This approach involves 1) making field and
petrographic observations to determine deformational and emplacement histories
between IOA deposits and host rocks, 2) interpreting mineral textures and
chemistries in IOA ores, and 3) using both high-spatial resolution and high-
precision U-Th-Pb geochronology to determine the timing and duration of IOA
mineralization and place it in the context of host rock deformation and
metamorphism. The results of this work will ultimately contribute to an
understanding of the tectonic mechanisms responsible for IOA genesis in
collisional orogenic belts and the timescales over which they
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.