* 2122922
* Mentorship and Project-Based Learning to Support Computational Thinking and Computer Science Education Pathways for Underrepresented Students in Los Angeles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tyrone Howard, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Educating Black and Latinx middle and high school students in the field of
computer science with specialized skills is of high social and economic interest
to the United States. Computational thinking skills, such as persistence in
working with difficult problems and collaborating with others to achieve a
common goal, are foundational in preparing students for careers in computing and
technology. This partnership between UCLA and a neighboring middle and high
school in South Los Angeles will explore how developing computational thinking
skills may also enhance students’ understanding of math concepts. To do this,
the team will focus on supporting students of color through two critical aspects
of education pathways through computer science: the delivery of knowledge by
teachers and social influence near-peer mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon a current partnership between the Critical Design and Gaming
Schools (C:\DAGS) in South Los Angeles and the Center for the Transformation of
Schools (CTS) at UCLA that centers on effective interventions for 9th grade
underrepresented students and expands the work to 300 students in 6th-12th
grade. The project seeks to advance understanding of effective models for CT
student development in schools that serve predominantly low-income students of
color, as well as the types of educational pathways and partnerships that can
remove barriers to learning and how CT development can be used as a means for
promoting student learning in mathematics. The proposal investigates two
critical factors in the CS preparation pathway: the delivery of knowledge by
teachers and social influence near-peer mentors. The model will emphasize common
instructional strategies to promote CT development and mentorship from UCLA’s
Center for Excellence in Engineering and Diversity (CEED) an organization that
will provide a pipeline of undergraduate mentors to work with teachers and
student mentees at both schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.