* 2122203
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Strengthening Teaching and Advancing Research Partnerships to Reinforce the STEM Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Edward Dudley, University of Puerto Rico at Aguadilla
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 03/31/2027
* USD 800,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project from the University of Puerto Rico at
Aguadilla aims to understand factors that improve STEM undergraduate education
and help Hispanic students of Puerto Rico succeed in their STEM courses of
study. It will do so by helping faculty members develop and implement evidence-
based teaching practices to improve student learning and by providing
opportunities for students to engage in the high impact practices of
undergraduate research experiences and internships. Innovative aspects of this
project are the collaborations with other federal agencies (e.g. the US
Department of Agriculture and the Food and Drug Administration) and Pennsylvania
State University, a major research-intensive university. The project will answer
the research questions: (i) What evidence-based active learning strategies and
interventions are successful at HSIs? (ii) What institutional programs lead to
increased retention and graduation rates for students majoring in STEM
fields?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two goals guide the Strengthening Teaching and
Advancing Research Partnerships(STARp) project. First is to implement new active
learning pedagogies in gatekeeper STEM courses to increase the retention of
students in STEM majors. Second is to involve students in undergraduate research
and citizen science projects to increase their persistence in STEM education and
pursuit of STEM career paths. The STARp project will use evidence-based
approaches that have been shown to improve student success of traditionally
underrepresented groups in STEM. This project will improve undergraduate
education by using the flipped classroom approach where the professor delivers
course content outside the classroom and then engages students in live problem-
solving during class time. In addition, the STARp project will provide
experiential opportunities for research and internships to improve students’
transition to graduate programs and the STEM workforce. It will also target the
critical second-to-third year transition through citizen science projects in
which undergraduate students train and lead high school students in their
creation of a community-based research project. The five-year project will
identify factors that develop student interest to continue postgraduate studies
and/or integration into the STEM workforce. A mixed methods research approach
will be used to assess the impact of each intervention. The strategies employed
by the STARp project are aimed to broaden representation in the STEM fields. The
results are expected to be used as models for other Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) seeking to overcome obstacles to undergraduate student
success in STEM. The project’s best strategies, activities, and success will be
shared in publications, web pages, and social media. The knowledge generated by
the STARp project has the potential to contribute to a diversified STEM
Workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity. Projects supported by the
HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on
how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.