* 2122058
* Xavier-UChicago Partnership for Research and Education in Materials for Energy Storage and Sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stuart Rowan, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non -Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Xavier University of Louisiana (Xavier), a primarily
undergraduate and historically black university, has a rich history of
graduating Black American students who pursue careers in postgraduate education
towards careers in healthcare and research-based careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Leveraging this strong reputation
for STEM education, this Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
(PREM) Seed project supports a partnership between the University of Chicago
(UChicago) and Xavier which seeks to increase diversity in research-based
careers in materials science and engineering through targeted interventions that
focus on engaging underrepresented minority students in research early in their
undergraduate education. This partnership also endeavors to increase
undergraduate student involvement in cutting-edge energy storage related
research in materials science and engineering through strategic collaborations
with UChicago faculty. Furthermore, this PREM Seed project is used to inform
student recruitment, retention, and degree attainment efforts pursuant to a
lasting Xavier-UChicago PREM journey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;Facilitated by the UChicago MRSEC and the Materials and
Interfaces Center for High Energy Storage and Sensing (MICHESS) at Xavier, lab-
to-lab partnerships between Xavier and UChicago faculty are intentionally
organized around long-term research collaborations within an interdisciplinary
research group (IRG) that develops materials for improved energy storage
applications. The overall goal of this IRG is to develop materials that support
safer lithium batteries with high energy density through an understanding of the
underlying interfacial interactions that occur as a result of lithium cation
transport at the electrode-electrolyte interface. The Xavier-UChicago
partnership encompasses two thematically related research projects that directly
address this overall objective by focusing on (1) developing robust solid
electrolytes with high mechanical strength and competitive lithium conductivity
and (2) investigating detrimental lithiation mechanisms at electrode surfaces
during lithium cation intercalation. These efforts have the potential to lead to
meaningful contributions towards understanding the critical interfacial
interactions that determine and/or limit the performance of energy storage
devices. Further, this collaborative research endeavor, focused on interactions
at material interfaces, also supports significant educational and diversity
goals of the Xavier-UChicago partnership. The primary educational effort is to
increase access to foundational training in materials science and engineering
through mentored research opportunities that recruit talented URM students early
in their undergraduate education and retain those students through degree
attainment. Through intentional efforts to broaden the participation of URM
students, this partnership supports the PREM pathway by facilitating a pipeline
for talented URM students from undergraduate into graduate school and eventually
into research-based careers in materials science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.