* 2122420
* Beyond salt: Effects of estuarine circulation and mixing timescales on biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Parker MacCready, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 685,684.00

Simplified physics using theoretical approaches will allow prediction of the
response of coastal environments, particularly their water quality, to climate
variations. This study will attempt to derive reliable results from simplified
physics that are equivalent to results from complex three-dimensional computer
models in estuaries, based on full-fledged physics principles. The study will
then incorporate biogeochemical variables, such as carbon and dissolved oxygen,
in the theoretical formulation and explore different responses of an estuary to
processes that can be linked to climate variability. This project will support
one graduate student and its results will benefit regional stakeholders such as
fishery and aquaculture managers, state agencies and indigenous
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this study are twofold: 1) to advance
understanding of the link between vertical mixing and horizontal advection in
estuaries, and 2) to investigate the effects of transport timescales and spatial
structure on biogeochemical properties in estuaries. The investigation will
extrapolate the efflux-reflux theory of Cokelet &amp; Stewart (1985), showing
that horizontal exchange transports are comparable to vertical transports. The
approach is to apply the theory to the output from idealized and realistic
numerical models. Particle-tracking experiments will further determine which
portion of the water is brought into the estuary with the exchange flow and
which portion is mixed upward, becoming part of the outflow. The study will also
explore a parameter space for various exchange rates, via box models. The
project will continue to support one graduate student. Results will eventually
be useful for studies of water quality in estuaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.