* 2122627
* PFI-TT: Development of a Graphene-Based Bifunctional Electrochemical Microchip Sensor for Colorectal Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Robert Roberts, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 12/31/2023
* USD 282,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to commercialize an effective, point-
of-care, colorectal cancer cell detection test. Colorectal cancer (CRC) was the
second most common cause of cancer deaths in the United States in 2020. This
novel test will provide a non-invasive, fast, and accurate method to detect CRC
that will not only impact the lives of individual patients, but also
significantly reduce healthcare costs. If commercially viable, the proposed no-
label/real-time colorectal cancer biosensor will also contribute to new
scientific and engineering findings in biosensing technology, which is currently
projected to be a $20 billion market. The resulting device may serve as a CRC
test for preclinical diagnosis. In addition, the research based on the microchip
biosensors may improve a range of equivalent studies that use similar systems
and biomarkers. Hispanic students and postdoctoral fellows will have the
opportunity to learn the basic concepts of entrepreneurship and innovation
through this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to
systematically develop an understanding of the need and commercial viability of
a point-of-care diagnostic technology for the sensitive detection of colorectal
cancer cells in real-time. The proposed technology utilizes electrochemical
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) for the detection of specific colorectal cancer
biomarkers by a means of surface sensitive electrochemical events occurring at
the interface of a conductive, interdigital graphene/gold based microchip. The
proposed method combines the recognized sensitivity of electrochemical sensing
platforms and the well-known specificity of exclusive biomarker probes, to
provide a sensor solution with the needed portability, reliability, speed, and
accuracy required to achieve early colorectal cancer detection for point-of-care
testing (e.g. primary care doctorâ€™s office). Moreover, this project allows for
the necessary measurements and studies required to mature the techniques to move
towards commercialization and prototypes for technology
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.