* 2122620
* Creating a Novel Museum-Based Resource for Neuroscience: Mass whole-slide imaging of the R. Glenn Northcutt Collection of Comparative Vertebrate Neuroanatomy and Embryology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Joshua Sanes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 651,747.00

This project will enable online access to a unique, irreplaceable resource for
comparative studies of the evolution and development of the vertebrate brain.
The R. Glenn Northcutt Collection of Comparative Vertebrate Neuroanatomy and
Embryology, housed in Harvard’s Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ), is the
world’s largest and most taxonomically diverse collection of histological
preparations of developing and adult vertebrate brains mounted on glass
microscope slides. It is of particular interest and relevance to the current
generation of neuroscientists who use molecular and genetic approaches to
elucidate mechanisms underlying evolutionary innovations, but the slides are
fragile and access to them is difficult and time consuming. By utilizing a
whole-slide-imaging workflow developed through a novel collaboration with
Harvard’s Center for Brain Science, the project will allow professional
scientists, educators and students to easily and routinely access the slides’
content via high-resolution digital images. Such access will facilitate use of
the slides in research and education and complement novel technologies for
studying brain structure, development and function. It will facilitate
collaborations between the neuroscience and biodiversity communities and,
together with other projects that seek mass digitization and sharing of
biological collections, it will enhance the ability of natural history
institutions to more fully serve both science and society beyond their
traditional constituencies. Indeed, the project’s imaging workflow and
associated training components offer an exemplar method for rapid and cost-
effective digitization that can be used by other institutions, whose slide
holdings number in the millions, most of which remain dark
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a high-throughput, semi-
automated slide scanner to make high-resolution digital images of the
approximately 33,000 glass microscope slides in the Northcutt Collection. When
completed, the project will provide online access to approximately 500,000
serial sections and whole-mount preparations of adult brains and embryos of more
than 240 genera and 270 species of living vertebrates. A cost-effective whole-
slide imaging workflow will be utilized to process as many as 360 slides/week
while yielding excellent image resolution (0.2 and 0.4 μm/pixel at 40X and 20X
magnification, respectively). A digital image of each slide will be served to
potential users via two online portals: MCZbase, the Museum of Comparative
Zoology’s permanent specimen database; and MorphoSource, an NSF-supported online
repository for specimen digital imagery. Both portals will be configured with
Girder and SlideAtlas, two open-source software tools for whole-slide image
viewing, downloading and analysis. In addition, for as many as 20 species widely
used to teach comparative vertebrate anatomy, digital images of a subset of
histological sections labelled to point out principal brain regions will be
uploaded to BrainMaps, an online resource for vertebrate neuroanatomy. Finally,
the project will produce several resources for training both students and
professionals in methods for mass digitization and computer-assisted
visualization of slide collections regardless of subject matter. These resources
include four “how-to” videos, two online tutorials, undergraduate and graduate
student internships and a graduate-level course in museum
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.