* 2122086
* Collaborative Research: Mechanism of Manganese(IV) Oxide Biomineralization by a Bacterial Manganese Oxidase
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2020,08/31/2024
* Bradley Tebo, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 282,345.00

Manganese (Mn) is a biologically vital element, supporting life through its use
by many enzymes, including those that produce oxygen in plants and that defend
many living organisms against reactive oxygen species. Thus, the manganese
cycle—the interconversion between bioavailable Mn ions (Mn(II)) and insoluble Mn
oxide minerals (MnO2)—is globally important. Microorganisms play a significant
part in driving the manganese cycle: some bacteria use MnO2 for respiration, in
the process converting the mineral to dissolved Mn(II), while other bacteria can
oxidize Mn(II), forming the MnO2 deposits that can be found in many
environments. The latter process, biomineralization, is a less-understood field
in manganese biogeochemistry. With this award, Dr. Bradley Tebo and Dr. Thomas
Spiro will develop a comprehensive picture of bacterial manganese oxide
biomineralization, which is essential for understanding how MnO2 are processed
in nature, and how this insight might be applied to the burgeoning uses of MnO2
minerals in environmental remediation and bioenergy production. The project will
enhance the training of the next generation of scientists and embrace outreach
activities, including mentoring students and programs that seek to attract
underserved/underrepresented middle and high school students to science majors.
A set of artistic illustrations to communicate the project to a broader audience
will be created and made available through various
channels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In many Mn(II)-oxidizing bacteria, multicopper
oxidase (MCO) enzymes have been implicated to be the catalysts for Mn(II)
oxidation. In Mn(II)-oxidizing Bacillus species, dormant spores oxidize Mn(II)
and form MnO2 minerals, catalyzed by MCOs residing in the exosporium—a complex
structure that surrounds the spores. However, the molecular mechanism of MnO2
production remains to be elucidated. With the first purified bacterial manganese
oxidizing complex, Mnx, and a collection of manganese-oxidizing bacteria, this
project will reveal how bacteria control the formation of MnO2 nanoparticles.
Specifically, investigators will characterize how the protein guides the
formation of mineral units, how they are expelled into the solution and further
grow to form the mineral found in nature, and how complexities of natural
environment—biological matter of whole cells, complexing agents, and dissolved
iron—affect the final biomineral. The project is highly leveraged through a
collaborative and integrated approach of multiple state-of-the-art techniques,
including cryoEM, SAXS, EXAFS, liquid-cell TEM, and computational methods to
offer a unique molecular-level view of manganese oxide biomineralization.
Additionally, the project will expand the use of state-of-the-art microscopic
techniques, primarily used in biomedical and materials science research, to
address questions of geochemical significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.