* 2122797
* PFI-TT: Actuated Gloves for use in Assisted Training and Rehabilitation Programs
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Thad Starner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create gloves that passively teach
users new manual skills, such as learning to type Braille or playing piano, and
aid in rehabilitation after traumatic injuries, such as stroke or partial spinal
cord injury. Learning manual tasks and rehabilitation are time consuming, and
learning/rehabilitation programs can have less than a 5% adherence rate. Passive
Tactile Learning (PTL) gloves significantly accelerate skill learning and
rehabilitation by stimulating the user’s fingers throughout the day to teach the
“muscle memory” of tasks without the user’s attention. For some critical skills,
this accelerated learning may be the difference between independence and
reliance on others. In rehabilitation, motivation is a prime factor. Many
traditional therapies involve monotonous exercises and are quickly abandoned,
but playing piano can improve dexterity as well as mental well-being. PTL gloves
both directly improve hand sensation and dexterity and inspire users to continue
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project designs PTL glove
hardware and support software to integrate passive learning into longer-term
manual skill training and rehabilitation. One objective is making PTL gloves
that are comfortable, are maintainable by users or caregivers, have low
encumbrance, are easy to don/doff, have sufficient battery life for 2.5-3 hours
of use per session, and are sufficiently fashionable that users will wear them.
A second objective is creating self-service web portals such that users can
download new study or rehabilitation programs and track their progress. Thirdly,
the project seeks to establish appropriate “gold standard” (controlled,
randomized) procedures for testing over weeks or months that can be generalized
for manual skill learning (Braille, piano, etc.) and rehabilitation. These
procedures will be optimized using metrics such as users’ adherence to these
programs, speed of improvement compared to control (for example, accuracy,
speed, sensation, or spasticity depending on the task), users’ perception of
workload, and users’ preferences. Anticipated results include a generalized
procedure for a given task (e.g., piano, Braille typing) or condition (e.g.,
stroke), hardware prototypes and support infrastructure sufficient for longer-
term testing, and published results for tasks addressed by this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.