* 2122128
* UTA/NU Partnership for Functional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Krishnan Rajeshwar, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Texas at
Arlington (UTA), located in the heart of the economically thriving, ethnically
diverse Dallas-Fort Worth Metroplex, is a major university in North Texas
designated as a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) with an enrollment of about
50,000 students and more than 45% underrepresented minority (URM)
undergraduates. The goal of this Partnership in Research and Education in
Materials (PREM)SEED project between UTA and the Northwestern University (NU)
Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) is to establish (i) an
interdisciplinary collaborative cutting-edge research program on functional
materials; and (ii) an educational pipeline for URM students by providing
research and educational opportunities, comprehensive student mentoring, and
professional development programs. The partnership involves reciprocal faculty
visits and exposure of students to research and facilities at NU. Undergraduate
research is a core strategy for recruiting and retaining URM students in
materials research along with programs in research experience for undergraduates
at NU. The PREM program also involves the participation of Grambling State
University (GSU), an HBCU institution, and the establishment of a network at UTA
with GSU and other URM-serving institutions and national organizations to enable
long-term, sustainable recruiting of URM students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
PREM SEED project addresses two key fundamental aspects of functional materials
research with major technological and societal impact. In the first focus area,
electron transport and energy filtering across mixed-dimensional
heterostructures will be explored. Thermal excitation of electrons broadens the
electron energy distribution, which obscures or prevents the emergence of novel
phenomena. A quantum state will be used as an energy filter, suppressing
electron thermal distribution, and lowering the effective electron temperature.
Therefore, electron transport through quantum states of different
dimensionalities will be studied and the resulting electron energy distribution
will be measured electrically and optically. This fundamental research has
important applicability in quantum information technologies, energy-efficient
electronics, and spintronics. The second focus area will deliver new hetero-
anionic semiconductor functional materials with tunable properties that are
otherwise inaccessible from simpler homo-anionic structures and chemistries.
Advances in the computational identification of new, thermodynamically stable
compounds will be leveraged, and the new compounds will be subjected to rigorous
computer-aided prediction of optoelectronic properties. Time-efficient and
energy-efficient synthetic routes for synthesizing these materials will be
realized for rapid screening and technological implementation. The effort
focuses on a largely overlooked materials class that promises tunable band
structure along with high electronic mobility and optoelectronic attributes that
are crucial for technological applications, such as solar energy conversion,
magnetic, and optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.