* 2122985
* NSF RISE: Enhancement of Research Capability and Development of Early Career Faculty at Tuskegee University
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mohammed Qazi, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities Research Infrastructure for
Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) activity within the Centers of Research
Excellence in Science and Technology (CREST) program supports the development of
research capability at HBCUs that offer doctoral degrees in science and
engineering disciplines. HBCU-RISE projects have a direct connection to the
long-term plans of the host department(s) and the institutional mission and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students in science and engineering. With support from
the National Science Foundation, Tuskegee University intends to mentor five
early career STEM faculty by immersing them in four interconnected activities.
The proposed interventions enhance research and education in advanced materials,
provide research experiences at national laboratories, foster grantsmanship and
provide training in career-life balance.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
Tuskegee University (TU) RISE proposal is to develop, implement and disseminate
a model to increase the number of junior faculty with the expertise in Materials
Science and Engineering (MSE) at TU who will in turn increase the production of
PhDs in MSE. Five early career STEM faculty will be immersed in the following
four interconnected mentored interventions designed to bolster their expertise
in MSE research and develop skills in the preparation of competitive proposals
for research funding while adopting positive work-like balance practices:
Intervention 1 (Research) will enhance research and educational capabilities in
advanced materials; Intervention 2 (Research) will provide research experiences
at national laboratories; Intervention 3 (Grantsmanship) will foster
Grantsmanship through mentored support in all pre and post award processes; and
4) Intervention 4 (Work-Life Balance) will provide a Workshop Series on Career-
Life Balance. These interventions will allow TU junior faculty to become more
competitive in attracting research grants from Federal agencies and foundations
and increase the number of underrepresented African American doctoral students.
The processes and knowledge developed through interventions 1 &amp; 2 in
advanced materials will help in product development in areas such as biomedical,
agriculture and polymer science. Additionally, the knowledge that will be
generated by the RISE model is scalable and can be replicated at other HBCUs to
overcome the challenges faced by their junior faculty. The broader impacts also
include improved research capabilities at TU in advanced materials and the
production of many minorities and women with B.Sc., M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees.
Participating students will be trained in cutting-edge research and learn
communication and interpersonal skills which will enable them to become role
models for other students. Moreover, these graduates will help bring much-needed
diversity to the nation's advanced technological workforce. The human and
physical scientific infrastructure established by the RISE grant will contribute
to TUâ€™s long-term vision of reaching the Carnegie classification as a doctoral
granting institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.