* 2122443
* Infrastructure and Subsistence Strategies in the Context of Long Term Land Use
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Kathleen Morrison, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2025
* USD 247,691.00

This project investigates the social and economic role of ancient animal hunting
traps known as "desert kites" during a time of dramatic changing land use, human
migrations, and shifting economies. Located in a hyper-arid, basaltic desert,
these structures were built as mass-kill traps for ungulates in the later
prehistory of the region. Each chain includes dozens to hundreds of individual
traps, spanning tens of kilometers, linked by intricate wall networks that
functioned to create one enormous system. These represent a remarkable ancient
infrastructural investment in labor, significant social organization, and the
ability to generate subsistence surpluses in a marginal environment. This new
study of desert kites, in context, focuses on the economy of this desert
infrastructure and the social organization of large-scale prey-manipulation
strategies, to offer new insight into subsistence adaptations in marginal
environments. The results from this research have the potential to transform
knowledge of human responses and adaptations to arid environments in prehistory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research examines human land-use in a critical and
understudied period of prehistory in order to document overlooked instances of
significant anthropogenic landscape transformation and assesses the potential
long-term impact on climate and environment. To address these issues, the
investigators integrate remote sensing data, including historic satellite and
aerial imagery, modern high resolution satellite imagery, and 3D data from low-
elevation drone photography for landscape-scale mapping and analysis of ancient
features. This combination of remote sensing data sources provides time depth
for changing landscape conditions in the present, 3D data for topographic
reconstructions, and broad-scale coverage across a large survey area. The remote
sensing analysis is complemented by intensive excavations of kites and
associated structures while the analysis of animal remains and artifacts provide
a clear picture of how massive-kill traps were used as a crucial subsistence
technology that reflects broad regional cooperation. By revealing nuanced
insights into settlement and land use patterns, herding versus hunting
strategies, building traditions, and exchange with different regions, this
research begins to demonstrate the network people established beyond well-
studied agriculture zones. These new strategies, land use patterns and
settlements underscore a vital new social network that has been invisible up
until now and will facilitate comparative analyses across the larger arid
environmental regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.