* 2122691
* Collaborative Research: Examining the effects of academic mobility on individual professors’ research activity and institutional human capital at HBCUs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jiangen He, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 191,102.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HBCUs comprise 3 percent of higher
education institutions in the United States but make substantial contributions
to the preparation of Black professionals. Despite these achievements, HBCUs,
since the 1960s, often lose the battle with non-HBCUs for the most talented
Black students and faculty, causing a “brain drain” from HBCUs. Because of
social mobility and civil rights movements in the past few decades, the need to
investigate academic mobility of faculty at HBCUs is ever-increasing. The goal
of this project is to examine two forms of effects of academic mobility. The
first is the effect at the institution level, measuring the potential brain
drain from HBCUs. The second is the effect at the individual faculty level,
assesses the impact of academic moves on their career advancement. Results from
this large-scale, longitudinal analysis will provide important evidence
regarding the career paths of professors at HBCUs, including those moving to
other HBCUs and those moving to other types of institution. This project will
identify and seek to understand factors associated with mobility and retention
decisions for HBCU faculty and provide data-backed evidence to support a
diverse, inclusive, and equitable scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will collect faculty affiliation data from 35 HBCUs with
master- or doctoral-level programs. It will use Internet Archive as the primary
data source and LinkedIn, ORCID, and ProQuest as secondary data sources. The
project will link large, heterogeneous corpora of faculty affiliation data,
Carnegie Classification institution profile data, Web of Science publication and
citation data, and survey and interview data. The linked data will be used to
conduct expansive, cross-domain examinations of the impact of academic moves on
individual professors’ research activity and institutional human capital. The
project will employ statistical modeling and historical comparisons in
combination with surveys and interviews. The combination of quantitative and
qualitative results will provide evidence concerning both the causes of
institutional human capital change at HBCUs and the effect of moves on
professors’ research activities. This project will contribute new knowledge on
academic mobility, particularly for minority-serving institutions (MSIs). The
project will design an interactive visual dashboard to share project outputs
broadly. The visual dashboard will be updated annually in September for three
additional years beyond the conclusion of the project. The results of this
project will provide insights for administrators and policy
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.