* 2122174
* EAGER: SAI: Facilitating Restoration of Natural Infrastructure Using Uncertainty Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Roger Bales, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the management and
restoration of watersheds in remote, mountainous regions. Management efforts can
reduce the risk of severe wildfires in these regions. Among local residents and
stakeholders, however, there may be misunderstandings about the ecological
processes that lead management efforts to reduce the risks of fires. As seen
more generally in studies of risk perception, the resulting uncertainties can
result in indecision and inaction. In this study, the researchers examine how
uncertainties in evaluating risks lead people to prioritize different management
opportunities. Using experimental methods, the study presents participants with
varying degrees of uncertainty about anticipated outcomes of restoration efforts
to determine how this variation affects decisions to allocate resources toward
management. The project contributes to goals of forest management by identifying
the information that stakeholders need to make decisions about restoration
efforts. The project also provides training opportunities for a graduate student
and a postdoctoral scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses the
effects of uncertain outcomes on the perceived benefits of restoration efforts
in remote, mountainous watersheds. Drawing on methods and theory from cognitive
psychology, the researchers experimentally pose scenarios to participants to
determine how varying uncertainty leads individuals to evaluate the benefits of
different management options. This work focuses on three distinct types of
uncertainty, namely direct, indirect, and perceived uncertainty. Direct
uncertainty assumes that the probabilities of events are known completely
whereas indirect uncertainty arises when the respective probabilities are known
only incompletely. Perceived uncertainty refers to subjective feelings of
uncertainty, which are commonly influential in decision-making. This project
disentangles the respective effects of the different types of uncertainty on
assessments of risk and subsequent decisions. An additional objective is to
assess the extent to which visualization techniques can reshape
conceptualizations of watershed-restoration uncertainties. This study tests the
hypothesis that modern uncertainty-visualization techniques can reduce the
complexity of watershed restoration uncertainties by intuitively communicating
the uncertainties and key aspects of relevant ecological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.