* 2122882
* Expanding a Statewide Pathway for CS Teacher Certification: A Curriculum Model for Secondary Education Teacher Candidates
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Gray, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 978,930.00

The University of Alabama (UA) will form a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership
(RPP) among six Alabama higher-education institutions (Alabama State University,
Jacksonville State University, University of Alabama at Birmingham, University
of Alabama in Huntsville, University of Alabama, and University of South
Alabama), as well as other RPP partners (e.g., high school Computer Science
educators across Alabama, and the Alabama State Department of Education). A
national plan for expanding K-12 Computer Science (CS) teacher professional
development must include (pre-service) future teacher candidates (TCs) well
beyond the current models of only training in-service teachers. This project
will contribute to a new approach for virtual online instruction that prepares
pre-service TCs as credentialed future CS educators who will introduce their
students to computational thinkingskills and concepts. Participant TCs will be
recruited from a diverse pool of candidates across the six partner institutions
and topics of diversity, equity, and inclusion will be a foundation of the two-
course pathway. The project is driven by the following core CSforAll needs:
scaling effective professional development (PD) efforts to a large cohort of new
CS teachers--many of whom have little to no formal CS preparation; establishing
certification programs and preservice paths for teacher PD; establishing online
and hybrid PD approaches, creating robust PD materials for teachers and
facilitators; and assessing the effectiveness of PD models with respect to
content knowledge, pedagogy, computational thinking, classroom equity, and
student outcomes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these needs, the
implementation, research and evaluation of this project will focus on expanding
our existing knowledge and impacts from a locally successful and recently
completed implementation for training Secondary Mathematics TCs in CS within
their existing Mathematics teacher preparation program. The statewide expansion
and implementation will widen the geographic coverage to TCs at our partner
institutions and broaden the recruitment to all focus areas of Secondary
Education (e.g., Science, Mathematics, Career Tech, and even Social Studies and
other teaching fields in secondary teacher preparation). The specific goals of
the project include: (1) recruiting and enrolling up to 90 secondary TCs to
begin the CS preparation pathway in pursuit of a CS endorsement added to their
secondary teaching discipline; (2) producing 72 CS credentialed secondary TCs,
of which 27 will receive a course-specific certification for AP Computer Science
Principles (CSP); (3) producing 45 full CS subject endorsed secondary teachers;
(4) leveraging an RPP model that builds beyond a prior effort, this project will
provide preparation opportunities that will enable TCs to be ready to teach CS
upon graduation, including Praxis preparation to become fully credentialed in
CS; and (5) expanding and enacting the UA campus CS curriculum for all
disciplines of secondary TCs across six higher-education partner institutions,
providing an opportunity for openly sharing all developed resources and
assisting the partner institutions in bootstrapping their own CS education
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.