* 2122102
* UPR-PENN Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Idalia Ramos, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,336,758.00

A Partnership for Research &amp; Education in Materials (PREM) between the
University of Puerto Rico (UPR) (Humacao and Cayey undergraduate campuses) and
the University of Pennsylvania (PENN) Materials Research Science &amp;
Engineering Center (MRSEC) will sustain a long-term and successful collaboration
between UPR and PENN that began in 1998. The program will advance scientific
discovery and technical development by widening and diversifying the amount of
current and potential participants doing high-quality research. It strengthens
research through an active year-around collaboration between researchers at the
two Hispanic-serving institutions and PENN. Research topics include study of
novel carbon-based materials with interesting electrical properties and
modification of surfaces of common materials that can be used as sensors and
purification devices. This rich research environment serves as the base for
further expanding and developing a pipeline model that has proven to be
successful in increasing the mentioned underrepresented group in research
careers. The model focuses on the recruitment, retention, and graduation of
undergraduate Hispanics, women, and Afro-Latin students from disadvantaged
backgrounds (low income, first-generation in college) into materials research.
It begins as early as PreK-12 with outreach activities to make youth aware of
exciting and rewarding research careers in materials, and then doing actual
research during their college studies starting at freshman and sophomore
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and education efforts of the UPR-PENN PREM
will be organized as two Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs): Charge
dynamics in transition metal and carbon-based materials (IRG-1) and Surface-
functionalized nanomaterials for sensing applications (IRG-2). IRG-1 will
synthesize, characterize, and manipulate optoelectronic materials to develop a
fundamental understanding of charge transport mechanisms leading to device
applications. IRG-2 aims to develop nanomaterials into sensing tools with
designed properties and functions for a wide range of applications that include
enzyme activity assays, detection of metals and organic pollutants, and
monitoring of environmental and biological analyte levels in biological samples.
The multidisciplinary research teams are built on UPR and PENN faculty
researchers’ evolving interests and complementary strengths. Collaborative
efforts will benefit from mutual interactions within the groups and between
IRGs. Undergraduates and high school students along the PREM Pathway will have
direct exposure in research areas related to Physics, Chemistry, Materials
Science, Engineering, Computer Science, and Nanotechnology, both experimental
and theoretical/computational. They will take part in all stages of the
research, including co-authoring publications and scientific presentations.
Faculty will also integrate their research topics, techniques, and results into
enhanced and new undergraduate courses and laboratory experiences, and outreach
activities that will impact large numbers of students, teachers, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.