* 2122460
* SCISIPBIO: Partnering Through It: Building a Research Base for Dual-Career Academics
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Jill Fisher, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 641,048.00

This research project will provide a comprehensive analysis of universities'
dual-career policies and practices and will generate resources for increasing
the representation of women and minorities in science. With more than one-third
of US-based academic researchers being in personal relationships with other
academics, recruitment and retention of top talent depends upon universities
meeting the dual-career needs of researchers. This challenge is especially
important for diversifying the scientific workforce, as prior studies have
pinpointed problems with academic appointments as a major contributor to the
leaky pipeline causing attrition of women and minorities in biomedical and STEM
fields. The project will develop evidence-based guidance for university
administrators and critical resources for dual-career researchers in order to
support greater inclusion of women and minorities in scientific careers. These
objectives will be met through a rigorous research project designed to produce
new empirical knowledge about dual-career policies, their application, and
perceptions of them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project has three
aims: (1) assess researchers' perceptions of dual-career academic job searches
and the effects of university partner-hire policies upon research productivity
and career advancement, (2) document the formal mechanisms used by universities
to support dual career hires, and (3) establish innovative resources for the
larger academic community to visualize and share information about universities'
dual career policies and practices. These aims will be accomplished through a
mixed-methods approach that includes a quantitative online survey of US based
dualcareer academic researchers' perceptions and employment decisions at
critical transition points in their careers, qualitative content analysis of the
dual-career policies of all 131 R1 ("very high research activity") universities
in the US, and the publication of an online "scorecard" of the dualcareer-
friendly status of all R1 US universities, along with an accompanying report for
university officials and academic associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.