* 2122559
* Culturally Responsive Pedagogy in  Computer Science (CR in CS)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Enrico Pontelli, COMPUTER SCIENCE ALLIANCE
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 286,920.00

In Fall 2017, New Mexico enacted legislation that will recognize one computer
science course as satisfying a high school science or math graduation
requirement, adopted CS standards in 2018, and allocated funding dedicated to CS
PD, mainly supporting K-8 initiatives. With this new emphasis on CS education in
NM, there is a critical need for NM HS CS teachers to enrich the experience of
CS students from underserved communities. This project will establish a design-
based implementation research partnership between the Computer Science Alliance,
the Computer Science Teachers Association (CSTA) New Mexico Chapter, and
researchers from New Mexico State University and the National Indian Education
Association. Together, the team will hold a series of convenings to co-design,
gather feedback from stakeholders, and ultimately pilot a culturally responsive
pedagogy-focused microcredential. With the long term goal of equitable and
rigorous CS instruction for all students in New Mexico, especially students who
identify as Hispanic and/or Native American, this partnership will support
computer science teachers’ growth towards mastery of the CSTA Standards for CS
Teachers, specifically focusing on increasing their use of culturally responsive
and inclusive teaching practices. This project is jointly funded by the
CSforAll:Research Practitioner Partnership program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research-
practitioner partnership (RPP), involving the leadership from the Computer
Science Alliance, the Computer Science Teachers Association New Mexico Chapter,
and researchers from New Mexico State University and the National Indian
Education Association will support CS teachers’ growth towards mastery of the
CSTA Standards for CS Teachers, focusing on increasing their use of culturally
responsive and inclusive teaching practices. By leveraging the pre-existing
relationships between all RPP members and their respective networks across NM,
the project will convene stakeholders representing experienced and new CS
teachers, equity-focused organizations, administrators/colleges of education,
and industry leaders who will inform a culturally responsive pedagogy in CS
microcredential tailored to the needs of Hispanic and Native American students
in NM. The RPP will recruit a small group of teachers to experience pieces of a
professional development sequence, use the strategies in their actual CS
classrooms, and submit lesson plans in which exemplars will be archived for
future dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.