* 2122886
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-OCE: Shipboard Measurements of Dissolved Aluminum, Iron, and Manganese â€“ Tracing Inputs to the South Pacific Gyre and Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 260,366.00

The goal of the international research program GEOTRACES is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. The
importance of trace elements in the ocean lies in their roles as essential
micronutrients for marine phytoplankton (e.g., iron), as toxicants (e.g., lead),
and as tracers of past and present oceanic processes (e.g., thorium). In this
project, the dissolved concentrations of two micronutrient trace elements (iron
and manganese) and a tracer of atmospheric dust deposition (aluminum) will be
measured in seawater samples collected during a research cruise in the
southeastern Pacific Ocean and adjacent Southern Ocean, in order to better
understand the inputs of these micronutrients and their impact on biological
processes in these regions. Chemical analyses will be performed at sea in near
real-time, thus providing a first glimpse of data that will inform the cruise
sampling strategy and the analyses performed by other investigators. The project
involves two US laboratories, and will support the research of a graduate and
undergraduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The U.S. GEOTRACES GP17-OCE
expedition will focus on the distribution of trace elements and isotopes along a
transect crossing the South Pacific Gyre and the Pacific sector of the Southern
Ocean, where the supply of dissolved iron (DFe) and manganese (DMn) to the
surface ocean is thought to regulate primary production and associated cycling
of carbon and nutrient elements. The investigators will undertake shipboard and
post-cruise measurements of dissolved aluminum (DAl), DFe and DMn in order to
constrain (1) the magnitude of dust deposition to this ocean region and the
fidelity of DAl and DMn as tracers of aeolian iron inputs; (2) the origin of
deep-ocean DAl and DFe anomalies, and their implications for deep sources of
these elements; and (3) the source and fate of hydrothermal DFe emissions from
the deep ocean and their role in supporting Southern Ocean primary production.
Project results, complemented by measurements of other trace chemical species
made by collaborators on GP17-OCE, will advance the understanding of the
processes that control the oceanic inventories and distributions of DAl, DFe and
DMn, and their trajectories of future change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.