* 2122672
* Broadening Access to CT-STEM: Leveraging lived experiences and hybrid language practices of upper elementary Mainers for computational sensemaking
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Aditi Wagh, Gulf of Maine Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 152,108.00

Broadening access to computing is a priority for the nation as the skills and
knowledge related to computer science are increasingly needed across various
sectors of the economy. However, without a more systematic effort towards
developing inclusive computing education, particularly as early as the K-8
grades, many students will be left out of the opportunities created by these
jobs. Of particular interest in this project are students for whom English is
not their first language. Research has shown these students learn best when
their multilingual fluency is supported in the classroom. Integrating computing
with math and science instruction and developing teaching practices that allow
students to move between languages will demonstrate how all learners, regardless
of their proficiency with the English language, can become successful at
computing, math, and science. This research project is designed to help teachers
build their own competence in teaching computing and provide structural supports
for these new teaching practices, while also evaluating the impact of a hybrid
computing curriculum for multilingual students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, researchers will partner with teachers to co-design a math and science
curriculum that integrates computing and supports hybrid language practices and
draws on students’ lived experience. The project includes support for a
Professional Learning Community for grade 6 teachers so they can collaborate and
reflect on the developing pedagogy. The project team will work in 20 classrooms,
reaching 350-400 students from an underserved and underrepresented community.
The project is designed to (1) build capacity for teachers with limited
experience teaching computing, (2) identify ways to support students’ hybrid
learning practices in an integrated curriculum, (3) understand the trajectory of
teaching with this approach, and (4) document how these activities impact
student learning and support the development of STEM identities for multilingual
learners. The project includes three research questions: (1) How do teachers as
co-designers find opportunities to integrate computing into their math and
science curriculum and support hybrid language practices? (2) How do teachers
refine their pedagogical practices over the course of 2 years through reflection
on key moments from their own and their colleagues’ teaching? (3) How does an
integrated CT-MS approach that leverages hybrid language practices support
student learning about computing, math and science and the development of their
STEM identity? The data collection and analysis will use video of classrooms,
artifacts of teachers’ planning, surveys and
interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded through the CS for All:
Research and RPPs program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.