* 2122639
* CEDAR: Advancing Observations and Understanding of Intermediate Scale Ionospheric Irregularities and Scintillation over the United States
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Fabiano Rodrigues, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 474,240.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will support a research
program that expands the ability to observe and assess the impact of ionospheric
irregularities and scintillation over the central region of the continental US
with a 30 sensor network with high sampling rates of 25 Hz. This award will also
create opportunities for citizen science initiatives. The science objectives of
the research plan are to study the relationship between the prevailing
geomagnetic activity and the occurrence of intermediate scale-size (0.1-10 km)
mid-latitude ionospheric irregularities and scintillation. The research will
examine the extent that geomagnetic activity controls the occurrence of mid-
latitude irregularities and scintillation observed over the US and identifies
what intermediate scale irregularities and scintillation are observed during
geomagnetically quiet conditions. Additional scientific objectives to be studied
in this award are what prevailing ionospheric conditions influence the
development of mid-latitude ionospheric irregularities and scintillation. More
specifically, to what extent can different types of large-scale ionospheric
disturbances (such as the expanded auroral oval, etc.) be associated with the
development of intermediate-scale irregularities and scintillation?
Additionally, the award would examine how often ionospheric disturbances
originating at low latitudes contribute to mid-latitude irregularities and
scintillation events. The award will include training and education of graduate
students that will be directly involved in the project. The award will create
research opportunities for undergraduate students, with commitment to broadening
the participation of underrepresented groups. The award will support the
creation of citizen science initiatives that may stimulate public engagement and
expand observational capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to advance
understanding of mid-latitude ionospheric irregularities and scintillation (G1),
the award will support the deployment of a newly developed, but well-tested,
low-cost sensor capable of measuring at a high-rate (25 Hz) ionospheric total
electron content (TEC) and L-Band scintillation. The specific science questions
are addressed by combining these new measurements with observations (TEC maps)
already being routinely made for the American sector. In addition to addressing
science questions, the award would expand the ability to assess the impact of
mid-latitude ionospheric irregularities and scintillation. The project will also
create opportunities for citizen science initiatives by engaging the public in
building and operating scintillation monitors. The award will address, in
particular, specific science questions that are well-aligned with the priorities
and goals of the CEDAR community. Additionally, the effort attends
recommendations by the 2013 Solar and Space Physics Decadal Survey and by the
National Space Weather Program. The application of an alternative and
potentially transformative observational approach that allows addressing a wide
range of science questions with reduced costs and risks. The development of an
observational infrastructure will produce new distributed measurements of
intermediate scale ionospheric irregularities and scintillation over the US.
These observations will be made available to the public and scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.