* 2122822
* PFI-TT: A non-toxic, biobased, and recyclable polyurethane for foam-in-place packaging and rigid foam insulation.
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Srikanth Pilla, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the conversion from a toxic to benign
manufacturing sequence for polyurethane foams in the packaging, insulation, and
construction markets. Polyurethanes rank the 6th most produced plastic in the
world yet use cancer-causing, mutagenic and reproductive toxins in their
manufacture. This project combines a 100% biobased source with non-toxic
ingredients to synthesize polyurethane foams that can be recycled back to their
starting materials at their end-of-life. The ideal of reducing plastic waste in
the environment and eliminating the use of carcinogenic material is desired
across many industries. However, the use of one-time-use plastics in packaging
applications as well as foams used for insulation has placed particular
environmental focus on the polyurethane industry. This project addresses the
need to transition from petroleum-based sources to biobased feedstocks and
enable industrially viable processes for non-toxic polyurethanes in diverse
commercial platforms. The successful outcome of this project would be a complete
shift for the polyurethane industry by innovating new routes to polyurethanes
that embrace a circular lifecycle. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
enable a room temperature foaming and curing protocol for a biobased, non-
isocyanate polyurethane. Polyurethanes are manufactured commercially from
polyols and isocyanates; The isocyanate carries significant health and safety
dangers as it is a cancer-causing, mutagenic and a reproductive toxin (CMR).
Non-isocyanate formulations in industry are currently very limited due to the
inability to adapt new non-isocyanate chemistries to processing conditions
typically used in industrial and commercial applications. To create reactive
biobased precursors for synthesis, reductive catalytic fractionation (RCF) will
be employed to woody feedstocks to extract an oil rich in bi-functional aromatic
compounds capable of functionalizing with cyclic carbonates. A previous protocol
will be leveraged to synthesize non-isocyanate polyurethane foams with specific
chemical linkages capable of depolymerization post-synthesis. Room temperature
foaming will be aided by catalyst optimization and a ultraviolet light-assisted
curing process through the addition of acrylated monomers and reactive diluents
containing vinyl groups. This approach will also facilitate the ability to vary
the viscosity of the reaction mixture to produce low density foams for packaging
applications. The successful outcome of the project may demonstrate a
commercially viable process for producing non-toxic polyurethanes at room
temperature that are specifically designed for degradation at their end-of-
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.