* 2122702
* NCS-FO:Collaborative Research:  Electroencephalography of Octopus bimaculoides using frequency tagging
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Gideon Caplovitz, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 22,414.00

Complex brains have evolved in only three lineages on planet earth: chordates,
such as ourselves, arthropods, such as honeybees, and molluscs. Among the
molluscs the octopus stands out as the brainiest and smartest. In fact, an
octopus has about half a billion neurons, which is comparable to the number of
neurons in the cortex of a dog. Just as wings evolved many times, in the birds,
bats and pterodons, complex brains have evolved to solve similar problems, such
as vision and planning, in convergent ways. To understand universal principles
of neural organization and computation, it would be beneficial to learn about
the commonalities and differences between our brains and perhaps the most
different brain on the planet, that of the octopus. While some anatomical work
has moved in this direction, there has been a relative paucity of work looking
at octopus cognition. Because octopuses cannot talk, Behavior and objective
measurements of their neural activity is one way to assess their cognition. A
great deal of work has focused on observing octopus behavior. Relatively little
research has focused on octopus neurophysiology, primarily because it is a
technically difficult issue to either place invasive electrodes inside an
octopus, or to place non-invasive electrodes on slippery octopus skin,
especially when they can easily remove them with their
arms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on developing a non-invasive
way to get measurements of octopus neural activity using underwater
electroencephalography (EEG). Researchers will place the octopuses on densely
packed, fixed electrodes on the floor of a container, rather than attempting to
place electrodes on the octopus, as one does in human EEG. This approach takes
advantage of the fact that octopuses naturally want to occupy a small crevice
and peer out onto the scene, because they are opportunistic and stealthy ambush
hunters, rather like cats, who themselves have to avoid being eaten. The goal of
the present work is to continue to develop co-PI Besio’s tripolar electrode
technology in an interactive cycle with EEG experiments that ask questions about
octopus cognition. To date, the team has struggled with various technical
problems such as corrosion caused by saltwater, or artifacts in the EEG signal
introduced by water. The team’s goal is to develop a fully functioning octopus
EEG system over the next two years of funding, to gather sufficient preliminary
data to put in a larger proposal concerning octopus cognition using EEG in the
future. This project will allow the scientific community to learn how the most
'alien' brain on earth functions, potentially teaching scientists about
universal principles of neural computation, which could shed light on how human
brains work and also inform design in artificial intelligence systems that could
benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.