* 2122230
* Collaborative Research: CISE-ANR: CNS Core: Small: Cryptographic Hardness of Module Lattices
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Noah Stephens-Davidowitz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Public-key cryptography is used in nearly all forms of modern communication to
provide authentication and privacy. However, the availability of large-scale
general-purpose quantum computers will undermine the security of currently
deployed public-key cryptographic mechanisms, including protocols protecting the
vast majority of today’s Internet traffic. Given the steady progress and
advances in quantum computing, it is critical and pressing to investigate the
mathematical and complexity-theoretic foundations for public-key cryptography
that resists attacks by quantum computers. The goal of this project is to study
the security of the primary candidates for quantum-resistant public-key
cryptography, whose security rests on the computational intractability of
certain computational problems related to mathematical objects called module
lattices. In addition to furthering the understanding of cryptographic protocols
that are likely to be in widespread use in the near future, the project will
generate educational materials that will be of interest both to the theoretical
computer science community and to the security community. It will also generate
open-source software for lattice algorithms and algebraic number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the primary candidates for quantum-
resistant public-key cryptography rely on the presumed intractability of the
problem of finding short non-zero vectors (SVP) over lattices with different
module structures. This project aims to provide a clearer understanding of this
problem and related problems. The project plans to achieve this by developing
both improved reductions between different module lattice problems and improved
dedicated algorithms. Specific directions include (1) investigating algorithms
for SVP over ideal lattices (i.e., lattices that correspond to ideals over the
ring of integers of a number field) that lead to an approximation factor below
the current best approximation factor (without pre-processing on the number
field) of roughly 2^{sqrt(n)}, with n being the lattice dimension; (2)
understanding the precise complexity of the cryptographically important NTRU
variant of SVP, its relation with other average-case versions of SVP, and
potential attacks; (3) better understanding the apparent hardness “transition”
between SVP over ideal lattices (i.e., rank-1 module lattices, which seems to be
significantly easier than SVP over arbitrary lattices) and SVP over rank-2
module lattices (whose hardness is necessary for the security of many
cryptographic schemes); and (4) continuing to contribute to efficient and robust
open-source software for lattice algorithms and algebraic number
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.