* 2122271
* Waste-Free Robotic Construction of Spatial Discrete Element Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sigrid Adriaenssens, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 430,904.00

The construction industry is one of most resource‚Äêintensive sectors and yet
civil infrastructure continues to be constructed with traditional waste-
intensive approaches. Robotic manufacturing is projected to disrupt the
construction industry in the next decades. Its advantages include increased
productivity, reduced labor costs, safer working environments and design of one-
off, complex buildings that are not technically and economically feasible with
traditional construction methods. Current building forms are deeply rooted in a
pre-robotic construction rationale, therefore robotic construction of existing
building forms still have significant economic and environmental costs. Such
construction would need form and shore work, which goes to waste once the entire
structure is completed. This research will develop computational and physical
approaches for the analysis, construction-focused design, and robotic assembly
of long span discrete structures to build without any form or shore work waste.
Additionally, this project will enhance research experiences for high school,
undergraduate and graduate students as well as a postdoctoral researcher, and
will provide outreach to the K-12 minority community through an annual
conference and an institutional summer materials research
academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to generate a new
understanding of how form finding, and element layout approaches coupled with
robotic phasing and path-planning algorithms can be tailored for robotic
assembly of spatial discrete element systems without requiring any scaffolding
or formwork. Thus, the specific objectives are to (i) to develop a computational
framework for the generation of discrete element geometries loaded under
internal membrane or axial action, and for the tessellation of efficient element
layouts based on topology optimization and geodesic net approaches, (ii) to
integrate corrugation or plate-bande construction strategies into the
computational framework to ensure stability throughout construction in the
absence of external support, and (iii) to develop and incorporate robotic
collaborative assembly methods based on temporary support phasing and path-
planning algorithms for multiple collaborative static or mobile robots, into the
framework, and physically validate them through the construction of discrete
structure prototypes. The key motivation of this project is to prove that the
shape and the element layout and sequencing of spatial structures can be
tailored to omit all support material during robotic construction. If this
premise is validated, it establishes a novel paradigm for robotic construction
and promotes robotic manufacturing as a driver for sustainable and cost-
effective civil infrastructure. This research will advance the knowledge base in
structural mechanics and design, construction engineering and additive robotic
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.