* 2122723
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: Western MA Engineering Pathways Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Adrienne Smith, Holyoke Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2025
* USD 956,458.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project called The Western MA
Engineering Pathways Program, will contribute to the national need for a diverse
engineering workforce by supporting the recruitment, retention, graduation, and
transfer of underrepresented students in engineering programs at Holyoke
Community College (HCC), the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, and Western
New England University (WNEU). Over a four-year period, the project will
identify students from partners Holyoke High School and Westfield High School
who express an interest in engineering, develop and test innovative
interventions, and support students along the academic pathway. Early engagement
with engineering concepts and ongoing comprehensive student supports will
bolster STEM identity, self-efficacy, and self-confidence among traditionally
underrepresented students in the field. The Western MA Engineering Pathways
Program has three goals: 1) Create improved pathways to broaden the
participation of students historically underrepresented in engineering, 2)
Revitalize HCC’s engineering programs to be more responsive to a diverse student
body and to regional employer demands, and 3) Produce fundamental research on
building an effective pathway for targeted students in the Western Massachusetts
that can be implemented and sustained in a way that is replicable nationally.
With support from project partners at the Collaborative for Educational
Services, the Society for Women Engineers (SWE), and the 50K Coalition, project
activities will attract and retain more students in engineering, especially
students who identify themselves as women, Latinx, or from other historically
marginalized groups. The proposed project will investigate the differences
between the experiences and decisions surrounding engineering education for
women, Latinx students, and students with multiple marginalized identities (MMI)
in undergraduate engineering education. Research questions will determine how
high school and community college students make decisions around pursuing
undergraduate engineering education; the ways in which Latinx and female
students, especially those with MMI, differ in their decision-making process
from their peers; how institutional changes made to address the needs of Latinx
students, especially those with MMI, improve their outcomes and those of other
undergraduate engineering students; and how equitable pathway design can be used
to shift stakeholders’ foci from institutional outcomes to student-centered
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Findings from this project will support equity
and inclusion efforts at each partnership institution and will guide efforts at
other Hispanic-Serving Institutions seeking to increase Latinx contributions to
the future of engineering. The project team will work with the 50k Coalition to
share promising practices and STEM education research findings on a national
scale. Improved connection and interaction with local industry will provide
employers with a voice in preparing future engineers and increasing diversity in
their workforce. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.