* 2122762
* Achieving Equitable Persistence in STEM with a Data-informed Student-centered Transformation of the First-year College Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Gabriela Smeureanu, CUNY Hunter College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,377,529.00

This project aims to develop and deploy a set of effective success practices to
transform first-year STEM education in order to attain equitable educational
outcomes in STEM, both at Hunter College and other Hispanic-serving
institutions. While many Hispanic students enter Hunter College interested in
STEM, relatively few persist and graduate in their chosen STEM majors due to
challenges during their first year. With support from the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions Program (HSI
Program), the project team will deliver several STEM success initiatives
intended to enhance first-year STEM education and determine which policies and
practices are the most effective for supporting STEM success at Hunter College.
The effective practices will be embedded across STEM disciplines at Hunter
College, thereby transforming its educational landscape. The project’s results
will be disseminated broadly, enabling other campuses to deploy similar best
practices. This is expected to reduce equity gaps and improve STEM outcomes for
Hispanic students at Hunter College and other HSIs, thereby contributing to a
larger and more diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to enhance the first-year experience among STEM students by deploying and
studying the effectiveness of a range of pedagogical practices. These include
gateway STEM course revisions, faculty pedagogical development, course-based
research experiences, STEM-focused learning communities, STEM-readiness
activities, and STEM-focused co-curricular supports. Both quantitative and
qualitative methods will be used to examine four key questions. First is how
these enhancements relate to students’ short- and long-term academic success,
motivation, belonging, and commitment to STEM. Second is how students’
motivation and self-concept as science learners relate to their success and
persistence in STEM. Third is how students’ perception of institutional climate
relates to their success and persistence in STEM. Fourth is how contextual and
situational factors relate to success across these different initiatives. The
new knowledge generated from this project will be disseminated to faculty,
researchers, policy makers, and institutional leaders within Hunter College and
the wider higher education community, via presentations, publications, and
conferences. The anticipated benefits of this project include a greater sense of
belonging and motivation among diverse STEM students; increased persistence and
success in STEM among Hispanic students; equitable outcomes for students in
their chosen STEM discipline; an enhanced STEM educational experience; increased
collaboration between STEM and STEM education faculty; and increased stakeholder
commitment to transformative STEM educational practices. This project will also
generate knowledge on the institutional transformation process itself by
deepening understanding of how intra-institutional teams can function to support
students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.