* 2122282
* How does sequential acquisition of nutritional resources modulate allocation decisions? A whole-organism perspective on life history tradeoffs
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Goggy Davidowitz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 10/31/2024
* USD 928,174.00

Nutritional resources available to organisms are often limited in nature.
Resources allocated to one trait are not available to other traits resulting in
resource allocation tradeoffs. Such tradeoffs are at the foundation of our
understanding of the ecology and evolution of all animals and plants. However,
empirical evidence for tradeoffs has been surprisingly difficult to obtain. This
is in part due to challenges associated with quantifying which and how much
nutrients organisms obtain, and how these nutrients are distributed across the
organism’s life. This study will examine how the common cabbage-white butterfly
(Pieris rapae) obtains and allocates nutrients between two critical functions,
flight vs. fecundity. This research is particularly novel in taking advantage of
the most recent technological advances in nutritional physiology to directly
trace the effects of specific nutrient inputs (e.g., amino acids and
carbohydrates), literally second by second, as this butterfly hatches, grows,
disperses, and reproduces. Results of this study will help resolve one of the
big mysteries in understanding tradeoffs, why don’t we always see the tradeoffs
that are predicted to exist? This project will also support Insect Discovery, an
established outreach program that uses insects, like the cabbage-white
butterfly, to teach biology to K-12 students. Using lessons learned during the
COVID-19 closure, this grant will develop online content and extend the virtual
teaching experience to underserved rural and tribal schools around the state of
Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resource allocation tradeoffs occur because
organisms can only acquire a finite amount of resources in their lifetimes and
resources allocated to one trait are not available to other traits. Because of
their importance, tradeoffs have been studied for well over 50 years, leading to
a fairly robust theoretical understanding. Surprisingly however, tradeoffs are
often not found in nature, even when they are predicted to exist. Most studies
of tradeoffs measure traits at a particular instant in time. Yet, resource
acquisition and allocation is a dynamic process that occurs throughout an
organism’s life cycle. It is possible that resources allocated now will only be
manifested in a tradeoff later. This research will integrate approaches from
nutritional ecology with cutting-edge stable isotope tracer methodologies to
determine the interplay between acquisition and allocation of specific nutrients
and nutrient mixtures, both within and across all life stages, to understand the
decision making processes associated with an important tradeoff, flight vs.
fecundity, in Pieris rapae butterflies. Specifically, this project will address:
1) Can nectar-feeding ameliorate flight-fecundity tradeoffs? 2) How do flight-
fecundity tradeoffs influence the ability of females to acquire additional
resources? 3) How do different resource currencies modulate the expression of a
flight-fecundity tradeoff? 4) How does nutrient provisioning in eggs mediate
flight fecundity tradeoffs across generations? By tracking individual nutrients
throughout a complete life cycle, egg to egg, a perplexing conundrum in
evolutionary biology will be addressed: why don’t we see tradeoffs among traits
when they are expected?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.