* 2122485
* Computer Science Connections: Using Data Science to Broaden Participation in Middle School
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Yvonne Kao, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project will help middle school computer science
(CS) students connect more deeply with CS content and promote inclusion and
equitable participation in CS classrooms through data science. Data science is a
new field that applies computer science and statistics to data sets with the
goal of extracting useful information. Data science skills have become necessary
to make sense of complex social and scientific problems. Data science has mainly
been taught in graduate and undergraduate programs, but more and more groups are
aiming to teach data science in elementary, middle, and high school. Data
science instruction can give computer science students the opportunity to solve
authentic and socially relevant problems, increasing interest and motivation,
particularly for learners who are members of historically underrepresented
groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Authentic
and socially relevant problems also provide opportunities for students to engage
in classroom discourse, a strategy that has demonstrated benefits for English
learners in mathematics classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computer Science
Connections is a researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) between WestEd and
the Oakland Unified School District (OUSD). The partnership will use a design
research approach to modify the data science content within OUSD’s middle school
computer science curriculum to include more socially relevant problems and to
incorporate classroom discourse strategies. The OUSD team will design the new
data science unit and establish a professional learning community (PLC) to
prepare teachers to teach it. Using a combination of focus groups, surveys, and
observations, the WestEd team will conduct research on teachers’ and students’
perceptions of data science and how it is currently taught in OUSD middle
schools. The team will also evaluate the effectiveness of the new data science
unit in OUSD CS classrooms and how well the data science PLC prepares teachers
to teach data science. The success of the partnership will be evaluated by an
external advisory panel with expertise in computer science education, math
education, data science education, and teacher professional development. The RPP
will provide information to the field on the successes and challenges of
engaging in this work and a program that is evidence-based through rigorous
efficacy research. This project is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.