* 2122574
* Enabling Ethical Analysis, Public Engagement and Public Justification in State-Level Pandemic Responses in the United States
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anne Barnhill, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 455,481.00

In an effort to reduce the health toll of the COVID-19 pandemic, state
governments adopted numerous policies that profoundly affected personal and
public life. Many of these policies involved difficult ethical trade-offs, as
they imposed significant costs on individuals, curtailed individual freedoms and
may have exacerbated social inequities. There is broad agreement that these
kinds of high-stakes policies should be ethically assessed, should take into
account the public’s values and perspectives, and should be clearly explained
and justified to the public; these processes serve multiple purposes. Successful
ethical analysis of policies helps decisionmakers to recognize the ways in which
those policies involve trade-offs and tensions between important values, and to
make those trade-offs thoughtfully. Engaging the public in policymaking can lead
to better policy decisions, and communicating with the public about the
rationale for policies may increase the perceived legitimacy of policies; some
argue that when policies affect people’s lives, policymakers owe it to them to
provide a justification of these policies. In short, when ethical analysis,
engagement with the public, and justification of policies to the public are
engaged in successfully, this can help to produce policies that are more
effective, more legitimate, and more widely accepted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project examines whether and how ethical analysis, engagement with the public,
and justification of policies to the public occurred in state level COVID-19
policy responses, and then creates guidance and tools to encourage these
processes in the future. To do this, the project team will first examine
documents from state websites and media representations, focusing on several
COVID-19 policies in 15 states, and will then interview state-level policymakers
and staff in four states. Interviewees will be asked about COVID-19 policymaking
processes, how ethical issues and public perspectives were addressed, how
policies were explained to the public, and what were the factors that enabled or
limited these processes. In tandem with this empirical research, the project
team will consider differing views about the forms of ethical analysis, legal
analysis, engagement with the public and justification of policies that should
occur in state-level pandemic policymaking; this will involve synthesizing
existing scholarship and considering recent constitutional challenges to
COVID-19 policies. Finally, the project will bring together the project’s
empirical research on what policymakers faced during the COVID-19 pandemic with
the project’s account of the policymaking processes that are seen as
appropriate, and will create practical guidance, tools, and recommendations to
help policymakers incorporate appropriate forms of ethical analysis, legal
analysis, public engagement and public justification into state-level pandemic
policymaking in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.