* 2122744
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Mechanisms of deformation through a complete eruption cycle of Sierra Negra volcano, Galapagos Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tanya Furman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 252,251.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanic calderas
are some of the most awe-inspiring geologic features on earth. Calderas most
often form through the withdrawal of magma through eruption and/or intrusion
along rift zones, and collapse of the overlying crust. The 2018 eruption of
Kilauea volcano, Hawaii was an excellent example of this. In some cases,
however, calderas grow through resurgence. Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos
Islands, is a large basaltic caldera that has grown through resurgence during
its last two eruptions. This study will integrate new and existing Global
Positioning System (GPS) precise positioning data with seismic data to
investigate pre-, co- and post-eruptive processes. This will improve our
understanding of the magmatic and volcanic processes that lead to caldera
deformation and the processes that potentially trigger volcanic eruptions.
Understanding these processes is important for volcanic hazard assessments not
only in the Galapagos, but at caldera systems globally, for example, Kilauea
volcano, Hawaii. This project will train the next generation of volcano
geophysicists, and continue long-standing collaborations between US, UK, and
Ecuadorian scientists. This project would not be possible without the
partnership with NERC, who has funded the development of the seismic network and
data analyses at Sierra Negra volcano.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sierra Negra
volcano, in the Galápagos Islands of Ecuador, is one of the largest basaltic
calderas on Earth, measuring 9 km by 7 km. Through investments from the NSF
RAPID and NERC Urgency programs, the June 26-August 30, 2018 eruption of Sierra
Negra was the first eruption at a Galápagos Islands volcano to be recorded by a
local geophysical monitoring network. The resulting data are spectacular. The
eruption involved &gt;6.5 m of pre-eruptive inflation, formation of a ~12 km
long fissure system on the north flank, ~8.5 m of co-eruptive deflation (one of
the largest co-eruptive displacements ever observed without collapse on caldera-
bounding ring faults), and ~1.5 m of net uplift (resurgence) on the intra-
caldera trapdoor fault system. Hundreds of thousands of earthquakes accompanied
the pre- and co-eruptive phases, including inflationary and deflationary intra-
caldera ‘trapdoor’ faulting events up to Mw5.4. The NSFGEO-NERC collaborative
scheme is ideally suited to bring together unique, complementary geodetic and
seismic observations and sophisticated numerical modeling techniques to address
specific questions relating to the behavior of Sierra Negra, the nature of
Galápagos volcanism, and important outstanding questions about fundamental
volcano deformation and the interaction between a volcanic edifice and magma
plumbing system. The exceptional new geodetic and seismic observations from
Sierra Negra offer a unique opportunity to investigate the external and internal
deformation of a magmatic system at different stages of unrest. It is rare that
a volcanic system is monitored well- and long-enough to observe a complete
eruptive sequence from pre-eruptive inflation, magma migration and eruption
onset, to co-eruptive deflation, and a return to inflation. By linking
observations, through modeling, to changes in pressure and stress within the
volcanic system, we will be able to probe the magmatic and structural processes
that control magma accumulation and withdrawal, and the initiation of eruptive
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.