* 2122374
* EAGER: International Type II: A Team Science Examination of Virtual, Hybrid, and In-Person Strategies for Strengthening International Collaboration on Agritourism Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Lori Dickes, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 10/31/2023
* USD 299,991.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has exposed a major weakness in
international collaboration: the reliance on in-person academic conferences as a
primary opportunity for scientists to network and collaborate. In response to
travel restrictions and lockdowns, international research conferences have been
forced to move online and collaborators have transitioned to remote means for
connecting and continuing scholarly work. The sudden transition to extensive use
of videoconferencing and digital tools for collaborative research came with
unanticipated side effects, including coordination barriers, communication
challenges, and heightened levels of burnout known as Zoom fatigue. Research is
needed to better understand the benefits and challenges of participating in
online versus in-person forums, and the resulting impacts on research
collaborations and scholarly productivity. This is especially important for
research areas that rely on place-based experiential learning such as
agritourism, which is broadly understood to encompass the farm-community-tourism
nexus in agroecosystems. The emerging research area of agritourism has profound
implications for sustainable community development, local food systems,
management of working landscapes, and ecosystem services. In addition to the
direct benefits of strengthening collaborative international agritourism
research, findings from this project will be documented and shared with a focus
on lessons that are transferable to other fields seeking to strengthen future
collaboration. The ultimate goal is to contribute to international research
collaborations that are resilient, robust, and sustainable so they can withstand
many types of disruptions, ranging from disease to war to natural
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.&lt;br/&gt;This project has
four primary objectives: (1) strengthen the emerging international agritourism
research collaboration by implementing a series of team development
interventions including webinars, virtual networking, and a hybrid international
conference that supports both online and in-person participation; (2) evaluate
the effectiveness of different modalities of team engagement by examining the
challenges, barriers, and opportunities presented by each mode and by measuring
outputs such as collaborative publications, presentations, grant proposals, and
additional scholarly products; (3) develop interdisciplinary scholarship around
agritourism through undergraduate and graduate student engagement in team
science implementation; and (4) assess the transferability of the results to
other fields to support the development of transdisciplinary research
collaborations with place-based elements and emphasis on resilience and
sustainability of international collaborations. The research team will track and
survey participants in project activities to document scholarly efforts, new
collaborations, and benefits of using different modalities for international
collaboration and research productivity. In addition to surveys, a series of
social network analyses will be conducted to measure growth of collaborations
and relationships within the field. Research productivity will be measured using
co-authorship network analysis, bibliometric indices, submission of
collaborative extramural funding, and student engagement across institutions.
Findings will be assessed for transferability across disciplines, and knowledge
will be advanced with respect to identifying barriers and challenges to
collaboration and the methods that are most effective for enhancing engagement
and productivity of international research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.