* 2122579
* Oxygen pathways into the deep ocean: investigating boundary current ventilation in the western Irminger Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Isabela Le Bras, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 710,587.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;This proposal would fund recovery of deployed
oxygen sensors on the OSNAP moorings in the western boundary current of the
Irminger Sea, along with deep calibration casts upon recovery, and subsequent
processing and analysis of the data. The purpose is to measure O2 that
ventilates the deeper boundary current through several pathways leading from the
near surface ocean exposed to the atmosphere, into the deeper boundary current,
and to investigate the processes responsible. In so doing, the project will also
provide information about the pathways of dissolved atmosphere-derived CO2 from
the near surface ocean to the deep. Carbon dioxide uptake in the subpolar North
Atlantic is thought to significantly mitigate global warming, but as global
warming continues, ventilation may decline, potentially weakening this CO2 sink
and also reducing oxygen levels throughout the Atlantic. A lack of direct
observations of dissolved gases has limited accurate budgeting and hindered
understanding of the processes which govern the sequestration of gases into the
deep ocean. These results may apply to other ocean regions and inform dissolved
gas coupling in ocean and climate models. Broad use of these data will be
promoted, to fuel additional advances in the ocean chemistry, ecology, and
climate dynamics of this critical region. The project will support an early
career female Hispanic/Latina scientist and a graduate student, along with
several outreach activities, including documentation of at-sea experience
through a blog and interaction with URM student
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon dioxide uptake in the subpolar North
Atlantic is thought to significantly mitigate global warming; moreover, oxygen
uptake in this region prevents large scale hypoxia throughout the North
Atlantic. As global warming continues, convection is expected to decline,
potentially weakening this CO2 sink and reducing oxygen levels throughout the
Atlantic. However, a lack of direct observations of dissolved gases,
particularly in winter and in boundary current regions, has limited accurate
budgeting and has hindered our understanding of the processes which govern the
sequestration of gases into the deep ocean. Careful calibration and analysis of
these valuable new O2 observations is planned, to emphasize an understanding of
the dynamics underlying boundary current ventilation and interior-boundary
current exchange. Science question addressed are: 1) How effectively does
slantwise convection directly ventilate boundary currents? 2) How much oxygen
reaches the Irminger Seaâ€™s boundary current through the draining of Labrador Sea
Water (LSW) from the interior? 3) To what extent does LSW entrainment set the
high oxygen levels in Denmark Strait Overflow Water (DSOW)? These results may
apply to other ocean regions and inform dissolved gas coupling in ocean and
climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.