* 2122317
* Waves, rain, and surface roughness at Ocean Station Papa
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Thomson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 740,633.00

A combined observational and forecast modeling study will address the coupling
between ocean surface waves and rain. The observations will extend an existing
time series at Ocean Weather Station Papa (OWS-P) and complement those
observations with more detailed measurements using drifting buoys. The
observations will be used to improve parameterizations in spectral wind-wave
models, as well as fundamental understanding of surface turbulence in the
presence of rain and the related changes to air-sea fluxes. The intellectual
merit of this research is addressing a knowledge gap in the suppression of ocean
surface waves by rain and the associated changes in surface roughness and
surface turbulence. The work will address this gap through long-term field
observations at OWS-P, combined with a short-term process study using
deployments of opportunity in the same region. The results will improve
understanding of air-sea interactions for coupled climate and forecast models.
In particular, this work will enable existing spectral wind-wave forecast models
(e.g., WAVEWATCH III, SWAN, etc) to account for the effect of rain on wave
generation and dissipation. The broader impacts of this work are in the
continuation of a time series of surface waves at a key reference site, as well
as improvements to wave forecasting and bulk formulae for air-sea interactions.
Other impacts include undergraduate education, through paid internships each
summer (funded directly by the project) and participation in the NSF Research
Experiences for Undergraduate program (funded separately). Outreach will be
conducted through an updated web site and short videos produced for an existing
Applied Physics Lab YouTube channel, as well as booths at public events like
Discovery Days (over 10,000 attendees).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will test the following hypotheses:&lt;br/&gt;1. Rain suppresses ocean
surface waves, especially the short waves in the `tail' of the
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;2. The suppression, together with a reduction in wind input
to waves, leads to a reduction in&lt;br/&gt;wave breaking.&lt;br/&gt;3. The
reduction in wave breaking reduces both the surface roughness (with implications
for&lt;br/&gt;drag coefficients) and the surface turbulence (with implications
for fluxes).&lt;br/&gt;4. Rain may increase the surface turbulence through a
direct injection of turbulence by raindrops,&lt;br/&gt;especially in low to
moderate winds, competing with the indirect effect of the
surface&lt;br/&gt;turbulence damping through a reduction in wave
breaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.