* 2122934
* Promoting Student Success through a Social, Academic, and Institutional Support System in Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Diane Golding, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2023
* USD 490,426.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 2 project will develop and study a
sustainable system of academic, institutional, and social supports (i.e., formal
peer-mentoring program) for first-year engineering students at the University of
Texas El Paso. The Promoviendo el Éxito Estudiantil a través de un Sistema de
Apoyo (PromESA) model offers educational and personal support for students by
providing mentees with tutoring, advising and connections to available
university services. Equally importantly, the project will provide social-
emotional support, provide opportunities to build friendships, and affirm
students’ sense of belonging, particularly for Latinx students. PromESA
components will specifically account for students’ intersecting identities
(e.g., gender, first-generation college student status, cultural heritage).
Research findings will inform efforts to provide academic, institutional, and
social support for under-served populations while addressing the lack of a sense
of belonging experienced by Latinx students in engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a holistic, socio-
culturally responsive peer-mentoring program adapted from the evidence-based
Promotores de Educación Program developed at California State University at Long
Beach. This multidimensional initiative will be guided by four objectives. First
is to increase students’ sense of belonging by incorporating holistic, socio-
culturally responsive practices into training and professional development for
faculty and peer mentors. Second is to build awareness of Latinx cultural assets
and values into the landscape of the piloting department. Third is to increase
participating students’ retention, persistence, and academic performance in
their engineering degree programs. Fourth is to establish structures and
policies to institutionalize major project components beyond the award period.
The embedded action research effort will use a combination of qualitative and
participatory research methods to offer a fuller understanding of the impact of
peer-mentoring programs for students from historically minoritized/marginalized
populations. The research will specifically examine how such programs can impact
participants and narrow the knowledge gap on the impacts of peer-mentoring
programs for Latinx students pursuing engineering degrees, particularly when
leveraging their cultural strengths and their intersectional identities.
Furthermore, the knowledge generated will provide the engineering education
research community with a deeper understanding of the unique experiences and
perspectives of Latinx students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.