* 2122606
* The Panulirus Hydrographic Stations (Hydrostation S): Years 70-74
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Nicholas Bates, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/28/2027
* USD 386,690.00

This project continues hydrographic observations at Hydrostation S, extending
the time-series of ocean data to almost 70 years. Hydrostation S (formerly known
as the Panulirus site), located about 25 km southeast of Bermuda in the North
Atlantic Ocean, is one of the longest open-ocean hydrographic stations in the
world. This program of repeat biweekly hydrographic observations began in 1954
and now, in its seventh decade, has proved to be the catalyst for numerous
studies of ocean physics, biological processes and biogeochemistry. Sustained
observations of the ocean, such as those from Hydrostation S, remain critically
important to establish rates of change to provide quantitative empirical data
for myriad regional and global ocean synthesis and modeling of ocean processes
and future ocean change. Hydrostation S program and its data are considered as a
service to the community, being openly distributed and subsequently have been an
invaluable resource in understanding processes and patterns of variability in
the ocean, as well as education, mentorship and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of the proposal is to continue
Hydrostation S into the eighth decade with numerous questions related to warming
and cooling, salinification and freshening, deoxygenation and insights on
biogeochemical changes over time. This program constitutes frequent water column
sampling of temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen (and indirectly,
sampling of important ocean carbon time–series) of the North Atlantic
subtropical gyre at the Hydrostation S site. Such work is complementary to other
sustained observations such as the Bermuda Atlantic Time–series Study (BATS) and
Ocean Flux Program (OFP). The project entails a similar sampling format that has
been followed for the past 68 years. Hydrostation S also supports the longest
global ocean CO2 and acidification time-series (from 1983 to
present).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.