* 2122515
* PFI-TT:  Making U.S. Aluminum Extrusion Manufacturers Greener and More Productive Through Tooling and Software Innovations
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Daniel Cooper, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 249,871.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes reducing industry greenhouse
gas emissions and making U.S. aluminum manufacturers more competitive. The
benefits of successful implementation include reduced material imports and
cheaper, lightweight automotive components leading to quicker deployment of fuel
efficient vehicles. This project enhances the scientific understanding of
aluminum manufacturing under extreme heat and pressure. This new knowledge
enhances the technological understanding of hardware design tools for the
aluminum extrusion industry with goals of minimize waste, increasing throughput,
and opening new markets for U.S. manufacturers. This project seeks to reduce
environmental impacts and costs in the extrusion industry by increasing the
efficient use of materials. This technology may save the average U.S. aluminum
extrusion manufacturer about $3 million in material costs per year, translating
to $396 million for the North American industry and $4.2 billion per year
globally. In addition, manufacturers may gain additional revenue from new
markets and product lines made possible by the faster production enabled by the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to increase the
competitiveness and environmental sustainability of U.S. aluminum manufacturing.
The PFI team has demonstrated a lab-scale technology that reduces extrusion
scrap by 25-50%. However, key technical knowledge gaps remain before the
technology can be scaled-up. The project objectives are to derive accurate
predictive models of cracking in extrusion-processed aluminum alloys. The team
will extend their previous work on mechanistic models of aluminum solid-state
welding to more complex extrusion case, validated through mechanical testing of
real-life samples. The team also seeks to derive algorithms that combine this
new knowledge with metal forming, air entrapment, and tool deformation
simulations to develop extrusion hardware that reduces the net scrap generated
by an anticipated 25-50%. Overcoming these hurdles may transform the technology
to a turnkey solution that can be easily adopted by manufacturers. The project
will culminate in field-tests under real-life industrial
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.