* 2122857
* Creating HSI Opportunities for Research and Undergraduate Support
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Justin Garcia, West Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 497,399.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to increase recruitment of
first-time students of color in STEM-majors, increase fall-to-fall persistence
of STEM-majors, and elevate student’s ability to envision themselves as STEM
professionals at West Hills College Coalinga, a 2-year rural community college
in California’s Central Valley. The academic rigor associated with STEM-
disciplines can be intimidating and impacts the likelihood of a student of color
declaring a STEM-major and affects their retention. To create smooth onramps for
students interested in STEM, support systems for retaining STEM-majors, and
cultivate students sense of identity as a STEM professional, the Creating HSI
Opportunities for Research and Undergraduate Support (CHORUS) project integrates
mechanisms such as peer-to-peer mentoring for first-time STEM-majors,
professional STEM speakers of color, and STEM-faculty guided research activities
that culminate in an annual Virtual Symposium spotlighting students research
conducted throughout the year. The CHORUS project will honor the student voice
by holding focus groups to identify practices integrated into the CHORUS project
that are personally meaningful and impactful. In terms of its broader impact,
the CHORUS project will demonstrate the role rural community colleges play in
nurturing STEM-majors, improving transfer readiness, and preparing students for
success in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Creating HSI Opportunities for
Research and Undergraduate Support (CHORUS) project will examine the impacts of
the project on STEM student enrollment, retention, and completion and the effect
on students’ STEM identity at a 2-year community college in California’s Central
Valley. The central research question is: To what degree does participation in
early STEM activities lead to changes in STEM interest, recruitment,
persistence, and identity in Latinx students? The project seeks to investigate
the efficacy of culturally responsive practices on STEM identity including,
peer-to-peer strength-based mentoring, connections with STEM professionals of
color, and engagement in faculty-guided undergraduate research. Using a quasi-
experimental design, the investigation will compare CHORUS and non-CHORUS
students on STEM Identity and STEM motivation. The findings from the
investigation will reveal the impact of undergraduate research and peer
mentoring on enrollment, retention, and completion of STEM-majors with the
intention to share the outcomes in journal publications and conference
presentations. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to
generate new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.