* 2122928
* Are strong ligands and dissolved iron tightly coupled in hydrothermal systems?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Randelle Bundy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,268.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is one of the most abundant
elements in the Earth’s crust, but it is extremely diluted in the ocean. Iron-
poor surface waters limit the growth of microscopic marine life, called
phytoplankton, and their ability to remove carbon from the atmosphere and
surface ocean. However, over the last few decades, our understanding of how iron
enters the ocean has evolved. Recent data has shown that deep-sea hot springs,
also known as hydrothermal vents, impact global iron budgets and are important
for surface iron supply. Hydrothermal vents are found globally along volcanic
spreading centers where new seafloor is created through tectonic activity. The
new porous seafloor allows seawater to circulate through the hot, chemically
reactive rocks to create hydrothermal fluids. These fluids are less dense
(hotter, 300-400°C) than deep ocean waters (2°C), so the water exiting the vents
rises while mixing with ambient seawater, eventually forming hydrothermal
plumes. These nutrient-rich plumes can extend for 10-1000s of kilometers into
the ocean interior. To account for the long-range transport of hydrothermal iron
into the ocean interior, models have shown that stabilizing agents (i.e. organic
ligands) are needed to prevent iron from precipitating and settling to the
seafloor. However, we still do not know the sources and identities of these
organic ligands, as well as how common they are in various hydrothermal systems
across the global ocean. Investigating these mechanism(s) for hydrothermal iron
stabilization across different vent systems will provide insight into both local
and long-range iron utilization by deep-sea marine microorganisms and
phytoplankton in the surface ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
sources, concentration, and identities of iron-binding organic ligands in
hydrothermal plumes from four different volcanic spreading centers will be
examined to understand their impact on iron stabilization and transport into the
ocean interior. The major aim of this research is to test whether (1) the
concentrations of strong organic ligands tightly control the distal transport of
hydrothermally derived dissolved iron in neutrally buoyant plumes across a
variety of hydrothermal vent systems and (2) investigate if microbes from
hydrothermal systems are responsible for production of these strong organic
ligands (i.e. siderophores). This work will use a combination of existing
samples and samples of opportunity that will be collected during an upcoming
field expedition, each from distinct spreading centers. These findings would
significantly enhance our understanding of hydrothermal iron transport and aid
in future modeling efforts on the fate of hydrothermal iron in the global iron
cycle. This project will support the training of two early career scientists, an
undergraduate intern, and STEM workshop kits for middle school programs about
deep-sea environments, which will be developed in collaboration and made freely
available through the NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Education and Outreach
webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.