* 2122212
* Building High-Quality K-12 Computer Science Education Research Across an Outcome Framework of Equitable Capacity, Access, Participation, and Experience
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Rosato, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Continuing Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 186,750.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to address the
critical need for high-quality, equity-focused K-12 computing education research
(CER) across the U.S. to meet the needs of finding promising practices for
teaching computing to all students. The research will analyze existing and
ongoing research and develop guidelines for conducting high-quality, equity-
focused research. One goal is to identify barriers and gaps in equity-focused
research across K-12 computing education using the Capacity, Access,
Participation, and Experience (CAPE) framework as a lens for analysis. Those
results will be used to develop workshops to build the capacity of researchers
to include and focus on equity. The research questions
ask:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) How comprehensive is K-12 CER in explicitly
addressing broadening participation in computing or equity goals?&lt;br/&gt;2)
What are the barriers that prevent K-12 computing education researchers from
conducting research?&lt;br/&gt;3) How effective are new resources, materials and
workshops specifically created to address the gaps in and barriers to producing
high-quality, equity-focused K-12 CER?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
first frame prior research against the CAPE framework to identify barriers
researchers face when conducting high-quality research inequitable K-12
computing education. Using results from that effort and input from experts, the
researchers will develop recommendations and resources for expanding coverage of
equitable, high-quality K-12 computing education research. Finally, the research
team will design and test workshops to train researchers in equitable K-12 CER
methods and practices. The project will directly impact the quality of computer
science education research conducted. In turn, this will lead to better analysis
and identification of programs, curricula, training, and interventions that
improve participation and experiences of populations historically underserved
and underrepresented in K-12 computing education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.