* 2122413
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Stronger Together: Exploring How Communal Care Reduces Individual Costs During Challenging Years
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Carolyn Bauer, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2024
* USD 136,611.00

This IRES award provides 6 undergraduate and 9 graduate students from the
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga and Adelphi University (N.Y.) with
international research experience in Chile. Students will engage in 12 months of
collaboration with researchers from four academic institutions in Santiago,
Chile. The scientific aim of the work is to identify physiological mechanisms
whereby communal care of offspring can enhance reproductive success under harsh
ecological conditions in the degu (Octodon degus), a social rodent found only in
Chile. The students will design their own experiments and contribute to a field
study to determine how communal care mitigates the physiological costs of low
food availability on breeding females and their young. Students will use modern
statistical methods to analyze a long-term dataset on degu social living, stress
physiology, and reproductive success. Student-led research will lead to progress
in our understanding of how the environment can shape the consequences of
communal care of young and thus, will have broad application to conservation
biology and human health. The program builds on an ongoing IRES program in Chile
and features an unique "generational" advising structure that promotes
collaborations within and between current and previous IRES cohorts. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; An important broader impact of the program is to promote
international collaboration, STEM education for middle and high school students,
and public outreach about the health benefits of community engagement in child
care. In preparation for their international experiences, IRES students will
write summaries about the way charismatic social animals live. These writings
will become part of educational activities developed by University of Tennessee
at Chattanooga STEM Education and Health and Human Performance graduate
students. Educational activities on communal care and healthy lifestyles will be
tested with middle and high school students participating in three University of
Tennessee at Chattanooga outreach programs (GEAR UP, Upward Bound, Upward Bound
Math &amp; Science). Activities will be made available online to the general
public. Co-PI Bauer will write posts for several social media platforms about
how the stress of parenting can be mitigated through family help, societal
assistance, and cultural support.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective
of this IRES is to determine how ecology shapes the reproductive consequences of
communal breeding, a social strategy in which multiple mothers nurse offspring
communally. The overarching experiment is a manipulative field study to
determine how low food abundance influences the endocrine and oxidative stress
of communally breeding Octodon degus, a social rodent endemic to Chile. Students
will conduct independent projects within the framework of this study and will
also analyze a long-term dataset. This program supports 5-6 students per year (2
undergrad, 3-4 graduate; 15 individuals over a three-year period). Students will
engage in year-long collaborations with one or more of the PIs? four
collaborators at four academic institutions in Santiago, Chile. Students
interested in studying how social interactions impact stress physiology will
collaborate with an expert on social networks and former IRES student at the
Universit? de Sherbrooke, Canada. Prior to IRES, international collaborators
will provide feedback on project designs and grant proposals. IRES will last
8-10 weeks (June-August) for undergraduate students and 18-20 weeks (June-
October) for graduate students. Post-IRES, international collaborators will
provide feedback on analyses, presentations, and manuscripts, thereby increasing
the likelihood of student productivity and success. Program outcomes, student
perceptions of the program and science, and student progression in STEM will be
assessed annually during and up to 3 years beyond the proposed
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.