* 2122874
* Advancing Research and Practice in Culturally-Relevant Computing in Upper Elementary Education
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Seungoh Paek, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 07/31/2024
* USD 996,552.00

This project is motivated by the need to prepare elementary teachers to
effectively integrate Computer Science (CS) education into their teaching. To
address this need, this project will provide professional development focused on
culturally-relevant computing. Culturally-relevant computing values explicit
connections between students’ home cultures and the concepts and practices of
CS. Research has shown that culturally-relevant pedagogies help students from
marginalized communities succeed in a variety of fields including STEM-related
areas. Accordingly, the project's basis is that a sustained culturally-relevant
computing professional development program will be an effective way to prepare
educators to reliably produce valued CS and culture-based outcomes. The work
will be done by a partnership between faculty and staff at the University of
Hawaiʻi at Mānoa (UHM) and the Hawaiʻi State Department of Education (HIDOE).
The project will directly address concerns about the need to prepare teachers to
integrate CS into their teaching while simultaneously promoting Hawaiʻi’s unique
place, history, culture, and language. The project’s practical and theoretical
outputs regarding culturally-relevant computing and its pedagogical implications
will be applicable to other cultures and contexts interested in equity and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of better understanding the role
of culturally-relevant computing in supporting CS education, this research-
practitioner partnership will provide professional development to upper
elementary (grades 4 - 6) educators (n = 230) in Hawaiʻi. Specifically, the
project pursues practice and research objectives aligned with calls to broaden
participation in CS, better understand pedagogical factors supporting effective
CS education, and examine how CS education can promote CS and culture-based
education outcomes. The practice objectives of the project include: 1)
developing culturally-relevant computing modules, 2) implementing a professional
development program about culturally-relevant computing, and 3) forming a
professional learning community about culturally-relevant computing. The
project’s research objectives will advance the field’s theoretical and practical
understanding of how culturally-relevant computing impacts educators’ knowledge
and beliefs about (a) the subject of CS, (b) their ability to teach CS, and (c)
the relationship between CS and culture-based outcomes. Methodologically, the
project will follow a design-based research process coupled with an explanatory
sequential mixed-methods design. Taken together, this project will help
researchers, practitioners, and policy-makers, better understand how culturally-
relevant (sustaining) pedagogy can be leveraged to increase diversity, equity
and inclusion in STEM-related fields such as CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded through the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.