* 2122032
* Molecular Definition of Plant Organelle Editosomes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2024
* USD 997,783.00

Land plants contain genomes in three locations: the nucleus and the organelles,
both chloroplast and mitochondria. A novel mechanism has evolved to correct
errors in organelle genomes. Following transcription of DNA to RNA. a protein
complex called the “editosome” changes the C to a U at locations where a C is
present instead of the proper U nucleotide. Harnessing the plant organelle
editing system could offer a technology to alter any selected transcript. For
example, Cs could be converted to Us to modify gene expression by introducing
start codons or stop codons or to allow production of a functional protein.
Advances made during this project could therefore lead to the emergence of a
transformative technology that would benefit the biotechnology industry and
society. The project will also have educational impact by providing research
training for a graduate student and several undergraduates. The project includes
a collaboration with a faculty member at a minority-serving institution,
California State Los Angeles, and opportunities for undergraduates there to
participate in the project on-site or at Cornell.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the composition and functioning of plant
organelle editosomes, the molecular apparatus responsible for the C to U
conversion, is a prerequisite to unleash the tremendous potential of this
molecular machinery. Genetic and biochemical evidence have implicated four
different families of proteins in the composition of the editosome. A remarkable
family of RNA-binding proteins, the pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR) proteins,
select the proper C to be edited by binding to hundreds of different upstream
cis-elements. Three small families of accessory editing factors are absolutely
necessary for editing to occur in angiosperms. A recent breakthrough resulted in
a new bacterial expression system that allowed editing of a plant RNA sequence
in E. coli following provision of a single PPR protein along with one accessory
factor. The goal of this research is to use this heterologous expression system
to dissect the role of the PPR protein and accessory factors, alone and in
combination, with regard to efficiency and specificity of editing. This project
will determine how accessory factors affect RNA binding affinity and in what
stoichiometry they are present in single types of
editosomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.