* 2122272
* Collaborative Research: Manufacturing of Low-cost Titanium Alloys by Tuning Highly-indexed Deformation Twinning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yufeng Zheng, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,192.00

This grant supports fundamental research in titanium alloys manufacturing and
promotes the progress of science and engineering. Titanium alloys are promising
structural materials due to their lightweight, high strength and toughness, high
temperature and corrosion resistance, and biocompatibility and have many
critical applications in transportation, such as airplane engine components, and
healthcare, such as human implants. However, the manufacturing of titanium
alloys requires the addition of expensive alloying elements and high processing
temperatures, which leads to their high costs and significantly restricted
commercial use. This project investigates the scientific mechanisms involved in
deformation twinning and develops a prototype system for low-cost manufacturing
of advanced lightweight titanium alloys. A combination of experimental,
computation, and machine learning efforts is performed to search for new
compositions of titanium alloys with low-cost alloying elements and activate
novel deformation mechanisms in order to achieve their room-temperature
manufacturing. The new knowledge generated by this project advances the titanium
industry and promotes technologies to reduce carbon dioxide emissions and
improve human health, thus promoting national prosperity and welfare. This
research provides a platform to train the next generation of titanium experts
and skilled workforce, especially those from underrepresented groups, in the
manufacturing of advanced materials as well as high-performance computing. This
project is jointly funded by Advanced Manufacturing (AM) program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance cost-effective room-
temperature manufacturing of titanium alloys by a novel alloy design and
processing strategy. In this strategy, a large portion (greater than 50 volume
percent) of the body-centered cubic beta phase is stabilized at room temperature
using low-cost elements after casting and homogenization processes. Furthermore,
room-temperature ductility and workability of these alloys in the subsequent
cold deformation process are improved by activating sufficient highly-indexed
deformation twinning modes in the beta phase utilizing coupled twinning-induced
plasticity (TWIP) and transformation-induced plasticity (TRIP) mechanisms. Two
specific approaches, involving integration of experiment, simulation and machine
learning, are followed. The first approach is to identify and tune the coupling
mechanisms between phase transformations and highly-indexed twinning in
representative titanium alloys through advanced characterization,
crystallography models and atomistic simulations. The second approach is to
manipulate and investigate alloying effects on twinning and room-temperature
workability of these alloys by iterative feedback between the machine learning
models, informed by first-principles calculations, and high-throughput
fabrication and mechanical testing experiments. These results guide the
discovery of beta phase stabilized titanium alloys containing low-cost alloying
elements and attain high room-temperature workability. Finally, large-scale
samples of titanium alloys with optimized compositions are cold deformation
processed by rolling and drawing into specific shapes and tested for mechanical
behavior to verify their room-temperature workability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.