* 2122742
* Collaborative Research: Rethinking Circle Time: Integrating Computational Thinking into K-2 Literacy
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristina Tank, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 126,308.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To prepare all students to
participate the increasingly digital society, computer science (CS) and
computational thinking (CT) education opportunities must engage all students in
CS ideas and practices to help them understand how computing influences the
world. At the younger grades, CS education focuses on computational thinking
(CT), which is the process of identifying a problem and creating potential
solutions so that a computer (human or machine) could implement that solution.
Students’ elementary experiences impact their perceptions and dispositions
toward STEM, with studies showing gender differences in CS as early as 5th
grade. The Rethinking Circle Time project will examine the learning and
instruction required for K-2 students to engage meaningfully with CT. Because
K-2 teachers struggle with fitting CT into the school day, some suggest
integrating CT into other subjects. With literacy being a strong focus at the
K-2 levels, this project will research the process of rethinking literacy
“circle time” - a reference to whole group literacy instruction. Rethinking
Circle Time will engage with K-2 students, in-service teachers, and pre-service
teachers to design, implement, and iterate different literacy activities that
build students’ CT knowledge and interests to explore connections between
literacy and CT to learn about how to help students, especially girls, gain key
CT understandings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research question being
addressed in this project is: What are models for integrating computational
thinking and literacy in K-2 classrooms that support key CT understandings and
abilities for all students and guide high-leverage instructional practices for
teachers? This question will be answered through design-based research (DBR)
using a multi-tiered design experiment that incorporates feedback loops for each
tier based on findings focused on student learning; student interest and
motivation with an emphasis on girls; and instructional innovations, practices,
and experiences of both in-service and pre-service teachers. The multi-tiered
design experiment has three levels: Tier 1: Student Level, Tier 2: Teacher
Level, Tier 3: Researcher Level. The project will examine the conceptual models
of the actors (students, teachers, researchers) at each tier, and how these
tiers interact: students as they learn CT through literacy, teachers as they
create and implement learning environments for CT, and researchers who play an
integral part in each of the systems that will be researched. Therefore, planned
and unplanned feedback loops will be utilized to refine representations of the
conceptual models as the project seeks to understand how K-2 students,
particularly girls, learn CT through literacy contexts and how to support that
learning effectively. Contributions from this project include (1) theoretical
and practical advances in helping K-2 students develop an understanding of CT
concepts in the context of literacy, specifically around multiple
representations and translations, (2) a model for supporting in-service and pre-
service teachers to integrate CT and literacy education, and (3) design
principles for creating curricula for K-2 CT education with a focus on engaging
young girls in CT. This project will directly impact and research an ecosystem
of K-2 in-service teachers (n=9), pre-service teachers (n=200), and students
(n=300) across multiple contexts (rural/urban, across two states). The project’s
partner schools serve a diverse range of learners, including students from
underrepresented groups. The CAPE framework will be used to examine issues of
equity in the K-2 CT literacy lessons, especially girls. The knowledge generated
from this project support broadening participation in CS by examining students’
experiences in CT at the K-2 levels. This project is supported through the CS
for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.