* 2122655
* HSI Pilot Project: Broadening Research Experiences for HSI STEM Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (BREDEI)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Gabriela Sosa, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 199,999.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-­Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to improve the quality,
availability, and diversity of the STEM educational pipeline. By building a
sustainable undergraduate field research program at Texas A&amp;M
University-­San Antonio, the project will develop a strong scientific and
professional identity critical to the persistence in STEM majors and the
motivation to pursue a science-­related career. We will develop role models,
facilitate student participation in federally-­supported research projects, and
provide field training programs to heighten the scientific literacy and identity
among the participating students. As the project team validates the impact of
these practices and develops them into a curricular program, the project will
have a long-­term impact of cultivating reliable domestic talent from
underrepresented populations by improving the disproportionately low
representation of Hispanic students in south Texas in the aquatic ecology
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic sciences are highly interdisciplinary
and require a considerable amount of field experience that has not always been
accessible to under-­represented student groups. We hypothesize that improving
the availability of field research opportunities and role models are key to the
success of minority STEM majors. Thus, the specific aims of the project are to
(1) improve scientific literacy among minority communities, (2) broaden
undergraduate research experiences focusing on assessing the health of stream
ecosystems, (3) improve recruitment, retention, and graduation of minority
students by offering field research and mentoring programs, and (4) establish a
sustainable model for a field-­heavy curriculum via a collaborative model
between HSIs, schools, public and private sector entities. These objectives will
be achieved by implementing field-­training activities supported by the National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON), the National Hispanic Environmental
Council (NHEC), and the Texas Aquatic Science project. The outcome of the
project will enable the development of a university faculty-reviewed
field-­study curriculum for A&amp;M-­SA that will benefit students from multiple
natural resource majors. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.