* 2122500
* CTCS: Integrating Computational Thinking into English Language Arts and Math, Building an Onramp to Computer Science in Grades K-5
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kelly Powers, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 889,785.00

Among the greatest barriers to elementary computer science education is a lack
of time during the school day, especially given the ramping up of emphasis on
state testing. To reach the most vulnerable learners with equitable, high-
quality CS education, educators and researchers must find a way to marry
computing and core disciplines in a way that will do justice to all subjects and
meet the needs of all teachers and learners. This partnership between Cornell
University, New York University, The New York City Department of Education’s
CSforALL unit, and a New York public elementary school aims to address this
issue by integrating computational thinking into English Language Arts and math
classes. This project builds on a three-year pilot that demonstrated promise in
this approach to build confidence in computer science for both the teachers and
the students they serve. Reproducing this success in partnership with the
nation’s largest school district will provide a vehicle to broadening
participation to Black and Latinx students and those with disabilities by
creating an accessible path to rigorous computer science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on a three-year pilot, the Computational Thinking
to Computer Science Research-Practice Partnership is refining and piloting
instructional materials that integrate computer science and computational
thinking into K-5 classrooms. The goals of the project are the following. (a)
Build on an earlier pilot with a NYC public elementary school serving 1700
primarily Latinx students to integrate CT and CS into math and ELA. (b) Support
and study the implementation of a tasks-based CT and CS curriculum and
professional development model in two NYC public schools to understand its
impact on teachers and students. (c) Identify the levers for making CTCS
scalable in NYC public schools in pursuit of CSforAll. The project is supporting
two K-5 schools designated by the New York City Department of Education by
providing a facilitator to lead school-wide professional development, co-
facilitate teacher Professional Learning Community meetings, and build teacher
and teacher leader capacity to implement the English and Language Arts tasks
with Computer Science units. The research and evaluation conducted by the
project are examining how prior Computational Thinking learning may shape
teacher agency in leading computer-science instruction. The implementation
design is investigating the potential ways in which teacher efficacy for
teaching computer science improves when introduced to computational thinking
first. Confidence and implementation are being measured and
compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.