* 2122567
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Cal Poly Pomona INtentional Venture Engaging STEM Students (CPP INVESTS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Alison Baski, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,760,096.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 ITP project at California State
Polytechnic University, Pomona (CPP) will advance the goals of the HSI Program
by embedding high-impact practices (HIPs) during three critical transitions in
the STEM student life cycle: (1) secondary to post-secondary education -- scale
First Year Experience (FYE) courses and course-based undergraduate research
experiences (CUREs), and embed peer learning assistants (PLAs) in FYEs; (2)
lower division to upper division STEM courses -- embed CUREs in second year STEM
gateway courses and capstone and upper-division GE courses; (3) graduation into
the STEM workforce -- utilize two innovative components: “micro” internships and
alternative learning records (ALRs). The project will scale the number of STEM
students participating in internships by embedding six-week “micro” internship
experiences in junior gateway and senior capstone courses. The project will
develop and implement two ALRs -- leadership and research career development. To
support STEM faculty, the project will provide STEM Faculty Institutes to coach
faculty in developing culturally relevant pedagogy anchored in diversity,
equity, and inclusion, developing FYE courses, embedding CUREs, micro-
internships, and ALRs in their courses and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific aim of the project is to contribute to the understanding of how to
build institutional capacity to enhance the quality of undergraduate STEM
education at HSIs. The program evaluation plan will focus on institutional-level
variables including recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of STEM
students in the project by utilizing both formative and summative assessment
methods. This project will employ quasi-experimental design to examine the
impact of PLAs on the sense of belonging and academic self-efficacy of first
year students in FYE courses. It will use mixed-methods to examine both the
impact of micro-internships and ALRs on the professional identities of STEM
students and the impact of the faculty professional development efforts,
including pre-post surveys, interviews, and focused group discussions. The
project will generate new knowledge and contribute to the development of the
nascent research on the impact of ALRs and course-embedded micro-internships on
STEM student success. The broader impact of the project is the potential to
develop and test a model that will be disseminated to and can be utilized by the
California State University system which serves the greatest number of Hispanics
and underserved STEM students in the nation, and other institutions that serve
large populations of students who are URMs, first-generation and low-income. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation
in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.