* 2122436
* Teaching Computational Thinking to Prekindergarten Students in Underrepresented Communities
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Pane, Rand Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 994,449.00

Underrepresented students face barriers in accessing and finding success in
computer science (CS). Black, Hispanic, and low-income populations have less
access to CS and encounter cues that the field that it is not for them. In
addition, girls face social barriers to a male-dominated field. To alleviate
these barriers, the National Head Start Association (NHSA), codeSpark, a content
creation company, and the RAND Corporation are creating one of the first
computational thinking curricula for underrepresented populations in
prekindergarten that teachers can directly apply in classrooms. This project is
based on research that shows barriers to entry into computer science are
complex, involving the home, school, and larger society. The research suggests
that two critical avenues must be addressed to successfully close disparities in
access to computer science along racial, gender, and socio-economic lines.
First, exposure to computer science must start young and, second, curricula and
learning tools must meet the needs and include the perspectives of
underrepresented communities. This project will create a half-year computational
thinking (CT) curriculum that can be implemented in prekindergarten classrooms
with varying access to technology. The early development of CT skills and
ongoing experiences of success with coding is likely to stimulate studentsâ€™
interest in the field and mitigate stereotypes that the field is exclusively for
white males. Because CT is tightly interrelated with other STEM fields, this
work is expected to also help increase participation among these
underrepresented groups in STEM more broadly and provide valuable cognitive
skills for those who elect not to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) and project are to
create: (1) a prekindergarten computational thinking digital app and companion
physical manipulatives; (2) a scalable professional development for teachers;
(3) and a set of lesson plans for teachers. The program will be made available
to schools and school systems free of charge. The RPP will engage in an
iterative design process to achieve the goals of the project. Head Start parents
and educators will provide input and feedback on versions of the curriculum
program through focus groups to ensure that all aspects are culturally relevant
and meet the needs of underrepresented communities and classrooms of differing
resources. Think aloud activities with students will provide feedback on how
students interact with the curriculum. Materials will first be tested in a small
number of classrooms in a feasibility study where teachers can provide feedback
and classrooms can be observed. The project will culminate in a randomized
control trial pilot of the curriculum program. The RPP will provide information
to the field on the successes and challenges of engaging in this work and a
program that is evidence-based through rigorous efficacy research. This project
is funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.