* 2122243
* HSI Pilot Project: Inclusive and Integrative STEM Education through Undergraduate Research
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* John Banks, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 399,990.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to increase access to
research opportunities for traditionally underrepresented students in STEM,
support diverse students and faculty in STEM, integrate research in the
curriculum, create more inclusive research environments for undergraduates, and
to enhance the professional advancement of faculty and research mentors.
Undergraduate research, a well-established high-impact practice, provides
significant benefits for students who are from traditionally underrepresented
ethnicities, the first in their family to go to college, from lower-income
families, and transfer students (Jones, Barlow, &amp; Villarejo, 2010; Kinzie,
Gonyea, Shoup, &amp; Kuh, 2008; Villarejo, Barlow, Kogan, Veazey, &amp; Sweeney,
2008). However, these students are less likely to participate in research than
their peers (National Academy of Sciences, Engineering &amp; Medicine, 2011),
even when attending Hispanic Serving Institutions (Haeger, BrckaLorenz, &amp;
Webber, 2015). Additionally, when participating in research, students may find a
research culture that is an unsupportive or hostile environment, which
ultimately is one of the main contributing factors that cause low enrollment and
high attrition rates in STEM fields (Clancy, Nelson, Rutherford, &amp; Hinde,
2014). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a partnership with California State University,
Monterey Bay (CSUMB) and Monterey Peninsula Community College (MPC), this
Planning and Pilot Project will work towards a future proposal including
building collaborations with regional community colleges and scaling up
interventions that prove effective. The project will support students by:
generating more research opportunities; engaging transfer students in research
pre- and post-transfer; supporting students through the transition from lower-
division, introductory research experiences, to upper-division intensive
research experiences; building STEM career pathways; and creating more inclusive
research environments through equity training for students and mentors. In
supporting faculty, our aims are to: incentivize research with undergraduates;
foster more inclusive research spaces through inclusive mentoring and pedagogy;
create a community of practice for faculty to develop interactive learning and
career preparation in their courses; build interdisciplinary and multi-
institutional faculty collaborations. Program evaluation will involve a series
of studies closely tied to the goals of the grant: diversifying undergraduate
research, eliminating equity gaps by building more inclusive and equitable
research environments, and building partnerships that can help “scale up”
educational interventions within and beyond the participating institutions. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation
in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.