* 2122600
* Corporate Science Communication and Its Effect on Scientific Knowledge and Attitudes
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nicole Lee, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2024
* USD 210,188.00

For-profit entities in the science, health, and technology sectors have become
major players in the public communication of science. Science communication can
significantly influence the decisions individuals make related to health
behaviors, technology adoption, and policy support. Since the Bayh-Dole Act of
1980, U.S. scientists have had the right to patent and commercialize the
findings of publicly funded research, which has contributed to the shifting
science communication landscape. Despite the influence and prevalence of
commercial science communication, little research has focused on its effects.
Direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing provides a context in which to
understand these issues. Science communication from DTC genetic testing
companies is particularly important because how consumers learn about genetic
science and interact with it can influence their health decisions, their support
for science funding or policy, and their perceptions of related
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the purpose of this research, this
project will consist of two related studies. The first study will be a content
analysis of emails from ten DTC genetic testing companies and will identify and
describe how these companies communicate with their customers about science, the
capabilities and limitations of their tests, and the benefits and risks of
sharing genetic data. The second study, which will build on the findings from
the first, will consist of a national survey of U.S. adults examining the
effects of engaging with DTC genetic testing products and receiving
communication from DTC genetic testing companies. The survey will inform the
impact of DTC genetic testing experiences and communication on science
knowledge, perceptions of genetic research, support for science, and other
related outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.