* 2122449
* Investigating Conserved Function of Male and Female Developmental Genes in a Model Bivalve
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* William Robinson, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 202,137.00

Bivalves, such as mussels, oysters, and clams, belong to the second most diverse
animal phylum. They play a critical role in coastal ecosystems, help maintain
water quality, and are widely used in aquaculture. Despite their importance,
many developmental processes are not well understood in bivalves. Several genes
have been identified to be correlated with male and female specification and
development; however, their exact role is not yet known. The goal of this
project is to characterize these genes in bivalve development and identify their
roles in the process of differentiating male and female reproductive organs. Our
methods involve documenting levels of in gene expression in different tissues
and experimentally lowering their expression level to observe changes in
development. This project will provide critical insight into the process of male
and female specification and differentiation of reproductive organs. Our project
will also help to increase opportunities for students that have obligations
outside of the classroom that hinder their ability to pursue a STEM degrees.
Research shows that online laboratory courses, especially those that include “Do
it yourself” (DIY) kits and manuals, can be as effective as in person labs and
decrease barriers for students that have difficulty devoting time to in person
laboratory courses. This project aims to create a completely online DIY
laboratory in marine biology and physiology that will act as a model for
increasing accessibility to STEM labs and broaden participation. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Although some hypothetical models have been proposed for mechanisms
underlying male and female specific gonadal development in mollusks, there have
been very few experimental tests of gene function in this process. Using
phylotranscriptomics, we have identified several putative gonadal development
genes in bivalves, including a mollusk specific DMRT gene: DMRT1L. The primary
objective of our proposed project is to characterize the role of putative
gonadal development genes in a model, gonochoristic, adult bivalve, the blue
mussel M. edulis through two specific aims: (1) Determine the temporal and
tissue-specific expression patterns of male and female gonadal development genes
using RT-qPCR and in situ hybridization in relation to gametogenesis. (2)
Evaluate changes in gonadal development in males and females following knockdown
of key gonadal development genes using RNAi (SoxH, DMRT1L, FoxL2, β-catenin).
These genes have been studied in bivalves; however, this work has relied on
correlations in gene expression between males and females and knowledge gained
from distantly related species. The proposed work will verify the roles of these
putative male and female developmental genes and will enable us to develop a
transcript-based gonadal development pathway for bivalves. This proposed work
will be transformative to understanding the relationships between male and
female development pathways across distantly related metazoan species and how
they evolved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.