* 2122841
* PFI-TT: Wearable Strain Sensors for Real-Time Joint Angle Tracking in Sports
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yong Zhu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in enabling motion tracking in
sports. The proposed technology can be complementary to, and in some cases
replace, the existing wearable global positioning system (GPS) and inertial
sensors. In particular, joint kinematics is of critical importance for many
sports. In the near term, this innovation in wearable sensing technology will
provide an accurate, wireless, unobtrusive, launderable, and reliable solution
to track joint motions in sports. In the long term, in addition to sports
performance monitoring, the wearable joint motion trackers could enable a broad
range of new wearable applications such as human activity and health monitoring,
human-machine interfaces, prosthetics, and robotics. The educational/leadership
development plan of this project provides the graduate and undergraduate
students with training in interdisciplinary areas including implementation and
business entrepreneurship as well as experience in technology transfer and
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a
wearable system for directly tracking joint angles using stretchable strain
sensors based on silver nanowires. The proposed wearable joint motion tracking
method may competently address several challenges. First, the proposed nanowire-
based wearable sensors are mechanically stretchable and comfortable to wear.
Second, the capacitive sensing allows for fast response time, low hysteresis,
and constant gauge factor over a wide strain range. Third, scalable
manufacturing and integration with textiles are feasible. This technology will
fill the increasing need for accurate and unobtrusive monitoring of human joint
motions. This PFI technology development and commercialization project
integrates the sensors with a variety of sports textiles/tapes and other
components to develop wearable systems, to develop data analytics to process
continuous data streams and communicate performance information, and to test and
evaluate the wearable system in athletic training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.