* 2122393
* A Continuous Coaching Model for High School Computer Science Teachers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sikha Bagui, University of West Florida
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The United States will need more than 30,000 high school teachers qualified to
teach computer science by 2025. While Florida’s Escambia County school district
has recently been ramping up efforts to prepare high school teachers in the
state, there is a critical need for teacher professional development
opportunities. This partnership between University of West Florida, Escambia
County School District (ECSD) and Florida’s Department of Education will develop
ongoing support and training for current teachers such that they can
successfully teach the Advanced Placement Computer Science Principles course,
which has been shown to increase student interest and engagement in computing.
Though a model of continuous coaching, this partnership will create a cohort of
teachers prepared to teach the AP course. At the same time, the team will work
with school guidance counselors on strategies to recruit and support students in
computing classes, with the goal of increasing the number of students who enroll
and are successful in computing classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
will explore a continuous support coaching model, based on Knight’s
instructional coaching model, for increasing the pool of future educators
without deep pre-existing content knowledge, who will be prepared to coach and
teach AP Computer Science Principles (AP-CSP). The coaching model, offered by
the University of West Florida’s computer science faculty, will be focused on
the pedagogy of computer science, implemented using a constructivist pedagogical
approach. The three areas of focus of the coaching model will include: (i)
teaching assistance and feedback; (ii) just-in-time assistance offered by
coaches; and (iii) lesson modeling. These new coaches and teachers, selected
from in-service Math and Science teachers, will be catalysts for broadening
participation of computing in Florida high schools, some of which do not yet
offer a computing course, and increasing the pass-rates in AP CSP. The project
aims to recruit four new coaches, seven new teachers, and seven school guidance
counselors to be supported and trained by the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.