* 2122789
* Mafic magmatic enclaves as tracer of protracted mixing and hybridization
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Philipp Ruprecht, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 320,350.00

Volcanic eruptions are a major natural hazard. Understanding the processes
leading up to volcanic eruption help greatly to improve hazard forecasting and
the long-term assessment of individual magmatic systems. Hot magma rising from
depth that recharges and mixes within a shallow magma storage region is
considered an important mechanism to start volcanic unrest. In some cases, such
recharge may be the direct triggering mechanism for an eruption. Evidence for
recharge exists in the form of mafic enclavesâ€“compositionally distinct pieces of
magma dispersed at the centimeter to decimeter scale. The hot magma provides
thermal energy that mobilizes the magma and drives stirring and mingling. Using
chemical signatures in crystals from the recharge magmas, this project will
explore over which spatial and temporal scales the thermal disruption operates.
Such information provides unique constraints for chamber-scale dynamic models of
magma mixing and whether these thermal transient episodes are short-lived or
disrupt a magmatic system for years to decades. This research will be conducted
on the Holocene eruptions of the Chaos Crags in Lassen Volcanic National Park
that lasted for several decades. A second component of this project uses a novel
numerical modeling technique to constrain the mechanical integrity of the
crystal-rich mafic enclaves, which provide independent information on how long
these enclaves can survive during mixing and mingling and therefore represent
faithful records of that thermal history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team will
study the dynamics of magma mixing recorded in mafic magmatic enclaves using a
dual approach of plagioclase zoning and numerical modeling of multiphase flow.
Mafic enclaves are unique recorders of the mixing dynamics as they are both the
archive and the agent that drives mixing. The objective is to track the emerging
thermal transients of mixing and the potential return to a new uniform storage
condition. This thermal evolution can be captured because the study site, the
Chaos Crags domes, CA, erupted in six separate events and the entire unrest
period lasted years to decades. The thermal transients will be documented using
mineral-mineral based equilibria and elemental diffusion methods. In order to
assess the survival times and mechanical integrity of such enclaves, we will
employ a novel numerical approach for investigating mechanical erosion of mafic
enclaves in a host dacitic magma. Researchers will use coupled Discrete Element
Method and Lattice Boltzmann Method (DEM-LBM) numerical simulations to directly
simulate the fluid-solid interaction during mechanical erosion of the enclaves
by the host melt to constrain the survival time of mafic enclaves experiencing
plucking/erosion in response to chaotic mixing. With their coupled approach,
they will be able to assess how the temperature, captured through the viscosity,
of the host magma as well as the shape and relative packing of crystals
influences the mechanical erosion of the crystal-rich
aggregate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.