* 2122556
* Advancing the Science of Organizations: Work and workshops coordinated with the CASBS Summer Institute on Organizations and Their Effectiveness
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Walter Powell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,916.00

Organizations are all around us: not just firms, plants, and work groups, but
also hospitals, schools, and governments. Given such a broad domain, a huge
fraction of economic activity, as well as much political and social activity, is
undertaken as organized activity. One might think, then, that academics would be
actively studying the science of organizations and their effectiveness. To some
extent, this is true, but the field is badly fragmented: different disciplines
operate mostly in isolation; many professional schools focus on only their own
kind of organization (e.g., hospitals, schools, public agencies, businesses).
Meanwhile, social-science departments often regard the science of organizations
as outside their purview, yet doctoral training in professional schools
sometimes lacks the depth available in social-science departments. To better
respond to this situation, this project convenes a series of workshops and
multi-disciplinary collaborations to advance the science of organizations and
imagine its future directions. &lt;br/&gt;These workshops will engage the
network and expertise already shaped by the four Summer Institutes on
“Organizations and Their Effectiveness” at the Center for Advanced Study in the
Behavioral Sciences (CASBS) at Stanford University, co-directed by Robert
Gibbons (MIT) and Woody Powell (Stanford University). This network includes
young, problem-solving scholars researching organizational effectiveness from a
wide range of disciplines (e.g., communications, economics, education,
management, political science, public policy, social psychology, and sociology)
and in the contexts of very different kinds of organizations (e.g, firms,
government agencies, hospitals, courts, churches, schools, police departments,
and social movements). This group is well positioned not only to help imagine
but also to help implement the future of the science of organizations.
Participants will be assigned into small, multi-disciplinary teams and presented
with the question of how NSF might continue to advance and fund the science of
organization. The teams will discuss the ecosystem of research funding for
organizational science, including government agencies such as the NSF, major
foundations and philanthropies, and university centers. After identifying areas
of consensus and disagreement, participants will collaborate on strategies that
warrant further elaboration and synthesize these recommendations. In this way,
these workshops seek two related objectives: to enlist young experts in
imagining the future of the science of organizations; and to cultivate potential
leaders and collaborators in implementing this future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.