* 2122296
* EAGER: Testing New Formulae for Pressure Derivatives of Specific Heat, Thermal Conductivity, and Thermal Diffusivity
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Anne Hofmeister, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2024
* USD 37,299.00

Heat flow is ubiquitous. How efficiently matter transports heat is of
fundamental importance. Understanding heat transport is critical to numerous
engineering and scientific endeavors, such as designing tiny electronic devices
or modeling the cooling rate of large planetary bodies. The most accurate method
for measuring heat transport properties (laser-flash analysis) has shown that
values from diverse types of solids depend on the length over which heat is
flowing. Static properties (e.g., density) do not behave in this manner, so
tests against length were not made earlier. This finding led to new formulae
describing thermal dynamic behavior (conductivity, diffusivity, and heat
capacity) as functions of pressure. The formulae describe steady-state
conditions. This contrasts with equations of classical thermodynamics developed
in the 1800s to describe idealizations such as constant temperature. These
findings are critical for Geophysics because matter in Earth’s deep interior is
under extreme pressures. Here, the researchers will further test the formulation
which they previously validated for a limited number of solids and over a
limited range of temperature. They now quantify heat properties in a wider range
of solids, and other states of matter, and over a greater temperature range.
They use a new laser flash apparatus for liquids (water in particular); the new
apparatus allows measuring heat capacity and attains low temperature. They re-
analyze data on gases available in the literature. The goal is extreme accuracy
in the measurement, notably that of initial slope and temperatures near ambient
conditions. Both the old and the new formulation for thermal properties are
tested. This project may initiate a paradigm shift in the way we quantify heat
flow. Its outcomes improve our understanding of the microscopic mechanism
responsible for it. They have potentially wide repercussions for pure and
applied physical sciences. The project also supports a female scientist with
disability and provides training to undergraduate students at University of
Washington. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Discovery that thermal diffusivity (D) and
thermal conductivity (k) of insulators, semi-conductors, metals, alloys, and
glasses depends on the length-scale (L) of measurements has repercussions for
pure and applied physical sciences. Linear dependence on L for small length-
scales agrees with dimensional analysis of Fourier’s heat equation. It shows
that results from diamond anvil cell experiments are problematic, foremost
because these are benchmarked against 1 atm data for L &gt; 100 times larger.
Reliable data below 2 GPa pressure exist on mm-sized samples from well-worn
methods. Analyzing these results for 25 solids of diverse bond type show that
the logarithmic pressure derivative of specific heat (cP) equals -1 times the
linear compressibility. Mathematical analysis allowing for k depending on L
(i.e., volume) also related its logarithmic pressure response to equation-of-
state properties, and likewise for D. The new k vs. P formula was confirmed
against reliable data for 20 solids. Therefore, the team’s preliminary tests
suggest, but do not prove, that the new formulae are thermodynamic identities
describing steady-state conditions, which is a commonly encountered restriction.
Isothermal is not, because thermal emissions are ubiquitous. Thus, the time-
independent formulations from classical thermodynamics do not describe properly
the time-depended conditions in the Earth where heat is flowing. To test the new
formula for cP vs. P, databases already in existence can be used. Since a
generally applicable formula for steady state is the goal, diverse states of
matter and bond type are being tested. The researchers also collect data on
liquids and ices (e.g., water, metals melting near 298 K). They use a new laser
flash apparatus – the LFA467 instrument and its commercial low-pressure cell to
10 MPa - covering ~100 to 500°C, that simultaneously measures D and cP. Spurious
radiative transfer is removed via coating the interior of the cell with
graphite. A dilatometer spanning this T range is used when density vs T is not
available, to constrain k. Using machine learning to parameterize cP, D, and k
vs. P, L, T, will either distinguishing whether the new or previous formulae are
correct, or will lead to new and accurate formulae, permitting extrapolation to
high pressure inside Earth. Thus, the proposed work provides basic physics that
is essential to Geophysics. Confirmed P derivatives of cP and k (or D) pertain
to any process inside Earth and other large bodies. The work outcomes lead to
improving accuracy of geophysical and petrologic models and has potential to
improve our understanding of planetary interiors. Since new thermodynamic
identities have not been developed for ~100 years, other physical sciences, such
as study of chemical reactions, may be impacted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.