* 2122881
* STEM by Design: Increasing the Competitiveness of the Nation’s Technical Workforce through Institutional Change Using Human-Centered Design
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Jeremy Edison, Mount Mary University, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,999,689.00

This project aims to graduate digitally literate women to increase the
competitiveness of the nation's technical workforce. In the United States,
representation of women in the computing field has declined over the past thirty
years, despite increased use of technology in society. Current data indicate
that only 18 percent of computer science majors are female, 8 percent of
programmers are women, and 1 to 3 percent in computing careers are Latina and
Black women. In science and technology, 14 percent of researchers are women.
Because information technology is one of the fastest growing industries and
innovative technical solutions impact every sector of the US economy, this
project seeks to contribute to closing the gender, ethnicity, and race gap in
technology so that US companies will have the necessary workforce to create
accessible human-technology interfaces to support advances throughout STEM
fields. With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-
Serving Institutions Program (HSI Program), Mount Mary University, a women’s HSI
in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, will build capacity to prepare students for the
technology-driven workforce and seek to demonstrate that a human-centered design
approach is effective for institutional transformation. The project will include
faculty development, curriculum redesign, undergraduate research, and
communication with academic and industry partners. These components will work
together to introduce strong technology elements throughout the institution and
create a new human-technology interface degree program to attract and empower
diverse women for full inclusion in the digital STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Five specific aims will guide this project. First is to
increase faculty competencies to integrate contemporary digital technology in
courses. Second is to increase student self-efficacy in using technology,
coupled with a third aim to educate diverse women who feel included and have a
voice in the technology-based workforce. Fourth is to build capacity for human-
centered design for institutional change. And fifth to produce research,
improvements, and dissemination of best practices for large-scale STEM
transformation. The project will be driven by data collected in response to two
research questions: (1) does institutional transformation to integrate digital
technology literacy increase technology skills and sense of belonging for
diverse women? and (2) how does the human-centered design approach in STEM
create the buy-in needed for large-scale institutional transformation in digital
technology literacy that serves as a model for other institutions? The two
underpinning theoretical bases for these questions are multicultural and
minority identity theory and institutional theory, respectively. Research
findings will be shared through publications, presentations, and a project
website. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported
by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.