* 2122442
* HSI Pilot Project: The MAESTRO Program - Minority Advancement in Engineering, Science, and Technology by Refactoring the Online Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alberto Cruz, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,993.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1: PPP aims to address the lack of means
and support for Hispanic/Latinx, low-income, first generation students to
effectively participate in postsecondary education. Modern students work while
going to school. For Hispanic/Latinx students who work twenty to forty hours a
week, this workload may affect attendance and GPA, ultimately resulting in poor
workforce placement. Addressing the issue that work comes first for many low-
income underrepresented students, two approaches will be utilized: 1) supplant
non-career-relevant work experience with industry internships, and 2) develop
new formats for online learning. The overarching theme is to help students
maintain both their income and academics. Busy students often turn to online
programs that can be as effective as face-to-face instruction when combined with
online videos and peer instruction. However, this model dichotomizes at-risk
students due to poor regulation and social interaction. Preliminary results show
that this classroom model does not improve outcomes or attitudes of California
State University- Bakersfield (CSUB) students. A system that scaffolds and
regulates the class with small groups convened at times around student work will
be pioneered. Significant, meaningful experiences will be offered for students
in data science and wireless communication. Participants of this program will
have career-relevant internship/work experience, better retention rates, shorter
timelines to graduation, reduced stress, and better motivation. It will
contribute to the size and diversity of the U.S. science and technology
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize Real-Time Teaching
where students proceed at their own pace. The instructor monitors, scaffolds,
and self-regulates the class by convening small groups at times convenient to
the students for semi-synchronous learning. This approach will be paired with
industry internships relevant to careers in Computer Engineering (CE), Computer
Science (CS), and Electrical Engineering (EE). The impact of these strategies
and how they improve the retention and success of the Hispanic/Latinx, low-
income, and/or non-traditional students in CE, CS, and EE will be assessed.
Findings will be disseminated broadly through various presentations at
conferences, publications, workshops and a project website. The HSI Program aims
to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and
build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.