* 2122119
* EAGER: SAI: Cognitive Models of Human Social Wayfinding for the Redesign of Public Spaces
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Karin Stromswold, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,938.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2020, many public spaces were hastily
redesigned to optimize pedestrian flow in order to minimize the spread of
COVID-19. Unfortunately, conventional methods for simulating how people move
through public spaces do not take into account social factors that affect how
people actually navigate in the presence of other people (social wayfinding).
For example, these methods do not incorporate how people adjust to avoid others’
personal space, navigate around slower-moving people, or follow instructions
from other people. Even worse, existing simulations usually assume everybody has
identical abilities, which is rarely true in real populations. The goal of this
project is to develop a system for simulating the flow of people through public
spaces, including social aspects of human navigation, and incorporating people
with a variety of abilities and disabilities. These more realistic simulations
will be used to develop novel metrics and protocols for evaluating public
spaces, which more thoroughly reflect the rich social behavior of real people.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a new framework for modeling the
flow of people through public spaces, called the Social Wayfinding-Inspired
InFrasTructure (SWIIFT) design framework. The framework has three interlocking
parts: human subjects experiments on human wayfinding, computational simulations
of the flow of people through public spaces, and evaluation metrics for
assessing design and re-design of real public spaces. In a series of
experiments, human subjects will be immersed via Virtual Reality headsets into
simulated spaces. These spaces will contain different numbers of simulated
people, including people with variations in mobility (using wheelchairs, canes
or walkers; pushing strollers; carrying heavy bags), sensory ability (e.g.,
visual impairments, hearing impairments), knowledge, and attention. Human
subjects will receive different cues about which way to go, including visible
pathways, signage, and verbal instructions. Data about the choices they make as
they navigate through the virtual spaces will be incorporated into simulations,
allowing us to develop realistic models of how people move through spaces under
natural conditions. Finally, this framework will use these simulation models to
evaluate potential modifications to real spaces, allowing potentially expensive
changes to be accurately evaluated before they are carried out. The ultimate
goal of this work is to enable public spaces to be made more efficient and more
accessible for everyone, regardless of ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.