* 2122936
* Integrating Culturally Relevant Pedagogy in Math Instruction at a Hispanic-Serving Community College to Increase Student Engagement and Success
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Norma Jimenez Hernandez, Riverside Community College District/Norco Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 199,978.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving instructional
practices in math education at an Hispanic-serving institution through the
integration of culturally relevant pedagogical practices. A cohort of math
faculty at the Norco Campus of Riverside Community College will pilot this
professional development approach aimed at improving instructional practice in
mathematics courses ranging from Math for Liberal Arts to Calculus. The project
will also assign an educational advisor to work in tandem with participating
math faculty to address student support issues. The intent of the project is to
improve success, retention, and persistence for students in STEM fields through
a combination of improved instructional techniques and student support services.
The project will advance the scientific community’s understanding of how
culturally relevant and sustaining pedagogy influences classroom practices and
student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two goals guide the project. First is to
support an initial group of three math faculty to develop culturally relevant
and sustainable pedagogies while simultaneously enhancing support structures for
students with a dedicated educational advisor. Second is to increase the number
of students who successfully complete transfer-level math courses in their first
year as students at a Hispanic-serving community college. The faculty in the
cohort will make changes in six different courses, which will impact at least
900 students over the lifetime of the award. Through presentations and increased
collaboration with the rest of the math department at Norco College, this pilot
project has the potential to become a larger more transformative initiative that
could expand throughout the Riverside Community College District. Results from
the impacted courses will be compared to traditional courses, which will provide
new knowledge on the impact of employing culturally responsive pedagogies and
dedicated advising on the success, retention, and completion rates for students
at Hispanic-serving community colleges. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.