* 2122942
* Improving STEM Degree Completion with Professional Development to Support Inclusive and Equitable Classroom Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Michael Dennin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,725,545.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions Program (HSI Program), this project aims to facilitate
institutional transformation by addressing environmental factors that negatively
influence STEM degree completion for groups of students. The project will offer
a series of workshops that promote inclusivity in STEM fields by considering
research on systemic issues and barriers to academic success. The project will
seek to address degree completion disparities by providing faculty and
administrators with activities, exercises, and facilitated discussions of
research literature to examine social and cultural factors associated with their
own and their students' lived experiences at the institution. The project will
also leverage existing efforts on campus that aim to create more inclusive
academic spaces. By taking a collaborative research-oriented approach to working
with faculty and administrators, the project will seek to provide processes that
other institutions can follow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To directly address the
importance of culture in the classroom, the project will employ a mixed methods
research design, and a multi-session faculty professional development series
integrated into the broader campus community, that provides faculty with a
curriculum that will advance inclusion and equity in their learning spaces.
Three overarching goals guide this project. First is to lay a solid foundation
of local and national data related to disparities in persistence and retention
that will be used to inform participant practices and behaviors in the
classroom. Second is to increase awareness of the social and cultural locations
of STEM students. Third is to modify classroom practices and policies in order
to increase student engagement and success. Several research questions will be
explored by the project team. According to STEM students, what social and
cultural factors need to be considered to improve the classroom climate? What is
the impact of participation in project activities on faculty conceptions of
diversity and inclusion in the classroom? How does faculty participation in the
project lead to increased implementation of evidence-based inclusive teaching?
The key motivating factors for this project are to address systemic inequity
that is manifested in STEM degree completion disparities and to share methods,
data, and findings with HSIs across the country. Dissemination efforts will
include a project website for sharing pertinent project information, multiple
research publications and presentations, a research conference on creating
inclusive academic spaces, and strategic connections with existing programs that
are part of the NSF INCLUDES Network. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs,
requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.