* 2122658
* HSI Implementation and Evaluation Project: FUERTE: Fostering Undergraduate Education, Retention and Transfer Environments
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rick Sperling, St Mary's University San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,152.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2: Implementation and Evaluation Project
will increase the number of Latinx students who obtain baccalaureate degrees in
STEM fields, including both those who enter St. Mary’s University as first-time
freshmen and those who transfer from their partner, Northwest Vista College.
Research indicates that Latinx students are underrepresented in the STEM
workforce. A major reason for this discrepancy is that too few are earning four-
year degrees in STEM majors. Not only does this restrict the range of
occupational opportunities available to them, but it also attenuates their
social mobility. Rectifying this problem requires understanding the root causes
of differential outcomes of schooling. At the system level, Latinx students
confront barriers associated with the transfer process, misaligned curricula,
pedagogies unsuitable for Latinx students’ needs and experiences, and advising
processes that are difficult to negotiate. At the individual level, many have
internalized stereotypes that deflate their self-confidence and undermine their
image of themselves as future scientists. Effective responses, therefore, must
start with acknowledging that any efforts to scaffold student development must
be supplemented by institutional adaptation. This project fully embraces this
reality, and the activities proposed reflect research advancements that call for
culturally responsive pedagogy, streamlining of the transfer process,
developmentally appropriate advising, student-faculty research, and peer
mentoring. Through these efforts, the aim is to produce educational outcomes
that are more equitable and just while also facilitating the upward social
mobility of their Latinx students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of the
project are 1) to support the transfer of students from a two-year to a four-
year institution by creating a seamless transfer pathway, 2) to create
culturally responsive classroom environments and a system of student support
services, 3) to facilitate student progression through STEM majors, and 4) to
build competency in STEM. Social cognitive theory is applied toward adapting
institutional processes to foster improved attributional tendencies, a
heightened sense of competence in science, and stronger feelings of self-
efficacy, which will lead Latinx students to persist to the point of earning a
STEM degree. Because of their research design, straightforward connections can
be made between changes in student-level characteristics, such as self-efficacy,
and the probability of desirable academic outcomes. The findings from this
project will make a significant contribution to the literature by extending what
is known about social cognitive theory to a distinctly Latinx campus.
Ultimately, the HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs.
Supported by the HSI Program, we will draw from these approaches to generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.