* 2122176
* Strengthening Student Motivation and Resilience through Research and Advising
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xiaorong Zhang, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This implementation and evaluation project aims to increase the retention and
graduation rates of engineering students from groups who are underrepresented in
their participation in STEM fields of study. The project team's activities will
have a particular emphasis on Hispanic/Latinx students, providing them resources
and career development opportunities to increase their academic and employment
success in the engineering workforce. The School of Engineering at San Francisco
State University, in a collaborative effort with Skyline College and Cañada
College, will provide evidence-based faculty development, undergraduate research
opportunities, and improved advising for students transferring from community
colleges. The development of an HSI-Engineering Success Center will provide
transfer students academic support, advising services, career counseling, and
assistance in securing scholarships and internships so they can gain full-time
employment in engineering. The project will answer two research questions: 1)
What types of academic and non-academic supports will yield the highest
retention, graduation, and employment rates? 2) What is the impact of faculty
professional development on student learning experiences and success? The
project will raise awareness in teaching and research to better equip a
culturally diverse student population to earn engineering degrees while
preparing to make a substantial impact on the technical workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a data-driven and evidence-
based approach to identify the barriers to success of underrepresented
engineering students and to generate new knowledge on the best practices in
increasing students’ retention and graduation rates, self-efficacy, professional
development, and workforce preparedness. Three objectives underpin this goal.
First is to develop and implement a Summer Research Internship Program together
with community college partners and a Transfer Advising Days event for new
transfer students. Second is to establish an HSI Engineering Success Center
(ESC) to provide students internships, networking opportunities with industry,
and career development. Third is to develop resources for the professional
development of faculty members, including Summer Faculty Teaching Workshops, an
Inclusive Teaching and Mentoring Seminar Series, and an Engineering Faculty
Learning Community. The results and novel approaches, models, and tools
developed will be disseminated through journal publications,
conferences/symposia, and faculty learning communities. The knowledge gained
will address a national need to promote a diverse and well-prepared STEM
workforce. The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims,
given the diverse nature and context of HSIs, requires innovative approaches
that incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote
fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes
to diversify and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that
improves our understanding of how to build institutional capacity. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also draw from these approaches to generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.