* 2122712
* PFI-TT: Development of Point-of-Care Biochips for the Rapid and Sensitive Detection of Multiple Respiratory Pathogens
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Delfina Dominguez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project stems from the critical need for a low-
cost, point-of-care (POC) microfluidic device for the rapid detection of
multiple respiratory pathogens (such as whooping cough and pneumonia) in
vulnerable people in low-resource settings. For instance, there are an estimated
24.1 million cases of pertussis worldwide, and about 160,700 deaths per year
from whooping cough in children. The new microfluidic device can provide low-
cost, rapid, and accurate detection of multiple respiratory pathogens at the
point of care, enabling detection of whooping cough and pneumococcal pneumonia
within one hour at various venues such as physicians’ offices, schools, rural
areas, and developing nations. Rapid pathogen detection at the point of care
(POC) can significantly reduce mortality in children and the elderly. The
microfluidic device also has the potential to detect a variety of other
pathogens such as foodborne pathogens and SARS-CoV-2. Hence, the societal and
commercial impacts of the translational development of this technique may impact
global health. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is primarily intended to
develop a low-cost microfluidic device prototype integrated with specific and
sensitive DNA testing techniques for the rapid and accurate detection of
multiple common respiratory pathogens (i.e., B. pertussis and S. pneumonia)in
vulnerable people at the point of care. Conventional pathogen detection methods
either take a long time or require costly and bulky instruments, limiting their
applications for low-resource settings. This approach is based on integrated
loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) on a low-cost paper/polymer hybrid
microfluidic device. DNA amplification and six primers specific to each pathogen
target ensure high detection sensitivity and high accuracy, respectively, while
the instrument-free detection by the naked eye minimizes instrumentation
requirements. The integration of LAMP on a portable microfluidic device further
enhances its capability for POC testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.