* 2122907
* Collaborative Research: CAFECS: Developing Equitable Computer Science Pathways from High School to College
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 762,867.00

In June 2020, more than fourteen thousand students in Chicago Public Schools
(CPS) graduated with one year of high school computer science credit in
fulfillment of CPS’ recent computer science graduation requirement. This was the
culmination of over a decade of work by the Chicago Alliance For Equity in
Computer Science (CAFÉCS) to implement the Exploring Computer Science (ECS)
curriculum and accompanying teacher professional development program district-
wide. The ECS class supports equivalent assessment outcomes regardless of
students’ race/ethnicity and gender and equivalently increases interest in
pursuing additional computer science coursework, including Advanced Placement
courses. This project builds upon this work by expanding early college credit
computer science courses in CPS and engaging students in activities at local
universities to recruit and inspire them through computer science pathways. With
a focus on students of color and first-generation college students, the project
is providing extensive mentoring and preparation as students transition through
their high school, community college, and four-year institution computer science
pathways. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the evidence of the efficacy of this
high-school computer-science pathway towards early college credit, only about a
quarter of CPS high schools offer AP computer science and less than 10% of
schools offer computer science dual credit courses. In addition, there is a
paucity of research on the mechanisms by which early college credit courses
inspire interest and provide preparation for college success in computer science
majors. With a specific focus on students of color, this project focuses on the
expansion of high-school early college credit opportunities in CPS and
supporting students' success along computer science pathways in community
colleges. The project aims to understand the characteristics of ECS
implementation that enable high schools to successfully introduce early college
credit opportunities, such as AP and dual-credit classes and the extent to which
existing AP computer science professional development programs adequately
prepare non-endorsed teachers to achieve student outcomes that are equivalent to
those achieved by teachers who are endorsed in computer science. The project is
also exploring the extent to which early college computer science credit
opportunities increase interest in the field leading to enrollment in courses
along computer science pathways and potential mechanisms in which community
colleges can reduce barriers and increase success for students on computing
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.