* 2122553
* BPINNOVATE: Intersectionality in Building STEM Entrepreneurship Capacity: Rurality, Indigeneity, and Technology
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gabriel Sanchez, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 982,345.00

The Central New Mexico region is home to large populations of Native Americans
and Hispanics traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The state also contains an
abundance of STEM-focused education and research, including a transition to
clean energy that will provide new jobs and three national laboratories in the
region. However, no alliance directly connects New Mexico STEM majors to
innovation through training in technology transfer and entrepreneurship relevant
to their heritage. The proposed activities offer great potential to positively
impact societally relevant outcomes, including the broader participation of
women and underrepresented minorities from Native American, Hispanic and low-
income populations in STEM innovation and entrepreneurship. Broadening
participation by increasing the representation of underserved groups in
technology innovation and entrepreneurship is critical for maintaining global
competitiveness and for promoting economic development, especially in
communities historically plagued by endemic poverty and rural marginality.The
conceived technology career pathway proposed in this project has significant
potential to spawn an increase in the success of underrepresented populations in
STEM, creating a new career pipeline at the intersection of higher education and
research commercialization. This project will also enable the proposed research
team to create a Shared Vision and the necessary knowledge-base to address the
broadening participation challenges in STEM, especially for Native Americans and
rural Hispanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will advance knowledge and
understanding in the field of STEM education that focuses on technology
innovation and entrepreneurship by adding a novel aspect to the existing large
body of work seeking to broaden representation in STEM academic programs and
careers. This program will focus on the development of a profile of the rural
digital identity that operates within New Mexicoâ€™s underserved populations. An
investigation of the role that indigeneity plays in relation to other identity
categories has become increasingly urgent. The role of identity at this very
complex moment in world history requires the use of intersectionality as a means
of provoking a deeper understanding of the way people belong to communities and
serve as change-agents within those communities. This profile will be
instrumental in providing much needed context for educational and economic
development programs aimed at connecting underserved communities to global
markets using technological innovation as the mechanism for new models of
economic prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Science of Science: Discovery, Communication, and Impact, and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.