* 2122195
* PREM Vision for Excellence at Navajo Technical University in Research and Education in STEM (VENTURES)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Jennifer Lewis, Navajo Technical University
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,148,330.00

The Partnership for Research and Education in Materials: Vision for Excellence
at Navajo Technical University in Research and Education in STEM (PREM VENTURES)
is a partnership between Navajo Technical University (NTU) and the NSF Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Harvard University. As the
first PREM based at a Tribal University, the partnership will build robust
pathways for Native American students in STEM education and careers, from K-12
to undergraduate and from undergraduate to graduate programs. The goals of the
partnership are to: (1) Increase the number of Native Americans earning
undergraduate degrees in STEM fields, (2) Increase the research infrastructure
at NTU so that students and faculty can investigate problems within their
community, (3) Increase the number of Native Americans entering and completing
graduate programs in materials science, and related fields, (4) Integrate Native
American perspectives and methods of inquiry into materials science research.
The partnership focuses on investigating scientific problems whose solutions can
improve the lives and environment of the Navajo Nation. The research and
educational activities are designed to engage and attract NTU students to STEM
careers and provide resources and tools for their retention and success in STEM
fields. The partnership will explore the materials science of traditional foods,
dyes for weaving, and other Navajo technologies, with an approach imbued with
respect for Navajo Traditional Knowledge. This approach will provide culturally-
centered research and educational infrastructure, supporting the growth of STEM
pathways for Native American students. This project is supported by the Division
of Materials Research with co-funding from the TCUP program in the Division of
Human Resource Development of the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three research areas of the partnership will
apply materials research to important issues of priority for the Navajo Nation.
These research approaches will facilitate the transfer of technology and
expertise to Navajo Technical University (NTU) from the Harvard Materials
Research Science and Engineering Center (MRSEC) to establish a research culture
at NTU that both attracts Native American undergraduates and enables in-place
experiments that will excite, engage, and retain the cadre of student
researchers at NTU. The first research area will train Navajo students in using
microfluidic platforms for a variety of detection, analysis and production
applications, from analyzing soil microbes and soil composition adjacent to
abandoned uranium mines on the Navajo Nation, to creating controlled release
hydrogel and capsule systems, with potential applications in treating diabetes,
which is highly prevalent in the Navajo Nation. The second research area, which
focuses on fabrication of 2D and 3D electrochemical materials, addresses the
need for energy storage in remote parts of the Navajo Nation without access to
reliable electricity, and also focuses on developing low-cost electrochemical
sensors to monitor mining contaminants in the soil and water. The third research
area, dynamic soft materials, will harness the shape-morphing capabilities of
soft actuators for applications in health care, agriculture, manufacturing, and
veterinary care, which are all areas of interest for the Navajo Nation. Because
the research is motivated by current priorities in the Navajo Nation and is
accessible to K12 students, discoveries will be integrated into outreach
programs aimed at recruiting Native American students into the STEM
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.