* 2122312
* Observing LIGO/Virgo-triggered neutron star mergers with the Dark Energy Camera: a new path for Cosmology
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Marcelle Soares-Santos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 09/30/2023
* USD 440,391.00

This project will make a precision measurement of the cosmic expansion rate.
This hybrid program has a target of opportunity follow-up component and a survey
component. The survey will strategically cover the regions of interest of many
black hole events. It will collect a sample of gravitational-wave triggered
neutron star merger events and a sample of black hole mergers for which
potential host galaxies have been cataloged. The rate of cosmic expansion is a
key parameter in modern cosmology. There is currently tension between local
measurements and the results from cosmic microwave background studies, which
motivates the pursuit of improved independent observables: gravitational waves
have long been proposed as one such. This work covers two such alternatives.
Broadening the impact of research on society at large requires effective
communication to audiences from diverse backgrounds, including pre-college teens
currently under-represented in STEM fields. The researcher will engage with high
schools and emphasize under-represented groups, using the infrastructure of the
Brandeis Science Communication Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses
the full range of available data from the Dark Energy Camera (DECam) on NSF's
Blanco 4-meter telescope in Chile, including images taken as part of the Dark
Energy Survey (DES), as well as non-DES DECam images. It will also use data from
another NSF facility, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory,
LIGO. Methods to be used include a Hubble diagram fit to a sample of neutron
star mergers and a statistical dark sirens analysis for black hole events. This
is a new method independent of other cosmological probes, because standard
sirens are distance indicators based solely on general relativity. Detectors
with enough sensitivity to enable this approach became operational in 2015. This
research will fully exploit the novel datasets as multi-messenger probes for
cosmology using DES/DECam data, making a measurement of the expansion rate with
3-5% (statistical) uncertainty by 2022, and enabling percent-level precision
with future data from facilities like the Large Synoptic Survey
Telescope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.