* 2122488
* Counteracting Stereotypes to Boost Girls' Interest and Participation in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Weihua Fan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,937.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
identify and promote critical factors that facilitate the development of girls’
interest in pursuing computer science. This will help broaden girls’
participation in computer science courses, programs, and college majors. Young
women currently earn only 19% of bachelor’s degrees in computer science. There
is a pervasive societal stereotype that women and girls are less interested in
computer science than men and boys. This can harm young girls’ sense of
belonging and interest in computer science starting from an early age. This
project will experimentally examine the causal impact of these gender-interest
stereotypes on girls’ interest in pursuing computer science. It will also
investigate the sources that communicate these stereotypes to students. Finally,
this project will test an intervention to reduce the impact of stereotypes on
girls’ interest in computer science. Ultimately, this project will create a
foundation for disseminating best practices on effective methods for motivating
girls to pursue computer science. The findings will have implications for
computer science educators who aim to broaden participation in computer science
and others conducting research that aims to reduce educational inequalities
linked to stereotypes. Findings will be shared with stakeholders working to
promote students’ motivation in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four
experimental studies will be conducted to examine how gender-interest
stereotypes influence 12 to 14 year-old students’ motivation for computer
science through laboratory studies and one field intervention. Experiment 1 will
experimentally manipulate gender-interest stereotypes to assess causal effects
on girls’ interest in pursuing computer science. Experiment 2 will explore the
cues that communicate interest stereotypes to students, such as the proportion
of girls and boys in a computer science class. Experiment 3 will test whether
providing information that counteracts stereotypes can increase girls’ interest
in pursuing computer science. Experiment 4 will test a real-world intervention
designed to reduce the impact of gender-interest stereotypes on girls’
enrollment in introductory computer science courses. Together, these studies
will deepen understanding of the causes and consequences of gender stereotypes,
how they influence girls’ motivation to learn computer science, and how
educators can help students resist stereotypes and start the pathway to computer
science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.