* 2122108
* NMHU-BioPACIFIC MIP collaboration in design, synthesis and applications of metal-organic hybrid biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Tatiana Timofeeva, New Mexico Highlands University
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,063,644.00

New Mexico Highlands University (NMHU) is a small liberal arts university in
Northern New Mexico. It has a student body composed of 53.6% Hispanic Americans
and 66.4% women. Many of these students are from low-income first-generation
college families. This proposal presents a partnership with the NSF-supported
BioPolymers, Automated Cellular Infrastructure, Flow, and integrated Chemistry
Materials Innovation Platform (BioPACIFIC MIP) at University of California,
Santa Barbara (UCSB) and University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Faculty
in chemistry, biochemistry, computer science, geology, and chemical engineering
will provide materials science education and hands-on training for research to
students from underrepresented groups. The Partnership in Research and Education
for Materials (PREM) pathway, developed with collaborative efforts from NMHU,
UCSB and UCLA, will focus on recruitment, retention, and degree attainment for
the students. Professional development for students will take place throughout
the year both at NMHU as well as in the BioPACIFIC MIP Summer School. At
BioPACIFIC MIP PREM students will have networking opportunities at multiple
levels including with community leaders, faculty, staff, graduate students, and
postdocs as well as peer-to-peer. The NMHUâ€“BioPACIFIC MIP PREM will
systematically engage high school students, undergraduates, graduate students,
and postgraduates at all partner institutions. In New Mexico, at the high school
level, the PREM will utilize dual credits for high school students and the
Achieving in Research, Mathematics and Science (ARMAS) Center to encourage and
engage students from underrepresented groups in science education programs. At
NMHU, in collaboration with BioPACIFIC MIP, two new materials science courses,
devoted to an in-depth understanding of materials structure and properties, will
be designed. The PREM program will involve at least 12 BS or MS NMHU PREM
students per year. The research outcome will be disseminated through
publications, with a goal of at least 10 articles per year in peer reviewed
journals with student co-authors in at least 80% of those publications. This
project is partially supported with co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will include machine learning, materials synthesis, high-throughput
automated chemistry/biosynthesis, and applications of organic-inorganic
materials. By bridging machine learning and synthetic chemistry (closing the
design loop), a wider combination of bioinspired building blocks will be
designed to go beyond the current biomaterial landscape. This will enable the
use of two or more organic/inorganic components in one material which is
necessary to tune structural, optical, electronic, and magnetic properties of a
multi-component material. Resultant small molecules, organic polymers, and
organic-inorganic porous materials will also allow for designing of biosensors,
drug delivery systems, materials for chiral chromatography and templates for
polymerization. The partnership between NMHU and BioPACIFIC MIP will allow NMHU
re-searchers and students to establish a new area of materials research at NMHU.
Development of new expertise will be supported by access of NMHU faculty,
postdoctoral fellows and students to scientific expertise and advanced
instrumentation at BioPACIFIC MIP to rapidly accelerate discovery of materials.
The collaborative teams will hold research-focused group meetings via real-time
video teleconferencing. Students will visit BioPACIFIC MIP laboratories. Two to
three NMHU undergraduates will travel to BioPACIFIC MIP each year for summer
research. One or more NMHU MS students will go to BioPACIFIC MIP to take courses
and do research for one semester, and a PREM Annual Retreat will be held each
year, alternating between NMHU and UCSB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.