* 2122475
* RUI: Development and application of genomic resources for ascidian taxonomy and holobiont evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Marie Nydam, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2024
* USD 662,905.00

The ascidians, informally known as sea squirts, are an important group of marine
invertebrates. For instance, they are our closest invertebrate relatives, and
are thus often used as models to study vertebrate development and evolution.
Further, certain ascidians are very effective at invading new coastal habitats
where they thrive, altering natural communities and causing considerable
economic loss to the aquaculture industry. Identifying ascidian species in the
wild is important but can be challenging, as they differ only subtly in their
appearance and also in the short stretches of DNA typically used to identify
marine species. Thus, finding a new set of DNA regions that will allow
researchers to more accurately identify ascidian species and address important
questions in invasive species spread will be a key aspect of this research. The
research will also focus on the microbes of the sea squirt gut. These appear to
play a key role in allowing certain species to succeed when they invade new
regions. This research will better characterize ascidian gut microbes, shed
light on whether these microbes evolve in concert with the hosts they occur in,
and help shed light on the role microbes play in allowing the successful
establishment of sea squirts in new habitats. This project will provide hands-on
research experience for at least nine undergraduate students at three
universities and will train 24 students in ascidian taxonomy, including students
underrepresented in STEM. A workshop on ascidian diversity in both relatively
pristine and altered marine habitats will be offered to natural resource
managers and other scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
new nuclear genome markers across the ascidian tree of life, which will enhance
opportunities to conduct phylogenetic and systematic research on the group.
Further, analysis of these novel markers, along with morphological studies, will
be used to survey and inventory ascidians from both harbor and reef habitats in
Belize, a biodiversity hot spot for the group; information on taxonomic
identification and distribution which will be made freely available as a
catalog. This inventory will extend and update our knowledge of ascidian
biodiversity and distribution along the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System, a key,
threatened ecosystem. It will also document the prevalence of introduced
ascidian species and provide identifications based on integrated molecular and
morphological data for over 40 species never previously sequenced. Furthermore,
this project will characterize the microbiome of the ascidian gut. This
microbiome plays a key role in allowing certain ascidians to successfully invade
new habitats and may have been important in ascidian evolution. The variation in
structural (taxonomic groups) and functional (specific gene) features will be
mapped out across the ascidian tree of life to provide more insight into the
role of microbial symbionts in ascidian evolution. By combining morphology with
newly developed molecular markers, applying this integrative approach to
introduced species identification, and investigating microbial symbiosis as a
driver of ascidian evolution, this project will significantly advance our
understanding of ascidian diversity and phylogenetics and the factors promoting
biological invasions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.