* 2122663
* PFI-TT: Exploring Nanocellulose Based Foams for Low-Cost, Single-Use, Biodegradable Medical Patient Support and Positioning Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Renee Kelly, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,589.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes the ability to help the
healthcare industry meet infection control and waste mitigation goals and, over
the long-term, to help control costs and improve healthcare outcomes. The
proposed project will develop cost-effective, single-use and fully compostable,
medical grade materials capable of replacing petroleum-based polyurethane foams
that are either incinerated or landfilled annually. The project has benefits
specific to the state of Maine, where the closure of six pulp and paper mills in
a two-year period has been disastrous for the economic health of local
communities. The team proposes the use of foams for patient positioning made
from wood biomass (lignocellulose/wood residue/nanocellulose) as an important
pivot for the state, creating jobs in the most rural parts of the state. This
project is one example of expanding the use of the nation’s abundant biomass
resources while maximizing economic, social and environmental outcomes. The
proposed entrepreneurial leadership training activities will directly benefit
the student participants, whose future activities will have measurable impact in
these communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address a
major demand in the healthcare industry for cost-effective single-use and fully
compostable, medical grade materials capable of replacing tens of millions of
tons of petroleum-based polyurethane foams that are either incinerated or
landfilled annually. Lignocellulosic based foams are carbon positive, green
alternatives to polyurethane that could replace existing materials in some
positioning applications provided that certain softness/elasticity targets are
achieved and that production at bulk scale can be sufficiently demonstrated. The
research objectives of this project are: 1) to explore the use of “green”
hydrogen-bond disrupting plasticizers and wetting agents, to achieve improved
mechanical properties while maintaining compostability, and 2) to assess the
feasibility of and optimize the processing conditions for the use of microwave
dewatering as a more efficient and economically viable approach to produce
biomass materials at an industrially meaningful physical size. This approach to
formulation could generate &gt;200 material variants as well as corresponding
mechanical assessment data. The microwave processing parameters necessary to
form and dewater these materials, as well as potential heat and material
transfer limitations on sample volume, will be determined. Together these data
will inform the feasibility of translating this material system into
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.