* 2122504
* PFI-TT: Development of Self-Healing Coatings that Repel High Temperature Liquids and Polymers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Tak Sing Wong, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 01/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create self-healing, liquid-
repellent surface coatings capable of repelling liquids and melted polymers at
elevated temperatures. Potential applications include fuel transportation,
chemical processing, automotive parts, heat exchangers, kitchen appliances, and
printers. The worldwide 3D printing market size was estimated to be $11.58
billion in 2019 and is anticipated to grow significantly from 2020 to 2027. The
proposed non-stick surface coatings will prevent adhesion from various printing
materials at high temperature, enabling faster and more efficient printing
performance. The educational outcomes of this project include training the next
generation of scientists and engineers and equipping them with the necessary
skill sets to make substantial contributions in the translation and
commercialization of novel, high-impact technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project aims to further advance the liquid repellent surface coating
technologies by developing self-healing and self-cleaning coatings that can
repel liquids and melted polymers at high temperature. Durable and high
temperature liquid repellent surfaces are important in many consumers and
industrial applications. The development of such surface coatings remains a
challenge. Very few surface coatings reported in the literature or in the
commercial space have demonstrated both high temperature liquid repellency and
self-healing functionality. In this PFI-TT project, the thermally self-
repairable coating technology will be ability to repel different liquids and
melted polymers at high temperatures as well as their self-healing and self-
cleaning characteristics will be systematically investigated. In addition, the
coating formulations and application parameters will be further optimized to
enhance the coating application efficiency. The successful demonstration of a
self-healing surface coating that can repel high temperature liquids and molten
polymers not only will advance the field of non-stick surface coating
technologies but will also impact multiple consumers and industrial applications
ranging from kitchen appliances to 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.