* 2122511
* Coaching for Equity in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Pauline Lake, College of Saint Scholastica
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,924.00

The College of St. Scholastica will study coaching within the context of
computer science (CS) education, supporting the development of two coaching
programs that will serve up to 36 coaches and 72 teachers. Coaching is an
existing and pervasive part of the K-12 education system, however, it has not
been studied significantly within the context of computer science. Computer
science is a critical area of study for K-12 students for civic engagement,
developing collaboration, problem solving, and creativity among others. As in
other areas of education, though, there are unequal rates of access,
participation, and engagement in CS learning for those historically
underrepresented in computing. In general, coaching has been shown to increase
the adoption and improvement of equitable teaching practices, to increase
student learning outcomes, and reduce achievement gaps. The project team will
create a CS coaching professional development program and share tools with the
CS education community. Establishing and supporting CS coaching programs has the
potential to contribute lasting and substantive work towards advancing the
sustainability and equity goals of CS for all K12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create CS coaching professional
development and study the implementation of coaching within two contexts. Code
Savvy’s coaching program will support Minnesota coaches and teachers focused on
teaching CS content at the high school level and will involve a mix of in-person
and virtual coaching. The NCCSE coaching program will focus on a nationwide
virtual coaching program for teachers of the Advanced Placement Computer Science
Principles and Computer Science A courses. Using a mixed methods design, this
project will study the impact of the coaching programs on improving teacher
practice as defined by the CSTA Standards for CS Teachers. The project staff
will address the following research questions: 1) how does teachers’ ability to
apply CS practices and knowledge of CS concepts change as a result of the
coaching process; 2) what impact does CS coaching have on teacher capacity to
implement equitable teaching practices; 3) what, if any, changes to teacher
practice are sustained during and after the CS coaching process; and 4) does CS
coaching facilitate teacher professional growth and identity as a computer
science teacher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.