* 2122604
* PFI-TT: Technology Transfer: Robust Hierarchically-Textured Surfaces for Transportation of Heavy Crude Oils
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,01/31/2024
* George Pharr V, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 01/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is in designing robust surface coatings
for the interiors of rail cars and oil tankers that transport heavy crude oil
and bitumen. Fossil fuels continue to play a pivotal role in meeting increasing
global energy needs; They serve as a feedstock for the chemical and asphalt
industries. Heavy crude oil and bitumen are highly viscous, which leads to
difficulties in extraction, midstream transportation, and processing operations.
For instance, heavy crude oil and bitumen must be shipped using heated tankers,
railcars, trucks, and pipelines, which requires enormous energy expenditures.
Shipping also requires high-cost dilution to obtain flow properties that are
conducive to transportation. Furthermore, cleaning these vessels incurs
considerable cost, results in substantial unrecovered residues, and engenders
safety hazards. The proposed coating formulations will merge novel surface
chemistries with 3D texturation to improve the flow of heavy crude oil. These
coatings will decrease waste during transportation, reduce heating costs,
decrease diluent use, and reduce downtime. Designing and manufacturing coating
technologies for viscous oil transportation in the United States will ensure
that the US maintains leadership in an area critical to energy security and
economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project may result in engineered
coatings with surface chemistries and 3D textured structures that promote oil
repellency, adhesion strength, corrosion resistance, and robustness to thermal
cycling. While extensive efforts have focused on designing engineered surfaces
that repel water, options for surfaces that repel heavy crude oils are
exceedingly sparse. The proposed innovation is unique in its ability to repel
unheated viscous crude oil and distinctive in its performance at high
temperature, applicability at scale (entire shipping containers and railcars),
and compatibility with chemistries that inhibit corrosion of the underlying
metals. This project will advance this innovation in terms of technology
development by (1) efficiently navigating the materials design space to optimize
texturation and surface chemistries; (2) providing fundamental understanding of
design principles that lead to oil repellency and adhesion strength through
chemical and mechanical characterization; (3) developing models for lifetime
predictions by studying mechanical failure mechanisms; and (4) fabricating and
field testing a bitutainer scale model prototype. A distinctive element of the
proposed project is its emphasis on interrogation of physical mechanisms and
chemical design principles (not just optimization of compositions), which may
bring disruptive innovation to the transportation and storage of heavy crude oil
and bitumen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.