* 2122178
* UTRGV-UMN PARTNERSHIP to Strengthen the PREM Pathway
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Timothy Lodge, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 2,351,766.00

The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) located in the southernmost
region of Texas serves over 31,000 students, of whom 89% are Hispanic. UTRGV is
2nd in the nation in total Hispanic enrollment and 3rd in graduating Hispanics.
The proposed Partnership for Research and Education in Materials (PREM) between
UTRGV and the University of Minnesota (UMN) Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) will focus particularly on retention and degree
attainment of underrepresented minority undergraduates, as well as on building
the graduate school pipeline where Hispanic students are even more
underrepresented. The PREM pathway goals are to achieve a 5-year graduation rate
of at least 85% for PREM undergraduate students and a graduate school enrollment
rate of at least 30% for PREM alumni. This PREM aims to provide intensive
research opportunities to at least 100 undergraduate students during the course
of the award. Students will develop expertise in the broad areas of energy and
smart materials while acquiring a strong set of multi-disciplinary skills in
fundamental research. The participating students will carry out research at both
academic institutions and will be mentored by faculty from several disciplines.
Mentoring of junior and mid-career faculty will also be fostered. This PREM
program will allow UTRGV to significantly accelerate its emergence as a focal
center for materials research and develop a long-lasting collaborative
partnership with UMN. The research results under the UTRGV-UMN PREM partnership
will be disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and conferences, and to the
public at large via a dedicated web portal and frequent presentations at local
K-12 schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTRGV-UMN PREM will engage in compelling
scientific materials research through a synergistic approach towards development
of next-generation nanofiber (NF) systems that could impact a large number of
important practical applications, including in the biomedical fields,
filtration, electronics and energy related sectors. The team proposes to develop
a suite of strategies to prescribe, tailor, design and control the
mesostructures of fine fibers. UTRGV’s world leadership in force-spinning
leverages its platform in NF process-structure-characterization, while design
and characterization of nanoscale structures match a distinguishing strength of
the UMN MRSEC. The team will produce tunable hierarchical structures with
powerful property combinations. The proposed research is organized around two
interdisciplinary research groups (IRG); the first will explore processing
routes to control both fiber geometry and internal structure, and the second
will adapt internally structured NFs for specific applications. The world-class
instrument facilities at UMN will enable and catalyze the research efforts and
will provide unique opportunities for cross-fertilization of ideas, mentoring,
and multidisciplinary training. The collaborative teams will hold research-focus
group meetings via real-time video teleconferencing and hold an annual symposium
hosted by each institution, rotating yearly. This will foster a high-level of
research activity and a well-orchestrated student-centered organizational
environment. Ultimately, this research partnership will increase understanding
of hierarchically designed NFs and will pave the way for novel systems with
potential to facilitate decentralized energy production in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.