* 2122042
* A sea state dependent gas transfer formulation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Luc Deike, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,843.00

This project aims to produce a mechanistic formulation for air-sea gas fluxes,
more accurate than empirical relationships currently used. It will develop and
test a novel parameterization that fully accounts for the effects of sea-state,
wind, and key physicochemical variables such as diffusivity, solubility and
temperature on the bubble mediated gas exchange. This is novel as it spans all
the scales relevant to the gas transfer problem, from the bubble scale, to the
wave statistics at the ocean surface. The flux will be modelled through a sea-
state dependent gas transfer velocity, within a unified framework for all gas
species. The impact of key variables which are known to influence bubble
mediated gas transfer, such as the bubble size distribution, bubble residence
time, its dependence on salinity, viscosity and temperature, as well as the
diffusivity and solubility of different gases are directly incorporated in the
formulation. Better understanding and improved parameterizations of the gas
transfer are necessary to better predict the associated global biogeochemical
cycles of carbon dioxide, oxygen or dimethyl sulfide. Understanding how the wave
field modulates the fluxes of these climate-relevant gases will lead to general
improvements in climate and weather models and forecast. Since increased CO2
causes ocean acidification impacting shell-forming marine animals, and
limitations in oxygen have broad ecological effects, improved parameterization
of the exchange of these gases can help interpret existing observations, and
might improve our understanding of local processes and their impact on
ecosystems. The general framework to account for sea-state dependence is not
limited to gas transfer but could be generalized to other type of fluxes as
well. This project will expose undergraduate and graduate students at Princeton
to these critical environmental challenges that require research on fundamental
multi-phase flows, and promote the use of open-source methods through workshops
and teaching activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research promotes a general
theoretical framework to account for the complex nature of wave breaking and air
entrainment, a two-phase turbulent process, and the very large range of scales
involved in the process, from wave statistics scales of order of km, O(1km), to
wave breaking dynamics, O(1-10m), air entrainment, bubble generation and
dissolution O(cm to m). Leveraging recent progress in wave modeling, a state-of-
the-art wave model will be used to directly compute the breaking statistics,
which will help investigate the role of the full wave complexity on the gas flux
at high temporal and spatial resolution. Bubble contribution to air-sea gas
exchange will be evaluated regionally and globally for various gases like carbon
dioxide and dimethyl sulfide, and the formulation will be extended to low
solubility gases such as oxygen by considering the bubble asymmetric
contribution. Regions and seasons will be identified where capturing the wave
field and associated storms is critical to represent field observations.
Systematical comparisons of this modeling approach to recent and historical data
sets will leverage the large effort by the air-sea interaction community in
producing high quality field measurements. A consistent data set of global and
regional gas transfer velocity will be produced, that will be used to develop a
unified parameterization for the transfer of any gas, and which will be made
available to the ocean and climate community, to be used in coupled wave-ocean-
atmosphere and climate models. This should significantly reduce the
uncertainties of air-sea gas exchange at moderate to high wind speeds in
biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.