* 2122134
* RUI: The Process of Rural Industrialization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Khori Newlander, Kutztown University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 245,515.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of American industry
during the late-eighteenth and nineteenth centuries dramatically transformed the
United States. Researchers who study early industrial communities wish to
understand how physical, economic, demographic, and social factors intersected
in the unfolding of industrialization. Archaeology is particularly well placed
to provide relevant insight because it can trace trajectories of cultural change
over extended periods of time. Archaeology also can recover material evidence of
the countless men and women who, though lost to the history books, helped
America become an industrial and economic power. Rather than focus on giants of
industry or the industrial development of cities, this project will examine how
industrialization resonated in small communities, transforming work and domestic
life. This research will generate new data for understanding the contexts and
consequences of industrialization in the past and how industrialization
continues to transform the world in the present. The project will facilitate
comparative research on how local communities experience and engage with wider
flows of people, technology, commodities, and ideas. Additionally, the project
will provide opportunities for secondary school students, teachers, and scout
troops to learn about the history in their backyards through participation in
archaeological research. The research team will also install museum exhibits
detailing the research at the heritage centers in Stoddartsville and Joanna
Furnace. Finally, the project will provide undergraduate students with an
opportunity to participate in archaeological fieldwork, artifact analysis, and
public outreach. A larger number of undergraduate students will benefit from
exposure to this archaeological research through university courses. This
project at a primarily undergraduate institution will provide a unique
opportunity for students, many of whom are first-generation college students
from populations that are underrepresented in the sciences, to collaborate on
research and pursue the presentation of these data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will examine the myriad changes wrought by industrialization
through the archaeological study of two nineteenth-century industrial
communities in Pennsylvania. Comparative study of environmental data and
historic and material records from these industrial communities will allow the
research team to examine (a) the varying ways in which physical features
intersected with cultural and historical factors to define the economic and
extractive activities of these communities; and (b) the intersecting changes in
demographic composition, economic organization, and social formations that
resulted from the industrial postures adopted by these communities.
Archaeological fieldwork conducted during the project will focus on the
identification and excavation of domestic contexts, augmenting previous
fieldwork focused on community structures and work sites. By documenting
variability in the consumption of commodities, the research team will be able to
examine how different social groups participated in or resisted
industrialization and how industrialization itself may have contributed to an
emergent American ethnicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.