* 2122428
* BPINNOVATE: Impacts of Social Safety Net Policies on STEM Entrepreneurship and Innovation in Underrepresented Populations and Underserved Regions
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jiayi Bao, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 370,066.00

The understanding of how institutional environments shape entrepreneurial
formation and innovation activities is essential to the design of policies that
enhance participation and success of entrepreneurs and inventors. However,
surprisingly little is known about the role of social safety net policies in
promoting entrepreneurship and innovation. This is especially concerning, as
ongoing policy debates over a range of social safety net issues are being
discussed without a solid understanding of how these policies affect
entrepreneurship and innovation. This project aims to provide the first set of
evaluations of how social safety net policies impact STEM entrepreneurship and
innovation, especially in underrepresented populations and underserved regions
in the United States. Research results will provide practical advice to
policymakers and practitioners regarding how social safety net benefits affect
the quantity and quality of STEM entrepreneurs and inventors who are key to
sustained global competitiveness, and how they impact the well-being of
underrepresented populations and underserved regions through entrepreneurial
empowerment and inclusiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal consists of
three studies that examine social safety net programs providing child and
family, health, and educational assistance benefits, respectively. Each study
exploits a set of quasi-experiments, which are particularly meaningful for
underrepresented populations or underserved regions, to establish the causal
effects of one type of social safety net policies on STEM entrepreneurship
participation, innovation activities, and innovation outcomes. Additionally,
interview and survey data on how various social safety net policies shape
individual preferences and behavior will be collected to develop new theories on
the micro-foundations of entrepreneurial entry and innovative capability, which
can advance the multi-method approach in social sciences. Overall, this project
offers important insights into the design of governmental programs and business
strategies that would promote inclusive economic growth and maintain U.S.
competitiveness in science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.