* 2122044
* NCCU-PSU Partnership for Research and Education in Nanoscale Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2027
* Vincent Crespi, North Carolina Central University
* Continuing Grant
* Shadi Mamaghani
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,961,544.00

North Carolina Central University (NCCU) is a historically black, primarily
undergraduate institution with a 70% female and 80% underrepresented minority
student population. This Partnership for Research and Education in Materials
(PREM) between NCCU and Penn State Materials Research Science and Engineering
Center (MRSEC) seeks to advance materials research and strengthen the pipeline
for the advancement of women and underrepresented minorities in materials
science and related disciplines at NCCU by leveraging expertise and resources
available through the Penn State Center for Nanoscale Science. This project will
engage 10 undergraduate and 5 graduate students per year in highly
collaborative, multi-disciplinary research on advanced nanoscale materials.
Selected students will also participate in a summer research experience at Penn
State with combined peer mentoring focused on overcoming barriers to graduate
study encountered by minority students. Increased recruitment, curricular
enhancement, peer tutoring, career guidance and professional development
activities with extensive Penn State contributions will be offered to expand the
pool of students engaged in materials research at NCCU and provide them with the
academic, research and professional skills required for success in post-NCCU
careers. A broad range of outreach activities, including summer research
experiences for students and teachers, and development of home-based science
activities in collaboration with science museums will be established to impact
the local K-12 community. This project is partially supported with co-funding
from the HBCU-UP program in the Division of Human Resource Development of the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to increase understanding of the fundamental principles
underlying the properties of heterogeneous nanoscale systems, and to engineer
new materials with novel functionalities based on these insights. The
partnership is organized around two research thrusts that leverage the resources
at both institutions to extend the scope and depth of research beyond those
accessible at either individual institution. Thrust 1 focuses on the synthesis
of mixed-dimensional heterostructures integrating zero- and one-dimensional
materials with two-dimensional (2D) materials, and characterization of charge
transfer and enhanced chemical reactivity at the nanoscale interfaces in these
systems. This research thrust addresses key scientific challenges including
control of the physical and chemical properties of the constituent materials by
tuning compositions and dimensionalities of component nanostructures, and large-
area growth of novel 2D materials. Thrust 2 encompasses research into hybrid
nanocomposites combining different classes of materials. This research thrust
focuses on engineering strong light-matter coupling in semiconductor-metal
systems to control carrier dynamics and long-range transport, the effects of
compositional heterogeneities in organic-inorganic perovskite on charge
transport, and control of the multiferroic properties of polymer-ceramic
nanocomposites through matrix-nanoparticle interactions. Research from the two
thrusts will broadly benefit the fields of optoelectronics, photovoltaics,
photocatalysis, and sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.