* 2122799
* PFI-RP:  The development of a novel calcium carbonate, sourced from atmospheric carbon dioxide, as a green alternative for use in consumer and industrial products.
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Hazel Barton, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the production of sustainable
precipitated calcium carbonates (PCCs). Increased carbon dioxide (CO2) has led
to an increase in global temperatures. This warming is expected to lead to
increased extreme weather events, reduced food production, ocean acidification,
and damage to critical ecosystem services, necessitating the need to find new
technologies that remove this excess CO2 through sequestration. This research
uses a novel carbon capture methodology to trap atmospheric CO2 as micron-scale
PCCs, which have a wide range of industrial uses in paper, sealants, and paint.
Around 42 billion liters of paint are produced globally and up to 30% of this
volume includes fillers and pigments that PCCs could replace. This use of CO2
has the potential to significantly improve the carbon footprint of paint, while
the unique properties of these microbially-derived PCCs can increase
performance. The US paint market is valued at $28 billion annually, with PCCs
representing a served available market of $262 million.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will determine the scalability of PCC production technology.
There are two technical challenges limiting industrial scaling of production (to
rates up to 1,500 L h-1); These include the quick and efficient separation of
micron-sized PCCs from bacteria, and the development of a process that is price
competitive with current PCC technologies. By combining microbial metabolic
processes with genetic enhancement, the team will identify and establish the
steady-state conditions that optimize PCC size, morphology, and rate of
production. It is the aim of the proposed work to develop a continuous culture
strategy that mimics similar industrial-scale processes, such as ethanol
production. The team will also use the principles of fluid dynamics to design
novel, tangential flow filtration (TFF) strategies. The technology will be moved
to from small batch culture approach to an integrated 1 liter continuous-culture
filtration process to model the effectiveness of the approach under
industrially-relevant conditions. The research will increase the scientific
understanding of microbially-induced precipitation in bacteria as well as the
potential to develop novel separation approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.