* 2122191
* Collaborative Research: Generation of Rock Damage and Localization of Seismicity Before Large Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ilya Zaliapin, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 206,800.00

How large earthquakes are generated, and how to forecast them, remain
fundamental unsolved scientific questions. They have strong implications for
human societies. Large earthquakes can result in loss of life, devastating
destruction, and trigger additional hazards such as tsunamis, fires, and
landslides. This project aims to improve the understanding of earthquake
dynamics and ability to forecast large events. Its key aspect is to track the
progressive localization of seismic deformation preceding the earthquake
rupture. With this aim, the researchers combine novel statistical techniques
with high-resolution earthquake catalogs from different tectonic environments.
They account for data from fracturing experiments and physical modeling of
deformation localization. The project also provides support and training for two
graduate students. Its outcomes contribute to improve earthquake hazard
assessment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigations work to develop a
quantitative operational framework for tracking the preparation processes of
large earthquakes. This is done by following the progressive evolution of
deformation from distributed failures in a volume to localized shear zones
culminating in generation of large earthquakes. The research considers
deformation in entire volumes rather than on pre-existing faults or sets of
faults. The analysis is associated with uniform regional analysis and
interpretation of thousands of earthquake clusters on different space-time-
energy scales, without retrospective selection of the analyzed zones. The
project develops, tests, and implements an integrated multi-signal procedure
synthesizing different seismic observations that may be used to estimate the
approaching time of large earthquakes. The developed tools and results can have
significant impact on understanding of seismicity and analysis of seismic hazard
in active tectonic environments. The research can inform and impact additional
observational, experimental, and theoretical studies on earthquake physics and
seismic hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.