* 2122621
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Unveiling Conceptual Shifts and Novel Dynamics in Genetic Engineering Science: A Gene Drive Case Study
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Cody OToole, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia Kosmopoulou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 15,129.00

How is knowledge created at the intersections between basic science,
biotechnology, and industry? Gene drives are an interesting example, as they
combine a long-standing interest with a recent technological breakthrough and a
new set of commercial applications. Gene drives are genes engineered such that
they are preferentially inherited at a frequency greater than the typical
Mendelian fifty percent. During the historical and conceptual evolution of gene
drives beginning in the 1960s, there has been many innovations and publications.
Along with that, gene drive science developed considerable public attention,
explosion of new scientists, and variation in the way the topic is discussed. It
is now time to look at this new organization of science using a systematic
approach to characterize the system which has enabled knowledge to grow in this
scientific field. This project will break new ground in how knowledge advances
in genetic engineering science, and how we understand what a “gene drive” is
through analysis of language, communities, and social media. In effect, this
research will advance multiple fields and enable a deeper understanding of
knowledge and complex systems by a wide audience through publicly available
dissemination of results through conferences, blogs, GitHub, and scholarly
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will document patterns of
publication, collaborative relationships, social media influence, then combine
those factors to characterize the knowledge system into a signal detection
algorithm to predict the future trajectory of the larger CRISPR-Cas9 science.
The results of computational analysis will provide an in-depth and complete
characterization of the structure, dynamics, and evolution of scientific
knowledge found in the gene drive technology. In addition, the project will
analyze how the public opinion influences the progress of genetic engineering
technologies through social media and news platforms. Further, time series
analysis of the multiple layers of discourse will enable a diachronic connective
mapping of collaborative relationships and track linguistic variation and
change, highlighting where ambiguous language may appear. Thus, improving and
creating more cohesive scientific language. Overall, depicting the structure,
dynamics, and evolution of scientific knowledge during a novel eruption of
scientific complexity can shed light on the factors that can lead to: (1)
improved scientific communication, (2) reduction of scientific progress, (3) new
knowledge, and (4) novel collaborative relationships. Therefore, characterizing
the current technological, methodological, and social contexts that can
influence scientific knowledge. Research results will reach conferences, blogs,
GitHub, and be shared through both traditional and digital publications.
Scholarly results will be available through different websites, and as much as
possible will be shared for free.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.