* 2122248
* Integrating petrologic records and geodynamics: Quantifying the effects of glaciation on crustal stress and eruptive patterns at Mt. Waesche, Executive Committee Range, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Matthew Zimmerer, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 483,028.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The geologic record reveals that
volcanic activity increases when glaciers retreat and major ice sheets thin.
This relationship produces a positive feedback mechanism where the uptick in
volcanism increases greenhouse gasses concentrations, leading to climate warming
and further deglaciation. Although the pattern between volcanism and
deglaciation is observed in the geologic record, the exact mechanism(s) by which
glaciers impact a volcanic plumbing system is unknown. This project focuses on
Mount Waesche, a volcano in West Antarctica, that frequently erupts during warm,
interglacial periods and undergoes a period of less activity during cold,
glacial periods. This project will examine compositions of the rocks and
minerals from Mount Waesche to determine magma storage depths, allowing the
investigators to understand how magma plumbing systems change in response to
glacial cycles. These results will be compared with geodynamic simulations to
understand the physics behind the effects of deglaciation on the magmatic
plumbing systems within Earth’s crust. The investigators will additionally
partner with Mentoring Kids Works to develop several Polar and Earth Science
Educational Modules aimed at improving reading skills in third grade students in
New Mexico. The proposed Polar and Earth Science program consists of modules
that include readings of books introducing students to Earth and Polar science
themes, paired with Earth and Polar Science activities, followed by simple
experiments, where students make predictions and collect data. Information
required to implement our Polar and Earth Science curriculum will be made
available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isotopic and sedimentary datasets reveal
that volcanic activity typically increases during interglacial periods. However,
the physical mechanisms through which changes in the surface loading affect
volcanic magmatic plumbing systems remain unconstrained. Recently generated
40Ar/39Ar eruption ages indicate that 86% of the dated samples from Mt. Waesche,
a late Quaternary volcano in Marie Byrd land, correlate with interglacial
periods, suggesting this volcano uniquely responds to changes in the West
Antarctic Ice Sheet. We propose to combine the petrology of Mount Waesche’s
volcanic record, constraints on changing ice loads through time, and geodynamic
modelling to: (1) Determine how pre-eruptive storage conditions change during
glacial and interglacial periods using whole rock and mineral compositions of
volcanic rocks; (2) Conduct geodynamic modeling to elucidate the relationship
between lithospheric structure, temporal variations in ice sheet thickness, and
subsequent changes in crustal stresses and magmatic transport and, therefore,
the mechanism(s) by which deglaciation impacts magmatic plumbing systems; (3)
Use the outcomes of objectives (1) and (2) to provide new constraints on the
changes in ice sheet thickness through time that could plausibly trigger future
volcanic and magmatic activity in West Antarctica. This collaborative approach
will provide a novel methodology to determine prior magnitudes and rates of ice
load changes within the Marie Byrd Land region of Antarctica. Lastly, estimates
of WAIS elevation changes from this study will be compared to ongoing studies at
Mount Waesche focused on constraining last interglacial ice sheet draw down
using cosmogenic exposure ages obtained from shallow drilling. The scope of work
also includes a partnership with Mentoring Kids Works to develop several Polar
and Earth Science Educational Modules aimed at improving reading skills in third
grade students in New Mexico. The proposed Polar and Earth Science program
consists of modules that include readings of books introducing students to Earth
and Polar science themes, paired with Earth and Polar Science activities,
followed by simple experiments, where students make predictions and collect
data. Information required to implement our Polar and Earth Science curriculum
will be made available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.