* 2122012
* EAGER: ML-enabled early warning of blockage and beam transitions in mobile, hybrid sub-6GHz/mmWave systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Hans Hallen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,925.00

The emerging generation of cellular communication, 5G, is expected to utilize
frequencies in the range of tens to hundreds of GHz (mmWave) to overcome the
bandwidth limitations inherent to 4G (sub-6 GHz) systems. However, mmWave
signals do not propagate as far, are more susceptible to blocking by physical
objects, and require more directional communication than 4G signals. Indeed,
early deployments of commercial 5G mmWave networks in 2019 and 2020 have
suffered from major coverage and penetration problems. This project evaluates
the feasibility of a novel, potentially transformative approach to obtain an
early warning of blockages and antenna beam transitions at mmWave (5G) using
sub-6GHz (4G-like) observations. Suitability of machine learning (ML) for
enabling this task is investigated. A realistic physics-based propagation model
is enhanced to validate the proposed approach. The project is strengthened by
the interdisciplinary PI team with combined expertise in communication theory,
signal processing, and propagation physics. The proposed methods introduce
innovations to advance the broader fields of 5G networks and mmWave propagation
modeling. The insights of the proposed research will be integrated into courses
and presentations to student organizations, and the outcomes published for
professionals. A graduate student and undergraduate students will be trained in
a diverse, multidisciplinary, and inclusive environment about vibrant wireless
communications topics. Close collaboration with NSF BWAC and PAWR platforms will
enhance the success of proposed research and outreach plans by dissemination of
the research outcomes in the centers' events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This high-
risk, high reward project develops novel digital signal processing (DSP) and ML
solutions for solving resiliency problems in real-world mmWave deployments.
These methods are suitable for hybrid communication systems, where the sub-6 GHz
and mmWave bands are employed simultaneously. Using the Fresnel theory of
diffraction and our accurate physics-based model, we have previously
demonstrated that diffracted sub-6 GHz signals reach a specified received signal
strength (RSS) threshold much earlier than mmWave signals. The latter property
is exploited in this project to develop an early-warning method that forecasts
blockage, beam direction, and other rapid changes in mmWave signals several to
tens of milliseconds (several to hundreds of slots) ahead in mobile
communications systems. The early-warning approach provides hybrid mobile
communications systems with sufficient time to adapt the data rate, change the
antenna direction, or perform a handover between the two frequencies or base
stations before a significant change of the mmWave signal occurs. The early
warning method relies solely on the physical properties of diffraction, not on
measured environments or dense beams or users. It improves resilience of mobile
mmWave networks to blockages and other rapid signal changes by continuously
adapting to the environmental features, e.g., moving obstacles or small
reflectors not captured by base-station siting, environmental mapping, and other
previously proposed approaches. The early warning algorithm is trained and
validated using an accurate spatiotemporal sub-6 GHz/mmWave hybrid channel
model, which can provide a large set of physically realistic scenarios.
Utilization of the physical model in this project will provide insights for
collecting 'smart data' in future hybrid channel measurements using PAWR
platform at NC State and online data repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.