* 2122358
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Genetic and environmentally-induced functional variation in the rice RNA structurome
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Doreen Ware, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 09/30/2025
* USD 75,617.00

Ribonucleic acids (RNA) are essential molecules in living organisms, including
in plants. RNA can serve roles as both an informational molecule (genetic code)
and a functional molecule (perform and regulate chemical reactions). RNA can
fold into complex shapes that can control whether it stays intact or is
degraded. This in turn can control how a plant responds to environmental
stresses it faces such as heat and cold. The research involves the development
of new experimental technologies to investigate RNA structures one molecule at a
time and new computational technologies of artificial intelligence wherein a
computer learns patterns that can predict RNA structure and its variation. Rice
is an important world-wide crop, and the research applies these technologies to
rice varieties that are grown in different parts of the world. There are
thousands of different varieties of rice adapted to local environments and their
RNAs often differ from each other by relatively few changes. Some of these
changes will alter the shape of the RNA and thus the response of that rice
variety to stress. A major goal of these study is to identify those changes that
alter RNA shape and thereby affect temperature tolerance. Once identified, these
shape-shifters could be engineered into specific rice varieties to breed crops
more resistant to stress. Aspects of the research will involve high school
students and their teachers, and research results and methods will be
disseminated in public outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA structure
is a primary determinant of gene expression. Individual copies of the same
transcript can take on different structures as influenced by their
microenvironment, but methods have been lacking to categorize this diversity.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) also can affect RNA structure as
“riboSNitches”; however, riboSNitches have not been studied in plants, and their
conditionality on environmental conditions has not been assessed. Using rice
(Oryza sativa) as the primary model system, the proposed research will develop
new wet bench and computational approaches that will allow categorization of the
mRNA “pan-structurome,” its consequent impacts on gene expression, and its
functional association with respect to local climate conditions in rice
landraces. Training will be provided to postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
undergraduates, and high school students and teachers. Broader Impacts will
include development of the Oryza CLIMtools webtool to relate rice genotypes with
climate variables and to identify beneficial structural haplotypes for use in
development of elite rice cultivars. Impact will be broadened through technology
including enhanced browser-based RNA structure-reactivity visualization and
publicly available instructional screencasts. Collaborations with PUI Swarthmore
College will engage undergraduate researchers in computational aspects of the
project. Local high school students will perform whole plant physiological
experiments, engaging a future generation of biologists and chemists. Finally,
the 23rd Penn State Plant Biology Symposium, on RNA biology, will be organized,
which will promote the global field of post-transcriptional gene
regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.