* 2122540
* PFI: TT: Development of 5-Minute Protein Analyses
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Merlin Bruening, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/29/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project includes development of a convenient
device that can determine protein concentrations in 5 minutes. Current methods
for protein analysis often employ expensive kits that require more than 1 hour
to obtain results. The new technology will enable regular monitoring of protein
concentrations during their manufacturing and processing. The markets for some
individual antibodies as well as other proteins are in the range of $10 billion
per year, and these biomolecules are vital in treating diseases such as cancer,
diabetes, and anemia. Improving the production of these proteins by monitoring
their expression and processing is an important step in enhancing their
availability. The research may yield a simple platform for protein analysis in
multi-well plates used in most laboratories. Given the size of the therapeutic
protein market (&gt;$250 billion/year), tools for analysis of therapeutic
protein production should have a market of many million dollars per year.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use flow through functionalized
microporous membranes in 96-well plates to enable capture and detection of
proteins in minutes. In contrast, typical protein analysis platforms rely on
passive diffusion to bring proteins to binding sites; Analysis times are &gt;1
h. The research includes a method for functionalizing the porous membranes with
peptides that bind specifically to a given protein. The high density of peptide
immobilization and the high surface area to volume ratio in the membranes allows
capture of large amounts of protein in a short time to achieve rapid, sensitive
quantitation. The research aims to demonstrate a general method for the analyses
of antibodies in cell-culture broths as well as comparable analyses times,
detection limits, percent recoveries, and precision when compared to commercial
immunosorbent assays. Additionally, the work may establish membrane-based
capture and analysis of other important proteins such as insulin and
erythropoietin. Success in these studies may demonstrate the promise of
functionalized membrane plates for regularly monitoring the production and
processing of important commercial proteins. The research will also demonstrate
the advantages of this method over current techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.