* 2122054
* EAGER: SAI: Synchronizing Decision-Support via Human- and Social-centered Digital Twin Infrastructures for Coastal Communities
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xinyue Ye, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 298,982.00

Strengthening American Infrastructure (SAI) is an NSF Program seeking to
stimulate human-centered fundamental and potentially transformative research
that strengthens America’s infrastructure. Effective infrastructure provides a
strong foundation for socioeconomic vitality and broad quality of life
improvement. Strong, reliable, and effective infrastructure spurs private-sector
innovation, grows the economy, creates jobs, makes public-sector service
provision more efficient, strengthens communities, promotes equal opportunity,
protects the natural environment, enhances national security, and fuels American
leadership. To achieve these goals requires expertise from across the science
and engineering disciplines. SAI focuses on how knowledge of human reasoning and
decision making, governance, and social and cultural processes enables the
building and maintenance of effective infrastructure that improves lives and
society and builds on advances in technology and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal flooding and storms present a growing
global challenge. This SAI project focuses on strategies, technologies,
mechanisms, and policies for increasing coastal community resilience. The
project centers on the use of digital twins – virtual copies of physical objects
and systems that update in real time to match real-world conditions. Digital
twins can provide the insights needed to inform resilient decision making in
coastal communities. An initial case study is developed through the construction
of a digital twin of Galveston Island and portions of other coastal Texan
communities. The research adopts a holistic and integrated approach for
evaluating, modeling, and testing resilience scenarios. It brings together
multiple disciplines including geography, urban planning, landscape
architecture, computer science, construction science, and marine science. A
participatory and community engagement platform is used to collect ground truth
data and gain further in-depth understanding of coastal infrastructure
mechanisms at multiple scales. Residents and stakeholders will gain insights
into: (1) comparing the pros and cons of different planning efforts; (2) the
joint impacts that existing and future planning efforts may have on
stakeholders’ individual goals and objectives; and 3) the assets and capacities
involved with current dynamic sensors used in digital twin-based information
modeling. Decision-makers can leverage the capabilities of this platform to test
incremental and place-based planning approaches with real-time priorities,
policies, and suggested infrastructure changes. Through software and hardware
integration, this digital twin serves as a platform for pursuing solutions to
coastal infrastructure challenges. The potential reward is high, as more
informed decisions and better affordances for inter-agency coordination may
lower the costs of maintaining or replacing the coastal resilience protective
system. The digital twin-based decision-support framework serves as a catalyst
for further research in data-driven decision making by connecting different
datasets and by providing training and collaborative research opportunities for
local project participants as well as graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SAI project supports the resilient design,
planning, and development of sustainable infrastructure in coastal communities.
It integrates physical, cyber, and social infrastructure data into an analytics
platform for real-time, dynamic scenario testing for decision support. This
digital twin-based decision support system allows (1) collection, compiling and
sharing data on physical, cyber, and social infrastructure; (2) engagement of
communities to disseminate information and facilitate citizen science; and (3)
promoting a human- and social-centered approach for infrastructure planning and
integrated social-environment system dynamics modeling in the context of short-
term disasters and long-term climate change. The digital, data-driven decision-
making framework integrates a variety of data sources, digital modeling and
analytics platforms, and participatory-enhanced infrastructure management
considerations. It creates a visualized common operating procedure within a
digital twin of local circumstances that local residents and decision-makers can
use to better reason about the relationships among different planning efforts,
including disaster management, new construction, repair, rehabilitation and
retrofitting activities, regular maintenance, system performance, and
infrastructure additions. The digital platform collects and simulates highly
dynamic and massive volumes of independently-acting, reacting, and interacting
agents (such as people, vehicles, structures/infrastructure, and institutions)
under different policy or hazard response scenarios. Coupled with immersive
technologies, the platform allows people to better understand built and natural
environment changes by visualizing how planning and infrastructure alteration
and addition can alter resilience levels (positively or negatively). Local
knowledge is combined with expert evaluation across multiple flood scenario
types and infrastructure change scenarios to test different resilience levels to
urban change. By revealing fundamental design and planning principles with
implications for action, the research improves U.S. infrastructure for disaster
resilience, in support of science-based measures for accessible, affordable, and
universal geospatial design interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.