* 2122643
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Workshop -- Accelerating Translational Materials R&amp;D for Global Challenges
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2021
* Jed Pitera, IBM Thomas J Watson Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 10/31/2021
* USD 77,000.00

The overarching goal of the proposed workshop is the development of a broad-
based materials innovation community that takes a holistic view of materials
science, technology, and social impact and that brings together diverse
participants to nucleate working groups focused around specific global
challenges. Specifically, the workshop aims to bring together the materials
science and manufacturing communities to accelerate the translation of emerging
research in materials science towards applications of societal significance and
with environmental sustainability. Materials are at the heart – both the answer
to, and sometimes the source of – a broad range of global challenges. The
importance of materials innovation has been recognized with sustained investment
over the past decade, including programs such as the Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI) in the US (http://www.mgi.gov) and related efforts around the globe (e.g.,
https://elements-strategy.jp/en/, https://www.nomad-coe.eu/). The goal of this
workshop is to ask the question of how materials research and development should
be transformed to maximize our ability to address those global challenges. This
transformation should also change our idea of materials innovation from the
development of a point solution that solves a well-defined problem (optimizing
performance or figure of merit) to a systems view that includes diverse voices,
societal impacts, sustainability, and practical scale-up.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many global challenges need materials innovation. This
includes first-order innovations that&lt;br/&gt;create new industries (carbon
capture, nitrogen fixation, novel thermoelectrics) and also second-
order&lt;br/&gt;innovations to transform existing industries (novel energy
storage chemistries, light-weight structural&lt;br/&gt;materials). Technologies
like artificial intelligence and quantum computing are showing the potential
to&lt;br/&gt;significantly increase the pace of fundamental materials discovery.
These innovations need to be&lt;br/&gt;combined with global scale – economic
analysis, piloting, scale-up, lifecycle analysis, and
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;Putting all these pieces together successfully is a complex
challenge that involves not just academia but&lt;br/&gt;also industrial,
government, and non-profit entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.