* 2122314
* Collaborative Research: Moving beyond access, increasing teacher knowledge to teach rigorous equity-focused high school computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aman Yadav, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 347,497.00

As computing plays an increasingly important role in all industries, the demand
for skills in information technology and software have skyrocketed while the
associated training infrastructure has not kept pace. The need for a workforce
with a background in computing is particularly important for the economy of the
greater Detroit area, which is driven by the automotive and manufacturing
sectors. However, two primary limitations that inhibit the penetration of
computer science in Detroit-area high schools are: (1) a lack of teachers who
have sufficient preparation and confidence to teach the material, and (2)
students who lack the awareness and interest to undertake such courses when they
are available. Researchers from University of Detroit Mercy and Michigan State
University are partnering to broaden participation and increase access to
quality computer science instruction for high school students in Detroit. This
project will increase the awareness and interest of students underrepresented in
computer science and educate high school teachers to deliver high-quality
computer science instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
sustainable multi-pronged approach to build the capacity of underserved high
schools to offer CS curriculum in the metro-Detroit area. The components of the
project include: (a) training of incumbent high school teachers through a unique
co-teaching model with university faculty, (b) summer intensive CS experiences
for high school teachers, (c) co-design of activities and lessons with teachers
that bring issues of social and racial justice into their high school CS
courses, and (d) adaptation and dissemination of curriculum that integrates
technology, computational thinking, and career exposure into core required
academic courses. Using mixed-methods approaches, the project will collect a
rich set of data to examine how the project influences teacher learning (such as
pedagogical content knowledge and self-efficacy) and student outcomes (such as
AP Exam pass rates, attitudes, and post-graduation destinations). Results from
this project will help discover how to support high school computer science
teachers to offer high-quality computer science instruction that better engages
students and improves student learning and impacts student future career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.