* 2123496
* Probing the Ocean's Multiscale Pathways
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hussein Aluie, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 575,843.00

Oceanic flow is a quintessentially multiscale system, involving processes and
structures over an entire continuum of spatial lengths and time periods. The
nonlinear coupling between scales ranging from the many thousands of kilometers
of basin-wide circulation down to the millimeter size of turbulent eddies
presents a major difficulty in understanding and modeling oceanic circulation
and mixing, and also in limiting our predictive ability to forecast climate. The
main objective of this project is to probe the energy cycle coupling different
scales from the order of 10000 km down to around 10 km in the global ocean,
using data from satellites and high-resolution models. The project utilizes a
somewhat novel ‘coarse-graining’ approach to analyze multiscale interactions
that is more versatile and powerful than the classical ‘mean-eddy’
decomposition. It numerical models, it is almost never possible to directly
resolve all motions down to the smallest scales. Instead, the influence of the
smaller scales on the larger scale circulation of interest is estimated using
parameterizations, whose choice typically depend on where the cut off for
resolved scales are and sometimes on the particular location which may determine
what physical processes are important. This research is aligned with the search
for ‘scale-aware’ and ‘location-aware’ parameterizations, which would apply
universally without needing to be tuned for specific conditions. The project can
have a direct bearing on a fundamental problem in climate science: the extent to
which temporal variability is naturally emergent within the flow system itself
or is a response to external forcing. The work also promises to offer a priori
constraints on parameter tuning of current schemes, on proposed schemes that may
be applied to eddy permitting ocean models, and will help in the development of
a new class of ocean parameterizations that are a function of time, location,
and resolution. This work will also demonstrate a self-consistent integrated
methodology to analyze and model the dynamics of multiscale systems, which can
have an important impact on many fields beyond climate. The multiscale analysis
codes developed for this study will be made available on Github to allow for an
open development approach. The project will support two junior scientists, one
at the beginning of her PhD and another at the threshold of his career. Finally,
the project’s research will be integrated into outreach efforts through the
Rochester Museum and Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coarse-graining has a
rigorous mathematical foundation and is closely related to well-established
physics techniques, including macroscopic electromagnetism, renormalization
group, and large eddy simulation. Moreover, unlike the classical decomposition,
coarse-graining is consistent with the parameterization requirements of coarse-
resolution climate simulations. Equations governing the dynamics of different
scales on the sphere can be derived relatively easily, opening up a new and
potentially transformative way to studying multiscale pathways in oceanic flows,
including the transfer of energy, transport of momentum and tracers, and forcing
at different scales — all of which can be probed both geographically and
temporally. This project will analyze the geographic and temporal correlations
between different pathways and processes, including their amplitude and
frequency response to changes in atmospheric forcing. The physical processes
that require parametrization in climate models depend on the grid resolution and
also on an understanding and quantification of the dominant processes at any
given length-scale. In this respect, the project is ideally aligned to advancing
a new systematic approach to ‘scale-aware’ and ‘location-aware’
parameterizations that reflect the latent subgrid physics, along with a deeper
understanding of the amplitude and frequency responses of different length-
scales and processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.