* 2123708
* Collaborative Research: Combined Waves and Currents over Multi-Scale Topography: From Boundary Layer Dynamics to Parameterization
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Hench, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,278.00

Multiscale bottom topography is ubiquitous in coastal systems. Interactions of
surface waves and currents with this topography cause spatial patterns in
pressure, velocities, and turbulence production that result in bottom drag,
drive mixing, and dissipate wave energy. In most wave and circulation studies
these processes are not resolved and are represented in bulk friction
parameters, typically derived empirically. Dynamics of wavy flows over
multiscale topography are not well understood and there is currently no method
for computing friction parameters for waves and currents a priori from
multiscale topography properties. This project will examine interactions of
surface waves and currents with multiscale bottom topography, to investigate the
controlling dynamics and develop appropriate bottom friction parameterization
schemes, using modeling of flow over idealized and natural coral reef topography
together with theoretical development. Implications for drag, wave dissipation
and mixing will be addressed yielding improved understanding and modeling of
reefs and similar systems. The project will inform interdisciplinary coral reef
work through the PIsâ€™ involvement with the Moorea Coral Reef LTER, and support
an early career PI, a post-doc and a PhD student, and provide six undergraduates
with research experiences. The project team will also develop and implement new
K-12 outreach and education activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In previous work,
the PIs investigated boundary layer dynamics over topography characterized by a
single length scale across a parameter range typical of reefs. Those results,
along with analyses of reef topography, show that a range of topography length
scales (cm - m) are likely to contribute substantially to bottom friction. This
project will investigate how different topography length scales act together in
multiscale topography to determine dynamics of the combined current and
oscillatory flow, total drag on currents, and dissipation of wave energy. Using
dynamical regimes for single-scale topography as a guide, the work will
investigate the physics of combined waves and currents over multiscale
topographies spanning different regimes (inertia-, drag-, stress-dominated) by
conducting a series of computational fluid dynamics simulations in which key
parameters (wave properties, current, topography length scales scaling
properties) are systematically varied. Simulations will include topographies
composed of superposed discrete length scales, surfaces with a continuous range
of length scales, and reef topographies. Simulations (using OpenFOAM with LES
closure) will resolve flow patterns down to roughness element scales. A
spatially- and wave- ensemble-averaged Navier-Stokes framework will be applied
to simulation results to analyze effects of roughness-element-scale processes on
oscillatory and steady flow dynamics, and mechanisms by which energy is lost
from waves and current will be quantified. These analyses will form the basis
for new parameterizations for wave dissipation and drag on currents over
multiscale topography that represent smaller-scale dynamics and can be
incorporated into wave and circulation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.