* 2123634
* The dynamics of ultrafast cold cavitation in liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Claudiu Stan, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/28/2025
* USD 460,353.00

Phase transitions, such as evaporation or boiling, involve molecular mechanisms
that are well understood when the transition occurs slowly. However, in many
natural phenomena and technological processes, phase transitions occur very
rapidly. An important example is cavitation, which is the formation of bubbles
due to low or even negative pressures in liquids. Cavitation starts with the
nucleation and rapid growth of bubbles. The process is difficult to characterize
in three-dimensional samples because it can occur anywhere and is completed in
nanoseconds. Classical nucleation theory (CNT) helps understand the dynamics of
nucleation, but there are important cases where it fails, such as cavitation in
pure water near room temperature, which occurs at very different pressures than
those predicted by CNT. Refining theoretical models requires accurate
experimental data. Furthermore, data under extreme conditions is important for
addressing cavitation in applications such as modern diesel engines, which use
high pressure fuel injection to achieve high efficiency and low emissions. This
project will apply and refine laser ablation techniques to induce cavitation at
large negative pressures on nanosecond time scales, and ultrafast flashes of
light and X-rays to capture the evolution of cavitation bubbles over nanoseconds
and at nanometer dimensions. Advanced image analysis and computational fluid
dynamics (CFD) simulations will be used to increase the accuracy of pressure
measurements at the inception of cavitation. The work will be performed in
university labs and at X-ray free-electron laser (XFEL) facilities and will
involve a collaboration on CFD simulations with Prof. Dr. Nikolaus Adams at the
Technical University of Munich. The project will train graduate and
undergraduate students and will expose them to university research and also to
large science facilities and international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate cavitation in
water and diesel fuel below the boiling point (cold cavitation) at time and
length scales that represent the experimental frontier of the field (nanosecond
and nanometer, or “ultrafast”), using pulsed X-ray laser ablation and pulsed
optical ablation. The techniques to induce cavitation at the nanosecond-
nanometer scales have been recently demonstrated, but they must be refined, and
high accuracy measurements of cavitation pressures and nucleation rates are not
yet possible. Therefore, new techniques will be developed to characterize the
dynamics of ultrafast cavitation: (1) extracting directly from high-accuracy
optical images of drops and jets detailed hydrodynamic parameters, such as
pressure wave kinematics and amplitude, using advanced image analysis in
combination with image simulations; (2) combining high-accuracy image data with
high-accuracy computational fluid dynamics (CFD) simulations to measure very
high cavitation rates as a function of pressure; and (3) imaging rapidly
evolving nanobubbles using femtosecond X-ray laser scattering. Additionally,
liquid jet ablation experiments will be designed and used to quantify a poorly
understood type of cavitation that occurs in pure
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.