* 2123655
* MCA: Cockroach gut microbiome: Evaluating pressures from inflammation and bacteriophage
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Schwartz, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,805.00

This Mid-Career Advancement (MCA) award will increase understanding of the
relationships between the host immune system and the collection of microbes that
inhabit the host gut (the gut microbiota). It is well-known that the gut
microbiota as a whole impacts host health, but little is known about the
specific roles played by individual microbes. This MCA award will provide
resources for Dr. Hiltbold Schwartz to build a research program to study this
question in the American cockroach, an organism with many advantages for
addressing such questions. Cockroaches are inexpensive, easily cultured, and can
be grown either without microbes (germ-free) or may be colonized only with
specific microbes of interest (gnotobiotic). This system will enable us to learn
much about the roles of specific members of the gut microbiota not only in the
cockroach, but in other animals and perhaps humans as well. This project will
provide beneficial impacts not only for the scientific community in the form of
new knowledge of the symbiosis between host and microbes but will also provide
insights relevant to the general public. This award will provide scientific
education and research training opportunities to under-represented students at
the undergraduate level as well as K-12 students. Finally, the application of
immunology expertise to the cockroach (where immune responses are incompletely
understood), will provide insights useful to other investigators that wish to
study immunity in other poorly characterized organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary objective of this project is to better understand the selective
pressures on enteric bacteria provided by bacteriophage and by the host immune
response in the gut microbiota of the American cockroach, Periplaneta americana.
While bacteria are the most thoroughly characterized constituents of this
community, other organisms that play key roles in regulating bacterial
populations (bacteriophages) have received less attention. Further, while
bacteria-phage dynamics are regulated by pressures from the immune system, the
interactions between specific cells of the host immune system and the microbiota
remain incompletely defined. Thus, a mechanistic understanding of the biological
processes underlying phage-bacteria and bacteria-immune dynamics remains
elusive. To address these questions, we propose the following objectives: 1)
Determine how the gut microbiota impact the development and function of
hemocytes utilizing conventional and germ-free P. americana and 2) Determine how
bacteria-phage dynamics are impacted by gut inflammation utilizing conventional
and gnotobiotic P. americana. The benefits of this project are numerous. First,
we will gain a more quantitative and functional overview of insect hemocytes and
how their responses are shaped by the gut microbiota. Secondly, this award will
support research with two new, mutually-beneficial collaborations: one with an
entomologist who specializes in cockroach physiology, and a second with a
partner with expertise in generation of germ-free and gnotobiotic
cockroaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.