* 2123069
* Hemispheric and topographic neural organization of high-level visual representations
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Plaut, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,205.00

People recognize faces, words, and other common objects with remarkable speed
and accuracy. This project addresses the way that visual knowledge of faces,
words, and objects becomes organized in the brain through learning. Prior
research has shown that the right cerebral hemisphere is specialized for the
representation of faces, whereas the left cerebral hemisphere has a stronger
representation for words, with the representation of objects approximately
balanced across both hemispheres. These differences in hemispheric
specialization are a matter of degree and vary across individuals. Investigation
of these differences requires behavioral testing of recognition abilities,
combined with neuroimaging of brain structure and brain activation patterns, to
understand how the visual recognition system is organized both within and
between the two cerebral hemispheres, how this organization emerges with visual
experience, and how and why it varies across individuals. In parallel with human
behavioral and neuroimaging studies, another facet of this project is the
development of a computational simulation of the visual recognition system,
using an artificial neural network that learns to recognize faces, words and
objects as well as people do. This simulation model is designed to mimic the
properties of the brain. Variants of the model can reproduce the behavior and
even capture the underlying differences in brain organization of different
individuals. This project advances our understanding of the neural basis and
underlying brain organization for acquisition of face and word recognition. This
research has profound therapeutic implications for millions of Americans who
require remediation of developmental disorders like dyslexia, who need
assistance to overcome difficulties in letter and word recognition, and
remediation for recovery of reading and language abilities after stroke or
neurosurgery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visual recognition is supported by a network
of brain regions in both cerebral hemispheres, that starts with some initial
structure in early childhood and then develops through experience to have graded
specialization for different types of stimuli. To understand better how
recognition occurs, this large-scale study investigates brain structure (e.g.,
white matter connectivity), brain function (e.g., selectivity of neural
activation) and behavior (e.g., with visual stimuli such as faces, words, and
objects presented to one hemisphere) over a large group of subjects. This multi-
pronged approach allows us to test the prediction that participants with greater
within-hemisphere and/or weaker between-hemisphere connectivity will show
greater lateralization for faces to the left hemisphere and words to the right
hemisphere (but no difference for objects). A second study tests predictions
that variability in language lateralization of the brain (across right- and
left-handed individuals) explains individual differences in word lateralization,
and this, in turn, influences face lateralization. A final study examines fine-
grained changes in brain activity as individuals are exposed to, and learn,
novel visual object categories, allowing us to test predictions about
competition in representing new information compared with known categories
(faces and words). In parallel with these studies, this research includes the
development of a computational model of the visual recognition system by
training a spatially constrained multi-layer artificial neural network to
recognize a large number of faces, words, and objects. The modelâ€™s performance
is evaluated against data of the human studies to determine whether this model
can re-create and explain aspects of the system under investigation, including
the distinct patterns of different individuals. In identifying the principles
underlying the organization of high-level visual information, the work has
important implications for knowledge acquisition and learning, both in typical
individuals across the lifespan, and in those facing difficulties due to
developmental or neuropsychological disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.