* 2123699
* I-Corps:  Global solar irradiance forecasting with flexible prediction time horizons
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Roshanak Nateghi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a generalizable approach for accurate and scalable prediction of
solar light (irradiance) based on freely available satellite cloud images. High
penetration of renewable energy is essential for decarbonizing the grid and
decelerating anthropogenic climate change. The intermittency of renewable
energy, however, is currently a hurdle in its cost-effective integration, which
is only partially solved by improved energy storage. Improving the accuracy of
solar irradiance forecasts is a vital step towards effective utilization and
integration of solar energy since it allows utilities and electricity market
operators to make informed decisions for scheduling reserve capacity and
designing efficient bidding strategies in the wholesale power markets. Moreover,
it allows the strategic value of solar deployment to be assessed at various
scales. The proposed technology can benefit utilities, energy market operators,
and policymakers by allowing them to make informed decisions in regulating,
planning, and operating the grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
harnesses the power of big data and the latest developments in deep learning to
develop a generalizable Convolutional Global Horizontal Irradiance prediction
model. Specifically, the model leverages convolutional neural networks and cloud
imagery to accurately predict solar irradiance and has been validated across
several U.S. sites. Rigorous posterior analyses have been conducted to study the
model's variable skill as a function of prediction time horizon and cloud cover
and to demonstrate the benefits of incorporating mesoscale atmospheric dynamics
for enhanced prediction performance. The technology addresses key fundamental
gaps in state-of-the-art solar irradiance forecasting technologies as it
combines the benefits of physics-based solar irradiance prediction models (with
no need for in-situ measurement) with the accuracy and scalability of
statistical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.