* 2123002
* The importance of topographic complexity for estuarine dispersion and mixing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wayne Geyer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 632,546.00

The project will study the re-distribution of water and its properties in
estuaries, and propose simplified parameterizations to represent those
processes. Focus will be placed on the re-distribution caused by features of the
estuarine geometry: a) meanders in the channel, b) constrictions in cross-
sectional area, and c) the shape of the connection to the coastal ocean. The
project’s goals will be pursued with field measurements and computer models that
explore different forces altering water motions in an estuary, such as tides,
river discharge, and morphological features. Analyses will be anchored on a
theoretical framework that describes salt transport in estuaries. Findings of
this study should provide key connections to processes that determine the water
quality and the ecology of estuaries. The study will train two PhD students and
include activities that engage local environmental
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will seek to determine the role of
topographic features on dispersion, stratification and mixing in shallow and
tidally dominated estuaries. Features to be considered include meanders,
constrictions, and estuary’s mouth geometry. The objectives will be pursued with
field observations at the North River (MA) estuary, idealized numerical
simulations, and realistic numerical simulations. Idealized simulations will
explore amplitude, shape and longitudinal scale of topographic features, varying
the forcing from tides, river discharge and overall geometry. Measurements will
combine drone photogrammetry, shipboard measurements, and moorings. Analysis of
results, with the approach of Dronkers and van de Kreeke (1986), will provide
the “parametrization of the influence of topographic complexity on estuarine
dispersion and mixing.” In terms of broader impacts, the proposal would support
two graduate students. Graduate students will mentor high school students, and
together with the PIs will organize lectures for the North and South Rivers
Watershed Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.