* 2123136
* Acquisition of a New Stable Isotope ratio Mass Spectrometer with Carbonate and Water Systems to Support  Earth Science Research at Rutgers University
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* James Wright, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 470,500.00

This award supports the acquisition of an isotope-ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS)
with an attached peripheral at Rutgers University that will permit the automated
analysis of oxygen, carbon and hydrogen isotopes in carbonate minerals and water
samples. The instrument is equipped with the latest technology in stable isotope
mass spectrometry to allow expansion into the field of “clumped-isotope” paleo-
thermometry. The new instrument will critically support several active research
programs at Rutgers University, investigating paleo-climate questions that span
from the most recent millennia back to 100’s of millions of years. The Stable
Isotope Laboratory (SIL) at Rutgers is also used by researchers at regional
institutions who do not have stable isotope capabilities, such as Seton Hall,
William Paterson, CUNY-Queens, among others. The SIL at Rutgers has and will
continue to measure samples from corals, foraminifera, pedogenic carbonates,
speleothems, and fossil bones/teeth, as well as water samples collected from the
Antarctic continental margin, Arctic Ocean, deep-sea pore waters, and elsewhere.
The clumped isotope capabilities will augment many of these projects adding a
new dimension to current and future projects. Finally, the new IRMS will be
actively used for education and training of undergraduate and graduate students
as well as post-doctoral researchers. For over two decades, the SIL has been
used to provide experiential learning in both graduate and undergraduate
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new IRMS instrument will become the workhorse
for an active group of researchers investigating paleo-climate problems. Stable
oxygen isotope measurements are used to provide initial stratigraphies for
marine sedimentary cores and coral drillcores, but will also provide
paleotemperature, ice volume estimates and freshwater inputs especially when
combined with trace metal capabilities already existing at Rutgers. Carbon
isotope measurements provide projects with critical data to address carbon
cycling and storage. Carbon isotope measurements are also used by researchers to
infer landscape changes such as the proportion of C3 vs C4 plants and paleo-diet
in mammals. We will continue to measure oxygen isotopes in water samples because
data analysis in various projects require the precision (&lt;0.05‰) afforded by
IRMS. Examples include pore water isotopic measurements from marine cores that
have a range of ~0.5‰ but can be used to calculate glacial-interglacial
variations in seawater oxygen isotope changes. The ability to measure “clumped”
or triple-bond isotopologues will expand the research capabilities among
researchers who use the SIL at Rutgers presently as well as bring new
researchers. The clumped methodology allows for the independent measurement of
temperature in carbonate samples, freeing us from assumptions about the
d18Owater content. This award received co-funding from the Marine Geology and
Geophysics program in the Ocean Sciences Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.