* 2123204
* Collaborative Proposal: Harnessing simulation data to characterize transition layer mixing rates and mechanisms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alexis Kaminski, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 366,086.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine
entrainment processes in the ocean transition layer (TL), the vertical region
between the lower part of the turbulent near-surface mixed layer and the stably
stratified ocean interior. The project will use a novel combination of
approaches, including further analysis of existing high-resolution profile data
through the upper ocean layers, high-resolution modeling of entrainment and
internal wave processes in the transition layer, and machine learning
techniques. These processes help determine ocean mixed layer depth and
temperature and ultimately mediate air-sea exchange effects on the global ocean,
yet they remain poorly understood or represented in numerical model
parameterizations. Outcomes will be directly relevant to improving physical and
biogeochemical ocean models. Additionally, the methods developed will be
applicable to interpreting and analyzing data from a variety of geophysical
flows, and the analysis scripts will be made publicly available. The work will
support an early career investigator, the training of a graduate student,
contributions to local outreach and educational programs, and will form the
basis for a project for a graduate student in the WHOI summer program in
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A suite of high-resolution
direct numerical simulations will be generated covering a range of expected TL
mechanisms, including Kelvin-Helmholtz and Holmboe instabilities and interfacial
waves. Using standard fluid dynamical analyses, including characterization of
the linear instabilities and a detailed analysis of the flow energetics, this
comprehensive library of flow fields will be used to determine how well a given
stratified mixing event can be characterized from limited measurements. The
simulations will then be used as training data for a neural network-based flow
classification method, allowing for input profiles of temperature and velocity
to be classified in terms of the underlying waves or instabilities. After the
classification method is validated using simulation data, it will be applied to
the observations, allowing for identification of the relevant mechanisms driving
entrainment in the TL. Knowledge of the mixing associated with each mechanism
can thus be used to describe the mixing efficiency and turbulent fluxes in the
observational record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.