* 2123635
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Large: Multi-Disciplinary Analyses of the Nature and Spread of Unsubstantiated Information Online
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Manohar Narayanamurthi, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,935,238.00

Americans need reliable information to make decisions that can improve national
security, public health, community resilience, economic competitiveness, and
quality of life. Online media platforms make it possible for misinformation on
these topics to spread with unprecedented speed and scale. To counter the
deleterious effects of misinformation, it is important to understand how it
spreads and the conditions under which people believe it. This interdisciplinary
project examines these dynamics in ways that have the potential to help people
make better decisions about what kinds of information will help them make better
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research design focuses on how different
ways of presenting misinformation affect people’s attitudes, beliefs, and social
identities. The design will show how psychological predispositions, moral
values, sociocultural attitudes, social identity, group affinities and other
factors influence who believes misinformation -- and who rejects or ignores it.
The project also examines how network structures shape where and how false
beliefs spread. The project’s research will be broadly disseminated to help
scholars, policy experts, and social media designers create more contexts that
empower more people to base their decisions on accurate
facts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.