* 2123026
* IBSS-L: Procedural Mechanisms and Systemic Inequality in Municipal Law Enforcement
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Phillip Goff, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 133,048.00

This interdisciplinary research project will expand the scope of the National
Justice Database, the nation's first multi-site database to track police
behavior such as stops and use of force, and it will assess how common policies
and procedures in policing influence racially disparate outcomes. The project
will promote the development and validation of a nationally standardized
approach to police stop data collection, analysis, and interpretation. It will
enhance basic understanding of individual, organizational, and systemic
discrimination as well as the interactions among those levels. The project will
provide new insights that will inform interventions and strategies to bridge the
divide between police officers and the communities they serve. The project will
help transform the National Justice Database into a tool that can inform
interventions and strategies as well as determine the success rates of
strategies and interventions devised by police departments. By studying
policies, with a particular focus on those directed toward training,
accountability, community-oriented policing, "hot-spot" policing, calls for
service, and other deployment strategies, the project can help identify which
policies are most successful at reducing racial disparities and what conditions
moderate that relationship. This knowledge will assist in reducing racial
profiling and bolster equitable policing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine how common policies in policing influence racially disparate outcomes
across formal policy, organizational climate, geospatial, and community-guided
police activity domains. This investigators will use an interdisciplinary
approach to identify specific mechanisms of policing that can contribute to more
or less unequal outcomes. By examining outcomes across these domains, they will
provide a large multi-site assessment of how organizational policy produces
racially disparate outcomes, with special attention given toward identifying how
to reduce those disparities. The investigators will draw heavily on theoretical
frameworks from social psychology, economics, and sociology, such as implicit
bias, resource efficiency, and social stratification. They will trace causal
chains from police department (and related municipal and state) policies (such
as training and supervision) through the social and organizational attitudinal
climates of departments in order to examine how these policies and climates
interact with different deployment approaches (such as "hot spot" and proactive
policing) to affect outcomes for citizens, especially racially and ethnically
discriminatory outcomes in stops, searches, arrests, and excessive use of force.
This project is supported through the NSF Interdisciplinary Behavioral and
Social Sciences Research (IBSS) competition.