* 2123855
* Engineering Intelligent Chassis Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Corey Wilson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,077,799.00

The goal of this research is to engineer intelligent biological systems, with
advanced security features. From an engineering perspective, an intelligent
biological system has three fundamental tenets: (i) the ability to make
decisions, (ii) a memory system that is coupled to decision making, and (iii) a
means to communicate with other discrete living units. Engineered intelligent
biological cells will enable the development of living therapeutics, advanced
biomanufacturing capabilities, and contribute to a deeper understanding of
complex functions in living systems. In addition, this collection of emerging
technologies will enable next-generation biosecurity measures that will prevent
the unwanted release of organisms that can cause harm to human life or property,
and prevent the theft of valuable biotechnologies. In addition to the above,
this research will contribute to workforce development in the areas of protein
engineering, genetic engineering, and related technological fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful completion of this research will result in
several new chassis cells imbued with: (i) engineered programming structures for
decision making, (ii) complementary memory structures to control states of
specialization, and (iii) biosynthesis and receiver networks capable of
programmable unidirectional and bidirectional communication. The resulting
chassis cells will enable distributed computation, networked functions, expanded
biological computing capabilities, and programmable differentiation. Moreover,
the aforementioned technologies will enable the development of a broad range of
novel bio-cryptography tools. Collectively this new biosecurity platform will
enable scientists and engineers to progress beyond simple operational technology
security measures, to a more robust informational technology intrinsic-security
approach specifically designed for protecting biotic assets. To achieve these
objectives will require the design and construction of novel gene controls
forming a system of engineered allosteric transcription factors (i.e.,
transcriptional programming), a means to program correlated and permanent
changes at the genetic level that can persist in forward generations of a given
chassis cell, and the development of universal communication processes beyond
standard quorum sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.