* 2123485
* Collaborative Research: Trust across diverse contexts in early childhood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Yuyan Luo, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 254,085.00

Trust – the belief in the truth, reliability, or ability of another person to do
a promised action – is a cornerstone of everyday social interactions and
relationships. Trust is also vital to many aspects of children’s development:
they must decide who they should trust in order to learn new information (i.e.,
epistemic trust) and who they can trust for social support, reassurance, or to
keep a promise (i.e., social trust). This project investigates how young
children decide whether to trust a person who is unrelated and unfamiliar to
them. The project will advance our understanding of how children’s epistemic and
social trust judgments differ and yield new insights into how children’s racial
backgrounds and experiences, and socioeconomic environments impact the
development of trust in early childhood. The results will also benefit society
by providing educators with better tools to work with children in diverse
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the hypothesis that children
consider different factors in their epistemic and social trust decisions.
Although children’s epistemic trust judgments have recently received
considerable attention, little research has explored children’s social trust
judgments or directly tested whether the two types of judgments operate
differently. It is hypothesized that young children’s epistemic trust judgments
are based primarily on an individual’s prior accuracy, whereas their social
trust judgments will be influenced by social group membership. The project
focuses on two social categories, race and socioeconomic status (SES), which
have not previously been investigated in young children’s trust judgments. To
address these novel predictions, two age groups, infants and preschoolers, will
participate in a series of behavioral experiments that examine the role of
accuracy, race, and socioeconomic status in trust judgments. The project will be
conducted in three locations in the country with distinct participant samples
and contexts. Thus, the findings will have the potential to uncover the
underlying mechanisms of environmental influences on young children’s trust in
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.