* 2123220
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing controls on postfire steepland ravel - when does bioturbation go too far for diffusive models?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Danica Roth, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 316,895.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a wildfire, soils on
hillsides can be destabilized and subject to elevated risk of erosion. One way
this erosion occurs is through a process known as dry ravel, in which the
incineration of vegetation or disturbance by animals causes sediment particles
to bounce, roll, and slide down the hillslope. In many steep landscapes, ravel
is the primary form of erosion after fires and can supply material to post-fire
hazards like debris flows. Post-fire erosion and hazard prediction models are
urgently needed to inform responses to todayâ€™s changing wildfire regime, but
they are currently hindered by the inability of commonly used sediment transport
laws to account for ravel processes. This project will advance understanding of
ravel erosion processes by directly measuring sediment movement on hillslopes
that were recently burned by wildfires in California. The resulting process
knowledge will enable better modeling of erosion and hazards in response to
disturbances like wildfire, as well as better estimates of long-term erosion due
to predicted changes in wildfire conditions. The principal investigators will
also collaborate with local educators to develop a new outreach program and
materials to provide authentic field research experiences to underprivileged
K-12 students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics), while shifting perceptions around
outdoor experiences and geoscience careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will
use a novel combination of short-lived radionuclide analysis, high-resolution
topographic data and physical measurements to calibrate and conduct the first
field test of a convolutional sediment flux model on natural sediment transport.
This work will test the hypothesis that, under key conditions in newly burned
steeplands, disturbance by burrowing animals can entrain sediment fluxes
characterized by heavy-tailed particle travel distance distributions, thereby
escaping representation by diffusive, continuum-based models. This study will 1)
pioneer a new methodology for inferring particle histories from ravel deposits;
2) document statistics on natural particle entrainment rates, travel distances
and fluxes to investigate their functional relationships with controlling
physical variables that evolve over time; 3) demonstrate the utility and
identify use-case scenarios for nonlocal sediment transport models; and 4)
provide insight on how connectivity between geomorphic and biotic processes
informs dynamic responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.