* 2123965
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Usable Synthesis-based End-User Programming with Rich Interaction Modalities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Elena Glassman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 350,000.00

Programming, defined as the process of transforming a mental plan of actions
into a representation that can be executed by a computer, has been recognized as
a powerful, desirable, and even necessary skill for an increasing number of
people beyond professional programmers. In parallel, it has been a longstanding
challenge in computer science to provide easier, more supportive interfaces for
programming, which may be especially useful for computer users who want to
leverage the power of programming but have little or no formal training. This
project aims to develop software development tools and methods that help people
to interactively create programs for data science and data visualization, using
suggestions and feedback provided by the tools. The tools will allow users to
express their goals through gestures, voice, and other familiar ways people
interact with the world, providing rapid and ongoing feedback to help people
zero in on the programs they are looking to create. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve this goal, this project is combining techniques from human-computer
interaction, programming languages, and formal methods. On the one hand, this
project is contributing a program-synthesis framework that supports rich
interaction modalities, including accepting multi-modal specifications and
providing feedback during the synthesis process. On the other hand, this project
is also contributing novel user interfaces that allow end-users to naturally
express their intent in different modalities, to better understand the
characteristics of the program(s) generated on their behalf, and to more easily
recognize and update their expression of intent. By synergistically combining
strengths of these two areas, the project aims to lay the formal methods
foundation for usable human-centered synthesis-based interactive
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.