* 2123384
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: Data Science Training and Practices: Preparing a Diverse Workforce via Academic and Industrial Partnership
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alma Castro, North Orange County Community College District
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 82,000.00

A significant number of modern scientific studies rely upon processing and
analyzing a large amount of data for information extraction, scientific
discovery, and decision making. This motivates the need for training a new
generation of data scientists with interdisciplinary skills and a deep
understanding of appropriate and applicable data analysis methods, as well as
the ability to communicate the outcomes of the scientific inquiry. Historically,
a considerable number of students graduating from traditional programs in
statistics, mathematics, and computer science are not prepared to handle the
emerging challenges of data-intensive problems. To address this issue, this
project aims to develop a cross-disciplinary curricular, research, and career
preparation program in data science. Moreover, it will create a paradigm for
taking data science training from academia into real-world applications through
close partnership with industry, government, and non-profit organizations. This
project will have a broad societal impact by creating a diverse community of
learners, equipped with the required skills to join the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through engaging students selected from a pool of highly
diverse populations in STEM areas, this project, California Data Experience
Transformation (CADET), will facilitate data science training via curriculum
development, hands-on experiences, and close interactions with both academic and
non-academic organizations. The CADET project gives rise to the creation of an
integrative, dialectical, and interactive ecosystem between the University of
California at Irvine, California State University at Fullerton, and Cypress
College. These institutions represent the three tiers of higher learning in
California, namely, University of California, spearheading research and
discovery; California State University, combining research and pedagogy; and
Community College, offering two-year preparatory programs. The primary
components of the CADET project include generating data science opportunities
for underrepresented STEM majors, developing and implementing modern data
science curricula at the three participating institutes and disseminating them
to other institutions, and finally creating a gateway to diverse career
opportunities through mentoring and direct involvement in real-world projects.
More than 120 CADET scholars will participate in a host of activities including
a summer bootcamp, team science training, weekly seminars, and a collaborative
research project, all of which will lead to presentations at symposiums and
conferences. Ultimately, through implementing new curricula and student and
faculty training, the CADET project will establish a data science culture across
STEM disciplines that extends beyond the lifetime of this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.