* 2123190
* I-Corps:  Carbocation-based electrolytes for robust symmetrical organic redox flow batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Thomas Gianetti, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a battery that allows long duration energy storage. The
integration of renewable energy is transitioning to achieve zero-carbon emission
in the decades to come. Due to solar and wind energy’s transitory nature, the
successful deployment of renewable energy on a large scale depends on the
development of efficient energy storage systems. While lithium-ion batteries are
the most developed electrochemical storage technology at utility scale, they are
best suited for four to six hours (4–6 h) storage and high demand peak shaving.
To achieve longer-term emission goals, longer duration energy storage of 8–12 h
or more is required. Long duration storage technologies, such as the proposed
battery technology, have potential for utility, industry, and residential scale
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of energetically dense and inexpensive electrolytes for robust
symmetrical organic Redox Flow Batteries (RFBs). In RFBs, power is controlled by
the electrode size and the number of stacked electrodes, while energy capacity
is controlled by the size of the tank that stores the electrolyte, resulting in
the decoupling of power and energy capacity. For long-term storage, the ability
to decouple power and energy is beneficial since the size of RFB stacks and
tanks may be changed to meet application requirements. Unlike metal-based RFBs,
organic RFBs overcome limitations of conventional RFBs, such as high cost and
high toxicity, while providing the long duration energy storage that lithium-ion
batteries cannot. The proposed technology employs carbocation, such as
methoxyquinolinoacridinium salt, which is a stable electrolyte with an open
circuit potential of 2.12 V. These salts may be used as both the anolyte and
catholyte, resulting in a fully symmetric system that has high cyclability and
high efficiency retention. This I-Corps team will determine the suitability of
this technology to the marketplace through customer
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.