* 2123970
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FR: Understanding the neuropeptide modulation of brain circuits by advanced nanomaterials and imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Xin Yu, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,710.00

Human brain activity is modified by a group of molecules called neuromodulators.
However, little is known about how these molecules work and affect brain
activity, due to inadequate tools. This project seeks to develop a state-of-the-
art toolbox to study these important molecules. These new tools will enable
scientists to track the movement of neuromodulators in the brain, determine
their action on brain circuits, and reveal how they alter behavior. The
interdisciplinary team takes a broad approach of combining bioengineering,
cellular physiology, whole-brain imaging and behavior to develop and optimize
these tools. Completion of this project will have several broad impacts.
Scientifically, researchers will have access to a new set of tools for turning
on or off the delivery of neuromodulators to specific regions of the brain in
awake animals using light. The results will advance our understanding of how
neuromodulators impact brain activity in localized brain regions and across the
brain. The collaborative team will provide interdisciplinary training for
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers with cutting-edge technologies in
the fields of nanotechnology, engineering, chemistry, and neuroscience. This
project will provide STEM education to K-12 students both in the lab and through
community outreach programs. Finally, this project will also offer mentoring and
research opportunities for women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuropeptides are important neuromodulators in
the brain and yet remarkably little is known about their spatiotemporal spread,
action on neural circuits, and effect on behavior. This proposal focuses on
developing new neurotechnologies to study neuropeptide diffusion upon
spatiotemporally controlled release (thread 1), their actions on brain circuits
and behavior (thread 2), and brain-wide and circuit-specific activation patterns
(thread 3). Specifically, this work will develop and understand a new class of
photoswitchable nanovesicles that can be activated with widely available diode
lasers and light emitting diodes. We will integrate this with a neuropeptide
sensor, namely the cell-based neurotransmitter fluorescent-engineered receptor
(CNiFER), to study neuropeptide (somatostatin, oxytocin) diffusion in the cortex
and striatum upon photorelease. We will then investigate the impact of
photoreleased oxytocin on brain circuits and social behavior in freely-moving
animals. These efforts are closely integrated with the development of a new
fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)-based miniscope to detect
behaviorally released neurotransmitters. Through a multi-modal functional
magnetic resonance imaging platform, this research will determine the brain-wide
and circuit- specific activation patterns of photoreleased oxytocin, thus
enabling for the first time the integration of determining local neuropeptide
signaling with brain-wide effects. These newly developed techniques will advance
our understanding of the role of neuromodulators in the brain and more broadly,
promote new neuropharmacology research where targeted delivery and localized
release of a compound are currently unavailable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.