* 2123465
* Synthetic P-bodies: Coupling gene expression and ribonucleoprotein granules in synthetic cell vesicles for sensing and  response
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* William Gannon, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 992,280.00

Synthetic biologists are embarking on efforts to build synthetic cells with
specific functions and desired applications such as the ability to eradicate
infection-causing microbes or the ability to breakdown toxic chemicals in the
environment. One basic function these synthetic cells will need is the ability
to actively sense and respond to the external environment. The goal of this
project is to test a synthetic compartmentalization system known as programmable
bodies or P-bodies, which is designed to provide synthetic cells with the
ability to sense and respond to environmental cues. In addition to the
development of synthetic P-bodies, this project will allow an interdisciplinary
team to train graduate and undergraduate students, to expand the intellectual
and professional networks available to participants, and to design and deliver a
learning module on “synthetic life ethics.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates advances in bottom-up synthetic biology and engineering of liquid-
liquid phase separation of intrinsically disordered proteins, nucleic-acid
binding proteins, and nucleic acids. Specifically, the goal is to develop a
versatile synthetic cell platform that integrates intracellular synthetic
P-bodies which dynamically respond to, and regulate, gene expression in manners
analogous to natural membraneless organelles. These bodies comprise phase-
separated nucleic acids and engineered fusions of intrinsically disordered
proteins and ribonucleoproteins. Their dynamic and reversible formation and
dissolution is mediated by chemically induced gene expression to enable chemical
sensing. Molecular-level response is likewise enabled by the triggered formation
and dissolution of the synthetic P-bodies to sequester or release molecular
cargo. The project integrates synthetic cells into functional hybrid materials
systems for the specific application of controlling formation of bacterial
biofilms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.