* 2123550
* FMitF: Track II: FMCloak: Practitioners Using Formal Methods Without Knowing It
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Cameron Patterson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

Engineering teams typically spend most of their time checking whether their
designs function correctly and making changes when they do not. All possible
usages need to be anticipated and mapped to distinct test cases, which is
generally infeasible, and the inevitable bugs and oversights result in perpetual
patch and update cycles common for software. This is less acceptable for
embedded and safety critical systems such as autonomous vehicles. The project
automatically generates monitors serving as continuously vigilant observers
added to the development or even the deployed system. Monitors are defined by
the critical properties to be checked, such as unsafe or unsanctioned actions,
and a monitor may report or possibly mitigate the problem. Unambiguous property
definitions normally require use of an unfamiliar symbolic notation, and one of
the project’s novelties is to instead use pseudo-English. The project’s impacts
include enabling the existing engineering workforce to supplement conventional
test case generation with strong assurances about component or system
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitor generation is being added to familiar
development environments used by a multinational corporation’s engineers, who
evaluate the effect on productivity and product quality. While the tool
originally required properties to be specified in linear temporal logic (LTL), a
collaboration with NASA incorporated the FRET tool to translate pseudo-English
requirements to LTL. Current enhancements include the generation of monitors
with different performance, resource usage and isolation tradeoffs to suit both
development and deployment, adding metric time constraints for real-time
systems, and automatically synthesizing monitors to confirm state transition
validity and timeliness. Rather than require distinct tools for software,
hardware and systems, a unified approach suits run-time verification of targets
ranging from hardware buses to complete autonomous vehicles. Monitor
implementations are automatically analyzed for correctness in a mathematically
rigorous way, which relieves engineers of that
responsibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.