* 2123862
* NCS-FO: Integrated neuroengineering of brain-inspired algorithms for parsing realistic environments
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Thomas Cleland, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 999,997.00

For some tasks, modern computers vastly outperform the human brain – for
example, large-scale numerical calculations, or the precisely accurate recall of
organized information. But for other important tasks, the brains of humans and
other animals are far superior to any computing system that has been built, both
in terms of what they can do and in terms of the startlingly low energy
required. For example, people can recognize familiar individuals at a distance,
not only by their facial features, but by gait or other subtleties of movement
that they might not even be able to articulate. People and other animals rapidly
acquire information from their environments, but also are able to intelligently
apply that information under novel, unforeseen circumstances. The study of
brain-inspired computing is devoted to learning fundamental new ways to think
about how computers work with information, so that they can perform better on
such weakly-defined, open-world problems. In parallel, advances in physics have
produced new optical materials and methods that can perform computations very
rapidly and with extraordinarily low energy costs – if the problems of interest
can be structured in ways compatible with these brain-inspired computing
techniques. This project seeks to develop a brain-inspired computing network
that learns rapidly and solves a set of real-world identification tasks, and to
deploy this network onto portable devices as well as custom testing platforms
built with these advanced physical substrates. A key goal is to show how these
brain-inspired computing methods can achieve superior performance on open-world
problems, most radically so when deployed on next-generation optical computer
platforms. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In contrast to contemporary deep networks, the
brain-inspired networks described in this proposal are based on heterogeneous
elements and feedback-mediated dynamical systems, and operate based on fully
localized computations that obviate the need for shared memory resources.
Consequently, they learn rapidly, and when deployed on neuromorphic platforms
such as Intel Loihi they exhibit increased speed and tremendously reduced energy
budgets. Importantly, state of the art photonic computing substrates are
directly compatible with neuromorphic computational architectures, suggesting
that they will be compelling platforms for these decentralized, brain-inspired
computing algorithms. The intellectual merit of this project is to develop,
deploy, and benchmark an established set of decentralized, brain-inspired
algorithms designed for successful sensory identification under unpredictable,
open-world conditions on a range of platforms, including leading-edge photonic
computational substrates. Specifically, the algorithms will be extended to
incorporate higher-order brain-inspired circuit properties, deployed onto
portable device platforms for use in the field, and also deployed and tested on
photonic substrates to demonstrate the transformational potential of these
computational platforms. Broader impacts include a continuing commitment by both
PIs to supervising undergraduate research experiences for students from groups
underrepresented in STEM on projects directly connected with the research
proposed here, as well as the potential for development of a new generation of
smart devices using neuromorphic methods. PI Cleland also intends to incorporate
the concepts discussed in this application into a unit of his advanced
undergraduate Neural Representations seminar course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.