* 2123722
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Employment of Persons with Disabilities through Inclusion Engineering (EDIE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Keivan Stassun, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,910.00

Adults with neurodevelopmental disabilities (e.g., autism spectrum disorder;
ASD) and/or motor impairments (e.g., multiple sclerosis; MS) have the lowest
rates of any type of employment in the US (unemployment rate of 63-68%). The
potential economic benefits of improving employment outcomes for these
individuals are enormous. For example, the current economic opportunity cost to
the US economy of unemployed individuals with ASD is estimated at $90 billion
per year, to say nothing of the immeasurable human costs; for individuals with
MS, the estimated loss to the economy is approximately $25 billion per year.
This National Science Foundation Engineering Research Center (ERC) Planning
Grant award to Vanderbilt University will address this potential by creating the
capacity for a future NSF ERC for the Employment of Persons with Disabilities
through Inclusion Engineering (EDIE). EDIE would seek to create engineered
systems to lower barriers to employment for neurodiverse and motor-impaired
individuals, such that they can more readily maintain or pursue meaningful
employment. To be fully ready for ERC scale, we need to more fully develop a
number of critical elements through this planning grant, specifically: (1) An
ERC work plan guided by a 5-year timeline for deliverables that emphasizes (a)
stakeholder engagement and assessment of user needs, (b) pilot testing of
technologies with and through partner organizations, (c) development of
technologies to minimum viable product (MVP) stage, (d) testing through large-
scale deployment, and (e) sustainability through commercialization of the
technologies. (2) Commercialization strategies (e.g., start-ups and licensing
agreements) that would create a self-sustained innovation ecosystem. (3) A plan
to gradually expand the Center’s scope to include a wider range of both
technologies and disabilities, consistent with the mission of creating a more
inclusive workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed vision of the planned
EDIE ERC is to create intelligent, adaptive technologies that enable employment
and workplace success for individuals with neurodevelopmental and/or motor
disabilities, increasing human productivity and economic impact, and leading to
a more fully inclusive workforce and society. Guiding these Engineered Systems
would be the enabling idea of Inclusion Engineering, an emerging research
paradigm representing the convergence of engineering with implementation
science, labor and economic policy, and commercial innovation, toward enabling
full societal inclusion of all individuals. Multiple technological innovations
will need to be pursued in concert toward a truly systems-level solution for
full inclusion of motor-impaired and neurodiverse individuals for the future of
work. Thus, we envision that surrounding and supporting EDIE’s core research
thrusts will be an innovation ecosystem that includes commercialization efforts
coupled to key stakeholder needs and feedback, a culture of diversity and
inclusion with regards both to Center personnel and end-users, and a multi-
pronged effort toward developing a future engineering workforce that is trained,
equipped, and inspired to advance the future of Inclusion Engineering. The
preliminary convergent research thrusts that we have identified are: (1)
Workplace disability inclusion and employment nondiscrimination policy to ensure
these individual technologies and the resulting engineering systems are based on
Participatory Action Research (PAR) to have real-world uptake and societal
impact; (2) Social Human-Machine Interaction (sHMI) to support neurodiverse
individuals; and (3) Physical Human-Machine Interaction (pHMI) to support motor-
impaired individuals. The second and third thrusts map directly into engineered
systems, while the first guides them and also addresses issues that are not
directly addressable via technological solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.