* 2123016
* CAREER: Advocating for Engineering through Hidden Curricula: A Multi-Institutional Mixed Method Approach
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Idalis Villanueva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2022
* USD 251,571.00

Broadening participation in engineering is a major priority for the National
Science Foundation. Because of its importance to workforce development, national
security, and economic prosperity, there is a pressing need to fund broadening
participation educational research with strong intellectual merit and that
render findings that can be used to broadening participation throughout the
engineering enterprise. This CAREER research project is motivated by the need to
develop practical strategies and frameworks for helping underrepresented
students successfully navigate hidden curriculum that often deter or impede
their academic persistence in engineering degree programs. Research findings are
likely to inform the engineering education community about negative impacts of
hidden curriculum on underrepresented students' academic persistence in
engineering and how to create a more inclusive engineering academic culture for
all students. In engineering, there is strong need to better understand the
academic and social challenges that underrepresented students often face in
engineering degree programs. Conducting research studies, such as this, offers
immense potential to transform engineering education and engineering practice
for underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research project
proposes to utilize a mixed-method, multi-institutional approach to study hidden
curriculum in engineer degree programs and these curricula the motivations
(i.e., emotions and self-efficacy), behaviors, and actions of engineering
faculty and students at three Hispanic Serving Institutions, one Historically
Black College and University, and one Predominantly White Institution. This
research study comprises three phases: (a) an early stage exploratory study, (b)
a design and development study, and (c) an efficacy study. More specifically,
Phase 1 consists of conducting a quantitative study in civil engineering across
different institutional types and classifications of institutions of higher
education. Three unique surveys - focused on HC in engineering and the
motivations, behaviors, and actions of engineering faculty and students - will
be developed and validated. Phase 2 involves developing a set of custom-made
advocacy mentoring training materials for each institution through member-
checking qualitative interviews. Phase 3 focuses on expanding the project to
other engineering specialties, beyond civil engineering, for each of the
targeted institutions of higher learning. By including a targeted population
first, followed by a wider spectrum of engineering disciplines, the findings
from this project are likely to result in increased generalizability and
transferability of the findings that could be used to improve engineering
retention and graduation rates among underrepresented groups.