* 2123295
* Collaborative Research: An analysis of 150 years of sea surface and subsurface observations to map whole-ocean temperature and detect circulation change
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Huybers, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,517.00

In this project, surface and subsurface observations of ocean temperature will
be combined with a numerical model of the ocean circulation to optimally
estimate changes in ocean temperature and heat uptake over the past 150 years.
Ocean heat uptake is a critical quantity for understanding the degree to which
the Earthâ€™s climate is out of energetic equilibrium and for purposes of
constraining equilibrium warming in response to increases in greenhouse gases.
This integrated analysis will allow testing for the presence of systematic
errors in ocean temperature observations and to examine whether and how ocean
circulation has varied over the last 150 years. Products of the research will
include a quality-controlled dataset of ocean temperature observations and a
corresponding time-evolving, three- dimensional mapping over the modern warming
era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sea surface and subsurface ocean temperature
observations will be combined with an inverse ocean-circulation model to
constrain temperature and ocean heat uptake over the last 150 years. Historical
subsurface temperature observations will be used to evaluate random and
systematic errors within and across data sets. This examination will leverage
both a linear-mixed-effects methodology previously developed by the
investigators and applied to identify offsets among sea-surface temperature
observations, as well as a data-constrained circulation model also previously
developed by the investigators and applied for purposes of inter-comparing
interior and surface boundary properties. An existing circulation estimate,
conditioned on modern tracers, will be used to test for changes in ocean
circulation over the last 150 years. A three-dimensional mapping of ocean
temperatures over the last 150 years that combines constraints from surface and
interior ocean observations will be produced. The mapping will make use of the
data-constrained circulation model and will be performed repeatedly in order to
develop multiple ensembles that capture uncertainties associated with random and
systematic observational errors, as well as uncertainties in circulation and
initial conditions. Integration over this temperature mapping will provide
estimates of ocean heat uptake and associated
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.