* 2123863
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Micro Ferroelectronics for Devices and Systems:  microFeDS
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Santosh Kurinec, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,988.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to address the rising energy consumption of computing that is
posing an existential crisis with super exponential growth of data, computing
and communications. The genesis of the current digital revolution started with
silicon-based digital technology and has ushered in unprecedented progress over
the past five decades. However, as information systems transform to a data-
centric paradigm, it motivates a comprehensive rethinking of the fundamental
nature of computing platforms- from materials-to-systems. For instance, unlike
traditional computers that separate memory storage and computing processes,
realizing new computing platforms such as cognitive systems, explainable
artificial intelligence, communication systems, etc., would benefit from
converging them together, resulting in orders-of-magnitude improvement in energy
efficiency and performance. The recent progress in developing highly scalable,
and process technology compatible ferroelectric materials provides a promising
pathway to developing this infrastructure for the next generation of information
processing platforms. The objective of this planning grant is to consolidate
this vision to enable setting up an Engineering Research Center that can
facilitate across-the-stack innovations to facilitate such systems. Researchers
from the Rochester Institute of Technology, the State University of New York,
the University of Pennsylvania, and the University of Virginia, with
complementary expertise- ranging from devices to systems and computing
algorithms, will integrate these strengths to lay the foundation for a center to
realize the next generation of computing hardware infrastructure. The center
also aims to create mid-scale research infrastructure for training the future
generation of scientists &amp; engineers to expand the semiconductor workforce
for imminent societal needs in energy efficient computing, security and
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
unified logic and memory technology platform provides a promising pathway to
overcome the challenges of conventional computing platforms arising from the
Mooreâ€™s law scaling slowing down, and the memory bottleneck of the von Neumann
architecture. The ultra-low energy, non-volatile polarization switching in new
highly scaled ferroelectrics is a promising route the realize the power,
performance, area, and cost benefits of such a unified technology platform. We
propose to conceptualize a Center for Micro Ferroelectronic Devices and Systems
(microFeDS) that will create the infrastructure dedicated to performing a
comprehensive research effort that will span from designing, growth and
integration of ferroelectric materials, fabrication of ferroelectronic devices,
circuits and systems. Besides application of such platforms in computing, we
will also explore the synergies of various aspects of this technology in other
areas such as microwaves, ferro photonics, microfluidics, sensors, and energy
harvesting. Planning activities will entail cultivating collaborations with
government, academics, national labs, industry technologists, international
institutes, and educators to enable the integration of ferroelectronic devices
with new functionalities on to the existing electronic platform. The major grant
activities include: 1) establish mission and grand vision of the Center; 2)
identify external partners and invite them to collaborate in the planning of the
Center; 3) define goals, objectives and metrics for the Center; 4) conduct joint
meeting to unveil the mission, where involved parties will present their
technical work in the context of technological contributions and broader
impacts; 5) writing a compelling proposal; and 6) proposal review and
submission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.