* 2123627
* Using genetic and computational methods to investigate morphological variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Iain Mathieson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 339,937.00

This research examines environmental and genetic factors that influence body
size and shape in humans. The project compares genetic variation, body size
measurements, and environmental measurements of ancient people to advance
knowledge about human adaptation and the relative roles of genetic and
environmental factors affecting human morphology. The project supports a post-
doctoral researcher to develop quantitative and computational research skills
that are necessary to analyze these data, as well as national and international
collaborations. The results of this research are used to develop museum exhibits
and teaching materials that support public and K-12 science education and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changes in human body size can be assessed by
measuring the skeletons of ancient individuals. However, these data reflect only
the cumulative effects of both genetics and environment. Recent advances in
genetic technology make it possible to sequence ancient genomes and make direct
estimates of the genetic contribution to height. It is also possible to collect
some information about the environment in which ancient individuals lived
through methods such as stable isotope analysis. This project collates a large
dataset of genetic, phenotypic and archaeological measurements and develops
statistical models to combine these different types of data and identify the
relative importance of different factors. By separating genetic and
environmental factors it is possible to determine whether changes in body size
and shape are driven by plastic developmental response to environmental change,
genetic changes, or both. As well as addressing these questions about the human
form, the research can provide a roadmap for integrating ancient genetic data
with other anthropological measurements like markers of health and disease.
Finally, data collated as part of the research are made publicly available as a
resource for further studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.