* 2123284
* The origins and evolution of ancient genomic structural variants in hominins
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Omer Gokcumen, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 306,181.00

This study explores hominin genetic variation, specifically focusing on
previously understudied structural variants such as deletions and duplications
of large DNA segments. The research advances knowledge about hominin adaptations
and evolution from the distant past into the present, with anticipated outcomes
emphasizing the shared genetic legacy of all humanity going back hundreds of
thousands of years. The project supports the study of structural variants and
anthropological genomics through training, methods development, and
collaboration. Through planned workshops, scholars in the field can discuss the
challenges and opportunities for swiftly and effectively disseminating diverse
anthropological datasets and computational approaches. The project also serves
as a framework to continue the training of a diverse undergraduate and graduate
trainee community, as well as engage with the public to promote STEM training
and anthropological genomics, especially through collaborations with the Genome,
Environment, and Microbiome Center of Excellence at the University at Buffalo.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genomic structural variants, which are deletions,
duplications, inversions, and translocations of large genetic segments in
mammalian genomes, have not been a major focus in anthropological genetics
because of methodological challenges and the cost of studying these types of
variants. However, as new technologies make studying these variants more
feasible, new research suggests a broad and previously underappreciated effect
of structural variants on human evolution. The study addresses hypotheses about
balancing and positive selection as processes maintaining structural variants in
the human lineage and generates opportunities for follow-up research to
investigate the functional impact of structural variants, some of which may have
biomedical relevance. The study has the potential to be transformative in our
understanding of recent human evolution and the role of specific structural
variants in shaping human biological variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.