* 2123575
* Methylated mercury sources and cycling in the high latitude North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Robert Mason, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2023
* USD 283,534.00

Determining inputs and outputs associated with ocean boundaries (atmosphere,
rivers, ice and sediment) is crucial to understanding mercury (Hg) budgets in
the ocean. Sediments are an important mercury reservoir, and a location where
ionic mercury is converted to methylated mercury (TMeHg). This potential source
of Hg to deep ocean waters is poorly constrained. Understanding the role of
sediment-water exchange is especially important in the far North Atlantic,
around Iceland, as this is a region of deep water formation and these waters are
also a conduit for transport of chemicals between the North Atlantic and Arctic
Oceans. The team proposes to use an opportunity to join the GEOTRACES Process
Cruise (GApr16) in July/August 2021 to investigate Hg and TMeHg biogeochemical
cycling in this region. This project will support training of a postdoctoral
scholar and one graduate student, as well as undergraduates at UConn and all
will gain research experience from this study. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research is formulated around the hypotheses that: H1) Benthic sediments are a
net source of TMeHg to the deep water in this region and will dominate the TMeHg
supply into the North Atlantic; H2) While sediment may release inorganic Hg due
to various biochemical and physical processes, sediments will be a net sink for
THg; and H3) Overall, the seas around Iceland are a net sink for total Hg but a
source for TMeHg to the deep North Atlantic Ocean, with the sources being
primarily from shelf- and sediment-derived TMeHg inputs. The GApr16 expedition
provides a unique synergy and opportunity given the other measurements
(radiochemical flux estimates and trace element distributions) that will be made
on the cruise. This project will examine the distributions of total Hg (THg) and
TMeHg throughout the water column as well as the sediment and porewaters to
examine the role of ocean processes including water advection, sediment
resuspension-redeposition, and dissolved exchange across the sediment-water
interface on Hg cycling. With this holistic dataset and data from prior studies
in subpolar regions, the team will develop a regional box model and construct a
comprehensive Hg budget for the seas between the North Atlantic and Arctic
Oceans, elucidating the role of sediments for the different Hg
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.