* 2123128
* Transport and fate of the Labrador Coastal Current
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Amy Bower, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,685,800.00

The Labrador Coastal Current (LCC) transports fresh outflow from the Canadian
Arctic Archipelago, Hudson Bay, and the Greenland Ice Sheet southward along the
Newfoundland and Labrador Shelf. If mixed offshore into the boundary current of
the subpolar gyre, the fresh water in the LCC has the potential to stratify the
upper ocean and alter the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC).
Yet very little is currently known about the transport of the LCC and whether
the LCC interacts with the large-scale North Atlantic circulation, or remains on
the shelf around the Grand Banks. This project would study the fate of the LCC
and its transport along the Canadian Labrador and Newfoundland coastlines. Using
a combined Eulerian and Lagrangian observational study, the project would
examine whether the fresh, buoyant water in the LCC moves off the shelf to join
the Labrador Current, hypothetically due to a combination of the region’s
complex bathymetry and strong wind forcing. The work would support an early
career researcher, provide project material for a summer undergraduate intern,
and involve 7 students with cruise experience as watch
standers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four moorings will be deployed in summer for one
year, along the Canadian Atlantic Zone Monitoring Program (AZMP) Seal Island
hydrographic section inshore of Hamilton Bank, which will provide the first
continuous volume and freshwater transport time series of the LCC. In addition,
46 surface drifters will be released into the LCC, in subsets at 15 day
intervals, by three moored Submerged Autonomous Launch Platforms (SALPs). Two
cruises will be conducted along the deployment and recovery efforts, collection
high-resolution shipboard ADCP and CTD surveys of the Newfoundland and Labrador
Shelf. Together with the historical AZMP hydrographic sections, the project will
quantify transport and track the pathways and fate of the fresh water in the
LCC, and will identify hot spots of shelf-basin exchange. Timing of the NASA
Surface Water and Ocean Topography (SWOT) satellite launch and three-month
“Fast- Sampling Phase” with daily flyovers may coincide with the drifter
releases, and would provide high-resolution sea-surface height (SSH) and surface
geostrophic velocities of the inner shelf, potentially broadening the spatial
and temporal extent of this targeted study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.