* 2123521
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Personalized Watch-based Fall Risk Analysis and Detection with Cross Modal Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Yan Yan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2026
* USD 209,505.00

Falls are a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in the elderly. A
robust and low-cost solution for the estimation of fall risk and detection of
falls will allow seniors to live independently and reduce medical costs due to
falls. Wearable devices have been developed to detect “hard falls”, namely falls
that cause injury. However, many falls in the elderly do not cause physical
injury (“soft falls”). These occur in association with weight transfer
activities such as turning and sit-stand transitions. Indeed, the ability to
control the position and movements of the trunk (“core”) is essential for
coordinating the movements of the limbs during weight transfer. The goal of this
project is to combine real-world limb-core dynamics of an individual with data
collected by accelerometer via a commodity wristwatch and a cell phone on the
opposite hip to improve the detection of hard and soft falls. A personalized
fall risk analysis and detection model will be created for each user via real-
time learning of the limb-core dynamics using state of the art machine learning
algorithm. We will also assess the perceptions and preferences of elderly
patients using this technology and evaluate their attitudes towards continuous
data collection and sharing of health data for improved health. The software
system, the real-world gait and weight transfer movement and the associated
accelerometer data will be made freely available to any institution,
investigator or research student interested in the study of machine learning on
health conditions as well as on fall risk and analysis. This project will train
graduate and undergraduate students in technical skills (machine learning,
wearable technologies and data analysis skills) as well as in people skills for
working with the elderly who live in long-term care facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While numerous fall detection devices incorporating
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning algorithms have been
developed, this project focuses on personalizing fall risk detection. This
project will explore the use of kinematic measurements of an elderly
individual’s movements associated with weight transfer to enable multi-task and
multi-modal machine learning algorithms to personalize fall risk detection. A
small-sample-based deep learning algorithm optimized to incorporate individual
kinematic characteristics using multi-task and multi-modal learning frameworks
is developed. Second, the team will analyze the movement transitions captured by
the Azure Kinect system in order to identify relationships between the
accelerometer data and the complete skeletal frame with an emphasis on the limb-
core dynamics. Specifically, our goal is to determine whether or not Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) can be used to augment missing modality from a small
amount of body motion data, smartwatch and phone acceleration data collected
directly from elderly participants who are at most risk of falling, namely those
living in an assisted living center. Finally, we will evaluate the perception
and attitudes of the elderly participants towards the continuous use of wearable
devices for fall risk analysis and detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.