* 2123341
* FmitF: Track II: KeenEye: Enhancing Scenario Exploration
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Allison Sullivan, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2023
* USD 99,102.00

Scenario-finding toolsets are used to help computer scientists explore the
correctness of their software by generating different examples of behavior
allowed by the software system. Then, a user inspects these scenarios and makes
sure the behavior matches their expectation. Since this inspection process is
often done manually, scenario-finding tool sets should produce the fewest unique
scenarios without missing important behavior. This project focuses on
improvements to the scenario-finding toolset of the Alloy Analyzer. The
project’s novelties are two-fold. First, this project integrates different
enumeration strategies in the Alloy Analyzer to generate a more succinct
collection of valuable scenarios. Second, this project improves the visual
display of these scenarios so that computer scientists can more easily assess
them for correct behavior. The project’s impacts are seen in the improved
productivity of Alloy users who will no longer need to invest an intensive
amount of time to build confidence in the correctness of their
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enhances the Alloy Analyzer’s
enumeration engine in three ways. First, this project integrates Seabs, an
abstract functions-based enumeration strategy, into the Alloy Analyzer and helps
ease the adoption of Seabs by developing meta-templates for common types of
abstract functions. Second, this project develops a novel enumeration strategy
that allows the user to provide interactive guidance. Lastly, this project
integrates several open-source enumeration strategies into the Analyzer, giving
the user one consolidated toolset to fine-tune enumeration and target relevant
scenarios. Moreover, this project improves the visualization of Alloy’s
scenarios by generating views that declutter scenarios that span multiple system
states and adding an annotated abstract syntax tree to visualize how logical
constraints resolve to concrete values over the current
scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.