* 2123682
* Ocean seismic survey impacts on the movement and distribution of nearshore temperate marine species
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Taylor Chapple, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 06/30/2024
* USD 267,100.00

A National Science Foundation- funded seismic survey occurred in summer 2021
along the Cascadia Subduction Zone off Oregon, Washington, and British Columbia,
employing the use of airguns over a period of about 2 months. This activity
presented a novel opportunity to investigate the potential responses of
important nearshore fish and invertebrate species to this soundscape-altering
event. As the oceans become ever noisier from both chronic and discrete sounds,
there is a need to understand how these events may alter the behavior of animals
that are managed and conserved. Project scientists collected animal behavior
information and acoustic data near Redfish Rocks Marine Reserve, Port Orford,
Oregon between May and September 2021. Three-dimensional animal behavior data
were measured using acoustic tracking devices that were implanted in several
fish species as well as attached to Dungeness crab. Ocean sounds were measured
using passive acoustic monitoring equipment that was deployed on the seafloor
near the tagged animals. The information obtained over the project’s 5-month
data collection period will provide new information on how increased man-made
noises can affect animals in nearshore marine reserves. More so, it supports
broad interests in understanding marine soundscapes, and will provide directly
relevant information to marine resources and fisheries management, including for
commercial fisheries and essential fish habitat. Project results will be
important to future seismic surveys and can be extended to understanding
concerns about upcoming offshore construction activities such as for offshore
wind development. This work will continue to seek community engagement with
educators, regulators, and local fishermen from Port Orford, the latter of whom
assisted in the tracking of animals as well as deployment and retrieval of the
monitoring equipment. Project findings will be shared at public events to engage
communities along the Oregon coast, including Marine Science Day at Hatfield
Marine Science Center and the Port Orford Marine Laboratory Open House. This
project will also provide graduate student research training in STEM (science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics) fields, including soundscape and
animal movement analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Virtually all studies of airgun
survey sound impacts in both open ocean and shallow-water environments focus on
the pressure component of sound propagation; few have focused on the particle
motion that accompanies the transmission of the sound to which many animals have
sensitivity. Additionally, current regulatory guidelines to assess the effects
of sound on aquatic life largely describe hearing thresholds in terms of sound
pressure. It is therefore important to conduct studies considering both sound
pressure level and particle motion. This project simultaneously measured the
particle motion and pressure components of the seismic survey activity using the
NoiseSpotter(R), an acoustic particle motion sensor array, while measuring
behavioral responses of reef associated fishes and crab to seismic surveys using
acoustic telemetry technology. These measurements will support testing of the
project hypothesis that responses to high-intensity acoustic pulses depend on
the habit (demersal or pelagic) and morphology/physiology (e.g., absence
[lingcod, crab] or presence and type of swim bladder) of marine species.
Accelerometer tag data will be used to assess rate of change in position and
direction associated with individual pulse events from the seismic survey,
including, but not limited to synchrony-in-response across tagged individuals
within and across species, comparison of activity budget components,
habituation, and geographic activity centers. Animal behavior will be evaluated
in the context of NoiseSpotter(R) acoustic pressure and particle motion data,
which will be analyzed for sound source, sound levels, cumulative exposure
levels, spectral probability densities, and ecosystem-wide metrics (e.g.,
acoustic complexity index, acoustic richness index). Because the seismic survey
made triplicate passes within range of Oregon’s Redfish Rocks Marine Reserve,
the project team has a statistically robust opportunity to assess the soundscape
and animal behavior before, multiple times during, and after seismic survey
activity. The novel results of this project will advance understanding of the
energetics of acoustic propagation in nearshore environments and the responses
of animals to loud, impulsive noises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.