* 2123556
* Underwater coded aperture miniature mass spectrometer (UW-CAMMS)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* M. Bonner Denton, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 781,418.00

Measurements of the spatiotemporal distribution of dissolved gases in the ocean
provides essential information relating to a wide variety of scientific
questions of relevance to global climate, plate tectonics, hydrologic
circulation patterns, and oil spill plume tracking and monitoring, to name a
few. Measurements of dissolved methane in the ocean are of particular importance
in that methane is 84 times more potent as a greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
With increasing ocean temperatures associated with global warming, large gas
hydrate reservoirs on the ocean floor could potentially release more methane
into the water column. Currently, it is not clear how much methane is being
released by gas hydrates (let alone if it is increasing), and how much of it is
being oxidized before reaching the ocean surface where it can be released into
the atmosphere. Oxidation of the methane below the ocean surface may lead to
ocean acidification, thereby impacting marine organisms, while release to the
atmosphere could alter climate. Hence, assessment of the relative concentrations
of methane below the ocean surface and in the ocean surface mixed-layer has
important ramifications for our understanding of how gas hydrates may impact
marine ecosystems and the feedbacks to our global climate. in situ measurements
are highly desirable as laboratory-based measurements reduce the spatiotemporal
resolution and increase time and cost of measurements. Over the past 20 years,
underwater membrane inlet mass spectrometry has emerged as the primary method
for in situ analysis of dissolved gases in the ocean due to their ability to
measure the concentrations of a wide variety of gases with high sensitivity (1
ppb) and rapid response times. However most currently available underwater mass
spectrometers are not ideal for measurements of dissolved methane due to limited
mass range, resolution, and/or interference from water vapor. This project will
be used as a platform for enhancing education across multiple academic levels
and disciplines by providing research opportunities for high-school students,
undergraduates, graduate students, and post-doctoral researchers and will be
leveraged towards broadening the participation of underrepresented groups,
particularly women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop an underwater coded aperture miniature mass spectrometer
(UW-CAMMS) using a cycloidal mass analyzer, spatial aperture coding, and a focal
plane array detector that combined will improve sensitivity, resolution, and
power requirements compared to the current state of the art underwater mass
spectrometers used for in situ measurements of dissolved gases in the ocean. The
higher resolution will eliminate the issue of interference from water vapor in
measurements of methane. The spatial aperture coding in UW-CAMMS will increase
sensitivity by increasing ion throughput without sacrificing resolution and the
ion array detector in UW-CAMMS will enable simultaneous detection over a wide
mass range with high sensitivity and dynamic range. Once developed, UW-CAMMS
will be deployed on the R/V Shearwater for field testing and to study methane
profiles in the waters above Blake Ridge off the coast of North and South
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.