* 2123209
* Collaborative Research: Submersible Humidity Sensor research and development for measuring surface air humidity and evaporative flux on autonomous ocean floats
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Simon de Szoeke, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2024
* USD 398,778.00

Water vapor is Earth’s most potent and variable greenhouse gas, the source of
its precipitation, and of its latent heat of condensation in the atmosphere.
Humidity is poorly observed by satellites. Accurate marine observations of
surface air humidity are prohibited by the cost of durable sensors and observing
platforms. Development of a submersible humidity sensor for low-cost unattended
ocean floats will allow measurement of air surface humidity and evaporation more
accurately and in more locations. More accurate humidity measurements will
reduce the largest error in evaporation and atmosphere-ocean heat budgets.
Humidity measurements from submersible floats will improve weather forecasting
on seasonal to subseasonal time scales. Specifically, measurements in conditions
too remote or too dangerous for crewed vessels near tropical cyclones
(hurricanes) will improve tropical cyclone intensity forecasts, saving life and
property. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is to develop and test a robust
submersible surface air humidity sensor and integrate it into standard
autonomous ocean profiling floats. The researchers will test the humidity sensor
alongside proven observing systems, characterizing its accuracy and error in
various weather conditions. The research will assess the representativeness of
measurements from surfacing ocean floats. The research will determine the
accuracy of evaporation estimates using humidity observations in bulk
aerodynamic formulae. The research will explore whether temperature transients
measured at a wet thermometer can be used as an alternative method for measuring
evaporative flux. The development of the humidity sensor enhances
“observational, experimental or analytical capabilities of the ocean science
research community,” in response to goals of Ocean Technology and
Interdisciplinary Coordination program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.