* 2123486
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC:  The Metropolitan Chicago Data Science Corps (MCDC): Learning from Data to Support Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rohan Attele, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 78,090.00

Diverse experts from five universities in, or with a presence in, the Chicago
area are collaborating as the Metropolitan Chicago Data-science Corps to 1) help
local non-profit organizations take advantage of increasing data volume and data
complexity, 2) train data science students in how to effectively apply their
academic knowledge to real data challenges in the non-profit sector, 3) exchange
data science curriculum and expertise among these universities and with local
community colleges. An organization can submit a Request for Data Services (RDS)
and receive help to develop it. MCDC particularly welcomes RDS in areas related
to environment, health, and our social well-being. Each RDS is assigned to a
team of students. Teams of students with a foundation in data science are formed
within a practicum course or as part of a summer internship. MCDC will develop
the practicum course, where each team has one or more expert mentors and forms a
partnership with the requesting organization. At the end of the term, each team
will deliver a solution to each of the requesting
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MCDC is an interdisciplinary partnership
between universities, myriad community organizations, and two expansion colleges
and aims to strengthen the national data science workforce by integrating
community needs with academic learning. By supporting infrastructure to unite
diverse students and faculty across institutions and disciplines, by
prioritizing the engagement of community, and embedding real-world team-based
data science projects into the curriculum, the MCDC will be a uniquely powerful
educational experience which will support societal progress. To realize this
goal, existing curricula are grouped into multiple pathways to prepare a diverse
range of students for participation in MCDC. MCDC students acquire both data
acumen and societal knowledge that is intended to lead to a well-prepared and
engaged workforce. The MCDC project directors combine extensive, proven, funded,
and diverse expertise in curriculum development, inclusive learning practices,
integrating real-world data into courses, learning systems, data science, as
well as in health, social, and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.