* 2123422
* Understanding Southern Ocean heat uptake and redistribution in a warming climate
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wei Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 510,732.00

The Southern Ocean plays a dominant role in uptake of anthropogenic atmospheric
heat. Observations have suggested a rapid interior warming in the Southern Ocean
over the past several decades, which has been attributed primarily to greenhouse
gases increases and stratospheric ozone depletion. Nevertheless, the physical
mechanisms and processes under either forcing could be distinct. Moreover, the
impacts of both forcings on Southern Ocean temperature may change during the
twenty-first century, especially when considering the projected stratospheric
ozone recovery. The goal of this project is to obtain an in-depth understanding
of physical mechanisms on Southern Ocean heat uptake and redistribution under
various anthropogenic forcings. The work will clarify the importance of well-
mixed greenhouse gases and stratospheric ozone in climate change as shown by the
Southern Ocean warming, broaden the recognition of the role of ocean circulation
in Southern Ocean heat redistribution, and is relevant to understanding of
regional sea level change. This project will support an early career
investigator and the training of two Ph.D. students and enhance modeling
capabilities at UC Riverside, one of the most ethnically diverse research
universities in the country. Outreach activities through Museum of Riverside
will include public lectures and teacher development workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposed work will address the following
questions: (1) What are the physical processes driving the Southern Ocean
warming during the past few decades under GHG increases and stratospheric ozone
depletion, respectively? (2) How will the projected ozone hole recovery in the
twenty-first century affect the Southern Ocean heat uptake? (3) What are the
effects of ocean eddies on Southern Ocean heat uptake and redistribution? To
answer these questions, the proposal outlines plans to: (i) analyze available
CESM1 large ensemble simulations and accompanying fixed-ozone and fixed-GHGs
simulations; (ii) conduct single forcing experiments with CESM1 in which the
model is only forced with historical integrations under GHGs or ozone forcing;
(iii) conduct overriding experiments based on CESM1 single forcing simulations
to explore the roles of ocean circulation in Southern Ocean warming under GHGs
and ozone forcings, respectively; (iv) analyze CMIP6 historical and SSP
simulations and accompanying GHGs-only, ozone-only, aerosol-only and natural-
forcing-only simulations, with a particular focus on the effect of projected
stratospheric ozone recovery on future Southern Ocean heat uptake; (v)
comparison between historical and Shared Socioeconomic Pathways (SSPs)
simulations with two versions of CMIP6 climate models—eddy-resolved and eddy-
parameterized—to examine the effect of ocean eddies in Southern Ocean heat
uptake and redistribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.