* 2123074
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying East African hydroclimate seasonal variability for humid intervals during the last 200 kyrs, Omo-Turkana Basin
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Catherine Beck, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 132,318.00

The proposed project will examine the ways in which monsoon variability shapes
ecosystems by studying samples from Omo-Turkana in eastern Africa. This project
will use a variety of tools to examine seasonal rainfall variability and test
whether increased seasonality is strongly correlated with wet intervals. Fossil
data and chemical analyses will be used to understand past environments and help
determine how this sensitive, water-limited region will respond to a modern and
future world shaped by anthropogenic climate change. International collaboration
will include training opportunities for the next generation of geoscientists,
with a focus on supporting undergraduates from both the US and Ethiopia. Both
PIs are based at Primarily Undergraduate Institutions and will develop a
learning community through pre-fieldwork programming, collaborative fieldwork,
and regular project team meetings. The project has the potential to recruit,
engage and retain students from historically underserved communities in STEM to
continue as leaders in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
test the hypothesis that solar insolation maxima increased the strength of the
East African monsoon, resulting in enhanced seasonality in eastern Africa during
humid periods. Understanding the extremes of seasonality is essential to
constrain the terrestrial paleoclimatic and thus paleoenvironmental conditions
and resource availability in eastern Africa where early hominins and modern
humans evolved. Specifically, the project will 1) establish a single valve
ostracod carbon and oxygen isotope proxy record of the eastern African
seasonality during wet phases over the last 200 kyrs, 2) develop complementary
ostracod-based proxy records of seasonality using trace elements and ostracod-
paleoecology, and 3) use modern water isotope records to develop and calibrate a
model of paleo-hydroclimate for key intervals over the past 200 kyrs. Given the
sensitivity of the study site to significant atmospheric phenomena such as the
Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and walker circulation, the outcome of
this study will improve understanding of the degree of seasonality in humid
intervals over the last 200 kyrs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.