* 2123259
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: Increasing Accessibility through Building Alternative Data Science Pathways
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tiffany Oliver, Spelman College
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 312,511.00

As computers become faster and less expensive, huge amounts of data are being
produced every day. Data scientists are trained to analyze this information and
apply the results to scientific research, engineering challenges, business
decisions, and other efforts to improve society. The demand for data scientists
increased by 28 percent between 2019 and 2020, and the U.S. Bureau of Labor
Statistics estimates that 11.5 million data science jobs will be created by
2026. This project will help meet this need by making data science education
available to more diverse populations of students in STEM (science, technology,
engineering, mathematics). This project will also develop flexible curriculum
materials that can be used to add specialized data science coursework to
undergraduate programs at other institutions, beginning with Spelman College and
seeking to grow this to the Atlanta University Center and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In a combined synergistic effort, Spelman College, the Atlanta
University Center Data Science Initiative and Michigan State University (MSU)
seek to address issues of accessibility through a joint partnership focused on
creating pathways to foster data science education across STEM (science,
technology, engineering, mathematics) disciplines. First, the proposed
partnership seeks to build a 3+2 BS+MS program (BS-Bachelors of Science, MS-
Masters of Science). This 3+2 program will allow students to complete their BS
in a STEM field (e.g., Mathematics, Physics, Biology) at Spelman and complete a
MS in Data Science at MSU, while also providing a strong foundation and clear
trajectory for students interested in obtaining a PhD. Second, this partnership
seeks to develop a minor in Data Science at Spelman, targeting students across
STEM fields. In creating this minor, we will leverage work already done at MSU
to create a data science program and the expertise of faculty at Spelman to
develop curricula that serves the needs of undergraduates from diverse majors
and backgrounds. The new educational material we seek to create is based on an
innovative one month one credit curriculum that was initially designed to
develop skills in bio-informatics for students at MSU. Harnessing these ideas
and mapping them onto the needs of Spelman STEM students, we seek to create an
accessible pathway into data science that meets students where they are in their
educational journey. These educational efforts will create pathways for STEM
majors who seek to bring to bear the power of modern data science methods in
their STEM field of study, both at MSU and Spelman. The curriculum will serve as
a model for creating accessible data science educational initiatives
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.