* 2123247
* HDR DSC: Data Science for Energy Transition
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mikyoung Jun, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,050,840.00

With the growing public awareness of climate change, Houston, the energy capital
of the world, is undertaking efforts to lead the energy transition for a more
sustainable and cleaner environment. There is urgent demand for a data science
workforce equipped with broad understanding for optimizing conventional energy
and leading the energy transition. This project focuses on training
undergraduates and Masters-level students from diverse backgrounds to achieve a
wide range of knowledge and skill sets essential for the future energy industry
workforce. Five major public universities in greater Houston are teamed up with
multiple energy industry partners, ranging from large oil and gas companies to
startups on energy sector data analytics. Given the emphasis of participating
universities on diversity and equity and the diverse student populations they
serve, this project broadens training opportunities for groups historically
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statisticians, computer scientists, geophysicists,
and social scientists at the University of Houston (UH) main campus, UH-
Downtown, UH-Victoria, UH-Clear Lake, and Sam Houston State University are
collaborating to develop year-long educational activities under the theme of
energy transition, from traditional oil- and gas-related problems to renewable
energy. The curriculum contains an array of important topics including
fundamental science and engineering understanding, essence of statistics and
machine learning methods, and practical skill sets of programming and data
visualization. Social science aspects on the energy transition and its
implications for society are also included in the curriculum. The program
consists of: (1) five-week summer boot camps with educational modules on
statistics/machine learning, CS/programming, geophysics and earth sciences,
public policy, and engineering; (2) advanced courses and micro-credential
training offered by participating universities in the following fall semester;
(3) semester-long team research projects on problems provided by industry
partners in the spring semester; and (4) summer internships and/or conference
presentation opportunities to conclude the program. Each year, about 40 students
participate in the program, totaling about 120 student participants over 3
cohorts. A framework in which research projects can be carried out is developed.
The project also promotes interaction and collaboration between academia and
industry in the region, opening up more opportunities for education and research
collaboration. All project data is well documented and made freely available.
The student and program-level outcomes are formally assessed, with results
disseminated through publication in peer-reviewed journals and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.