* 2123495
* INFEWS/T2: Organic Waste Lifecycles at the interface of Food, Energy, Water Systems (OWL-FEWs)
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Derek Kauneckis, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,745,419.00

Interconnected food-energy-water (FEW) demands are increasing due to increasing
population and economic growth. One of the major reasons for these increased
demands is the generation of non-utilized waste streams. The U.S. generates
approximately 254 million tons of trash each year, with only 34% of this waste
recycled or composted. Increasing restrictions on the export of garbage has
generated both challenges and opportunities for the management of waste systems.
Waste material provides and opportunity for materials recovery, the generation
of new products and processes, and the potential to positively impact food,
energy, and water systems. Given the increasing rates of consumption
internationally, developing the next generation of waste recovery is of global
significance. However, reinventing waste streams requires a better understanding
of how waste is currently governed, rethinking and redesigning waste recovery
production systems to better capture the value of material, developing systems
for monitoring material composition, integration with new cyber infrastructure
for waste monitoring, and incorporating the behavioral and policy structures
that influence action across complex multi-scaled systems. The objectives of the
project are to develop a systems-level framework for comparative analysis of
organic waste lifecycles that combines behavior sciences with material flows
analysis to rethink waste systems and the development of new co-products from
organic wastes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal focuses on systems-level
interactions in the framework of "Organic Waste Lifecycles at the Interface of
Food, Energy and Water Systems (OWL-FEWs)." The project entails the development
of the next generation of cyber-infrastructure for measuring, monitoring, and
capturing data on organic waste streams; analysis of social and institutional
drivers behind organic waste disposal behavior; and experimentation,
development, and testing of new co-products from organic waste streams.
Utilizing an existing pilot-scale anaerobic digester, bio/hydrochar engineering
facilities, open source radio frequency identification tagging for real time
tracking of waste flows, and a series of behavior experiments and comparative
institutional analysis of human behavior, the research team will focus on five
goals: 1) The development of a dynamic model of organic waste lifecycles at a
regional level; 2) The development and testing of organic food waste co-products
for energy, soil amendments, water remediation, and other uses; 3) The
development of a smart organic food waste cyber infrastructure; 4) The
integration of social sciences across the development of the dynamic model,
cyberinfrastructure, and waste/resource products; and 5) The engagement of
stakeholders across the research and educational efforts. The results of this
research will provide meaningful pathways to reducing waste in the U.S. and
provide water treatment, energy, and agricultural resources from waste, leading
to better food, energy, and water security in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.