* 2123593
* Collaborative Research: Designing Minimal Synthetic Cells Capable of Sensing and Self-Manipulation via Tunable Self-Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Seok Hong, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 09/30/2024
* USD 169,771.00

The development of synthetic cells is of great interest to identify the minimal
requirements for cellular processes and to enable a range of novel biomedical
applications. This project aims to provide both fundamental and practical
insights into designing synthetic cells that recapitulate essential cellular
functions, such as sensing, self-growth, and biological reactions. For example,
sensing is a central function in how living cells make decisions for synthesis
and controlled release and encapsulation of molecules throughout vesicle
membranes. Proteins at cell membranes play a critical role in these cellular
functions to mediate sensing and intracellular cascade reactions. This project
will demonstrate these functions by rationally designing the protein building
blocks using recombinant protein technology and by engineering their assembled
vesicle structure and properties to make them respond to external stimuli.
Interdisciplinary collaboration in the fields of polymer physics, synthetic
biology, and protein engineering will be conducted in this project, combined
with outreach educational efforts to provide hands-on learning opportunities to
underrepresented students at different levels in Gainesville, Florida, and
Lincolnshire, Illinois. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project
is to build minimal synthetic cells capable of sensing and responding to
external signals, by engineering the compositions and physical properties of
globular protein vesicles (GPVs) through the bottom-up approach. The vesicle
membrane of a synthetic cell will be made from recombinant fusion proteins
composed of sensor head proteins, leucine zippers, and elastin-like
polypeptides. The specific objectives are 1) to engineer GPVs for sensing
specific chemicals by tuning lateral association of sensor proteins, 2) to
demonstrate the sensing-induced transmembrane signaling to activate
transcription of reporters, and 3) to design programmable signal transduction
and amplification cascades upon sensing. This collaborative project combines a
thorough understanding of the self-assembly of polymeric building blocks, cell-
free synthetic biology, and molecular bioengineering of protein-ligand
interactions and enzyme specificity. Ultimately, this project envisions the high
potential of the protein-assembled synthetic cells, which can manipulate diverse
protein functions in minimal cell structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.