* 2123053
* Operation of a Community Marine-Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda, 2021-2024
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2025
* USD 435,865.00

This project supports the Tudor Hill Marine Atmospheric Observatory in Bermuda.
Because of its location in the western North Atlantic Ocean, Bermuda has been an
important location for many studies of the marine atmosphere. The observatory is
well equipped for carrying out research, with field laboratories and a 23 meter
tower at Tudor Hill. This allows scientists to study the chemistry and physics
of the atmosphere over the oceans. This part of the atmosphere plays an
important role in the transfer of moisture, chemicals, and energy between the
ocean and the atmosphere. Routine work at the site includes the observation and
recording of weather conditions, and sampling of rain and air. In addition,
samples and data are collected for a number of research partners, including
NOAA, NASA and many US and international universities. As well as supporting
research, this project will provide a range of educational opportunities,
including through the NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
program, and through other internships and courses at the Bermuda Institute of
Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continued operation and maintenance of
the Tudor Hill Marine Atmospheric Observatory facilitates research concerning
the chemistry and physics of the marine troposphere and ocean-atmosphere
exchange processes. The specific objectives of the project are to: 1) Operate
and maintain the atmospheric sampling facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda; 2)
Continue collection of continuous meteorological data and weekly bulk-aerosol
and rain samples, which will be archived at BIOS and made freely available to
other researchers; and 3) Collect additional atmospheric samples and data for
external investigators, and provide for the use of the facility by external
investigators. Ongoing partner activities at the facility include monitoring and
data acquisition for NASA (AERONET) and NOAA programs (Ozone and greenhouse gas
monitoring), and a new sampling location will be established for the US National
Atmospheric Deposition Program (NADP) in 2021. The THMAO site will enable
research to be undertaken that is central to international initiatives such as
IGAC, SOLAS and GEOTRACES. In a regional context, the Tudor Hill facility will
complement ongoing oceanographic time-series research in the Sargasso Sea,
including Hydrostation S and BATS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.