* 2123540
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Ecological and Economic impacts of the intensification of EXtreme Events in the Benguela Upwelling System (EXEBUS)
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2025
* Peter Freeman, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 04/30/2025
* USD 611,835.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the Benguela
Upwelling System (BUS) located in a unique geographical location at the
conjunction of three major ocean currents in the southern African continent. The
BUS is one of the most productive marine ecosystems in the world, and directly
supports the livelihoods and wellbeing of people in South Africa, Namibia, and
Angola as well as many people of the interior of the African continent. The
project will assess how extreme events in the atmosphere and ocean systems
impact the ecological, sociological, governance, and macroeconomic systems of
the study area through an integrated ecosystem assessment. The assessment to be
undertaken by a transdisciplinary consortium of international researchers,
practitioners, and representatives of the private sector and civil society will
bring unique and complementary perspectives for both understanding the changes
in this dynamic system, applying, and communicating the importance of these
findings. The team will ascertain the roles of, trends in, and range of
variability and the associated extremities of natural and anthropogenic
geophysical, biological, governance, socio-economic features and phenomena.
These results will be used to produce a variety of outcomes including indicator
development, risk assessments, and environmental forecasting and experiences of
future generations. These outcomes will enable the development of an Ecosystem-
Based Management framework for application in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.