* 2123740
* Collaborative Research: Global estimates of energy pathways and stirring by internal waves and vortical mode
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Marie-Pascale Lelong, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 981,611.00

The ocean primarily derives its energy from large-scale wind, tidal and solar
forcing, but the ultimate distribution of heat and currents depends on how this
energy is transferred from large-scale motions to small scales where it is
dissipated. Some of the energy forced by winds at the ocean surface escapes to
the interior through density undulations, called near-inertial waves, that can
span hundreds of kilometers. Another significant energy source for waves comes
from the tide when it encounters topography and produces internal waves, known
as the internal tide. It is generally well understood that these two types of
waves interact, catalyzed by other flow features, and transfer energy through an
internal wave field into smaller scale motions and mixing. This study will
parameterize the spectrum of internal waves in terms of the large-scale forcing
and other catalysts, and the predicted stirring that results, producing the
first global maps of these estimates. Parameterizations of these stirring
processes will benefit large-scale ocean general circulation models (OGCMs), and
a refined understanding and parameterization of the internal wave energy cascade
and its implications for vertical mixing and dissipation will benefit climate
models. Recognizing that submesoscale, OGCM and climate modelers at the same
meeting often do not attend the same scientific sessions, the investigators will
bring these two communities together by organizing a joint session at the 2024
Ocean Sciences meeting, focused on internal wave and submesoscale
parameterizations in global models. One graduate student will be trained under
this project (UMassD). The ongoing efforts of the team demonstrates their
commitment to education, outreach, diversity and inclusion. PI Sundermeyer
currently advises (among others) five women graduate students, and will seek to
recruit women and/or under- represented/minority students under this project. PI
Sundermeyer has given several presentations on ocean processes to multiple
classes in the Sandwich, MA public school district. Under the present project,
he and the graduate student will work with middle and high school teachers in
Sandwich and New Bedford public schools to develop ocean-related learning
modules. PI Early helped design and mentor in an NSF-REU program and co-founded
the NWRA early-scientist mentoring program; PI Wortham is a Science
Communication Fellow at Seattle Pacific Science Center; PI Lelong is a mentor
with MPOWIR and active in the Seattle Chapter of SWMS. NWRA participates every
summer in Discovery Corps, the Pacific Science Center’s summer research program
for high school and college students from under-represented communities. This
proposal involves collaborations with OGCM modeler H. Simmons and with Mexican
mathematician G. Hernandez-Duenas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The internal wave field
in the stratified interior of the ocean draws its energy primarily from winds
and tides, with geostrophic motions and topographic scattering acting as
catalysts. This energy cascades to small scales and directly stirs the fluid,
generating vortical mode along the way, which then itself contributes to energy
transfers and stirring. Although observations indicate stirring rates of O(1) m2
s−1 at scales of O(10) km, gaps remain in our ability to predict diffusivity at
these scales directly from the energy sources. The first major contribution of
this study will be to clarify the roles of relevant processes in setting the
shape and strength of the internal wave and vortical spectra. Second, it will
extend previous theoretical and numerical estimates of stirring from internal
waves and vortical mode to more realistic conditions. By considering realistic
stratification and forcing, this study will close a significant gap in our
understanding of how the oceanic internal wave and vortical mode fields are
formed, and how these processes stir fluid at the submesoscale. The work here
will also help close the energy budget for the ocean by quantifying the rate at
which energy is extracted from various large-scale forcing, and cascaded
downscale through the internal wave field. Last, it will quantify the shape and
magnitude of the vortical mode field that arises naturally as part of this
cascade, a result that has remained largely elusive from field
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.