* 2123255
* Collaborative Research: The role of subducting seamounts in fault stability and slip behavior throughout the seismic cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Demian Saffer, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 167,851.00

The largest and most destructive earthquakes occur at subduction zones, where
one tectonic plate slides underneath another. Relief on the subducting plate,
such as seamounts, is thought to affect the frictional resistance and slip
behavior. However, it is unclear whether seamounts promote stable slow slip or
cause locking of the fault and subsequent earthquakes. Here, the researchers
investigate the relationship between seamounts and earthquakes using state-of-
the art numerical simulations. They determine how seamounts affect the evolution
of rock properties, as they impinge on the overriding plate over hundreds of
thousands of years. They calculate variations in rock porosity, strength, and
fluid content, which lead to faulting and fracturing. They then calculate how
these rock properties, in turn, control slip propagation and the initiation of
earthquakes over decades or hundreds of years. By combining simulation codes
with different time scales, the team progressively unveils the long-term and
short-term factors responsible for triggering large earthquakes. The project
outcomes improve earthquake hazard assessment and mitigation in subduction
zones. It promotes support for early-career scientists and training for graduate
and undergraduate students, notably from underrepresented groups in Earth
Sciences. The project is co-funded by both the Geophysics and the Marine Geology
and Geophysics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant advances in
seismic and geodetic monitoring, the state of locking of the megathrust and its
relationship with earthquake ruptures has not been fully characterized. Spatial
variations in interseismic coupling and seismic behavior have been attributed to
heterogeneities on the megathrust interface. One ubiquitous source of
heterogeneity comes from topographic features on the seafloor. As a seamount
subducts, it modifies the state of stress on the subduction interface through
elastic deformation. It also drives variations in sediment compaction,
disruption and fracturing of the upper plate, drainage state, and introduces
spatial variations in lithology. The relative importance and interplay of these
processes in controlling earthquake processes is still unclear. Here, the
researchers investigate the effect of subducting seamounts on the state of
stress, slip stability and seismic behavior of the megathrust. They employ two
complementary numerical models: (1) a long-term (hundreds of thousands to 1
million years) hydromechanical model with an elastoplastic rheology; the goal is
to capture the effect of seamount subduction on material properties and state
variables, including sediment compaction and elastic moduli, stresses, and pore
pressure. Outputs of this model are then used to set initial conditions and
parameters for (2) a short-term (hundreds to thousands of years) elastic
earthquake cycle model; the goal is here to study the resulting fault stability
and slip behavior. The project overarching goal is a quantitative understanding
of the interrelated processes affecting the seismic behavior and interseismic
coupling of seamounts, and the spatial relationship between the two. The rapidly
growing field of seafloor geodesy will soon provide unprecedented constraints on
slip on the megathrust. This study identifies diagnostic features, such as time-
dependent locking patterns, which will help interpreting future observations in
terms of seismic hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.