* 2123402
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of surface ocean surfactant sources and transformations on their chemical composition and air-sea relevant properties
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Andrew Wozniak, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 452,301.00

The surface microlayer (SML), the thin layer of water at the interface between
the ocean and the atmosphere, controls the exchange of materials to and from the
ocean. As a result, it can profoundly influence biogeochemical cycles and global
climate. One type of chemical species that accumulates at this interface are
surfactant molecules, which influence the surface tension of and the rate of
material exchange at air-water interfaces. Biological and chemical production
and degradation processes represent surfactant sources and removal pathways, but
the relative importance of those processes for determining surfactant quantities
and molecular composition remains unclear. Similarly, the relationship between
surfactant molecule composition and surface tension at the air-water interface
has not been established. As a result, their effects on material exchange at the
interface cannot currently be predicted. This work will use measurements at sea,
laboratory experiments, and high-resolution analyses to measure the chemical and
physical characteristics of surfactants and their properties at the air-sea
interface. An improved understanding of surfactant processes and surface ocean
will benefit society by improving our understanding of the exchange of climate-
relevant gases and particles. Two early career PIs will advance their
established collaboration and gain further experience leading research projects
and mentoring students. Students will receive valuable hands-on training in
oceanographic field collections, state-of-the-science analytical techniques,
data interpretation, and data dissemination. The results and methodologies from
this work will be featured in courses at the University of Georgia and the
University of Delaware and will be developed into content for K-12 students,
enhancing infrastructure for education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work includes
the unique pairing of state-of-the-science measurements across time and spatial
scales to assess the influence of oceanographic processes on surfactant chemical
composition and physical air-sea relevant properties. SML and subsurface waters
will be collected from estuarine, coastal ocean, and open ocean sites during
high and low productivity conditions to establish surfactant molecular
characteristics over a range of space, time, and ocean biological activity. The
effects of light will be assessed via diurnal sampling efforts and laboratory
experiments. Samples will be analyzed for their detailed chemical, biological,
and physical characteristics. The surface tension of the SML is expected to be
inversely correlated with the abundance of lipid-like compounds (low O content,
high H/C ratios, e.g., sulfur-containing lipids) produced during periods of high
biological activity. Prolonged exposure to light is hypothesized to result in
photo-oxidation of surfactant compounds, higher abundances of oxygenated and
lower molecular weight aliphatic compounds, and increased surface tension.
Multivariate statistical approaches will be used to reveal a mechanistic
understanding of the links between biological and photochemical processes and
the resulting surfactant and SML chemical and physical characteristics. This new
knowledge will represent a first step toward improved models of the air-sea
exchange of climate relevant gases which currently have large uncertainties. It
will inform future work on the exchange of volatile and aerosol organics with
significant potential impacts for our understanding of the climate
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.