* 2123497
* Collaborative Research: The geological and paleoecological contexts of early Miocene hominoid evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Susanne Cote, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2025
* USD 280,789.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project examines the roles of time and environment
in the adaptive evolution of early apes by advancing knowledge about the
chronology, paleoecology, and species diversity for a set of geographically
restricted fossil localities. The research design includes a series of fossil
excavations to uncover new evidence of early apes and their habitats, combined
with laboratory analyses designed to aid in synthesizing and interpreting these
discoveries. The scientific importance of this project lies in documenting early
ape adaptive diversity within specific, highly-resolved chronological and
ecological contexts, with major downstream implications for interpreting the
origin and diversification of later apes, including hominins. More broadly, this
project expands participation in research through training opportunities
targeted to underrepresented groups, enhances scientific infrastructure by
digitizing invaluable but currently inaccessible field records, and increases
public engagement with science through outreach activities aimed at museums and
public schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fossil and molecular evidence indicate
that the major lineages of humans and apes diverged during the early Miocene
(ca. 23-16 Ma). The diversity of ape species and adaptations during that time
greatly exceeds modern variation in this group making it difficult to interpret
the evolutionary sequence and ecological contexts in which the suite of features
shared by living apes and humans appeared. This project is organized around the
central question: Are differences among early apes tied to differences in
paleoenvironments, ages, or both? To clarify these relationships, researchers
pursue three specific aims: (1) establishing a rigorous chronology of early ape
fossil sites; (2) generating high-resolution paleoecological reconstructions for
undersampled ape localities; and (3) documenting the diversity of ape species
during the early Miocene. Fossil excavations are conducted at a series of
outcrops to better document ape diversity, geological contexts, and habitat
parameters. The project employs radiometric and magnetostratigraphy at
correlated stratigraphic sections (Aim 1); sedimentological, isotopic, and
paleontological analyses (Aim 2); and comparative, morphometric, and
phylogenetic analyses of new fossil ape specimens (Aim 3). Integration of these
study results can enable the researchers to contextualize the timing and
ecological parameters associated with the emergence of key characteristics in
the ape and human lineage, and to subsequently interpret how these early Miocene
primate communities contributed to the distribution of primates across broad
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.