* 2123474
* NCS-FO:Distortions in Memory for Aversive Naturalistic Events
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Vishnu Murty, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2025
* USD 999,864.00

Memories are not exact records of past events; rather our emotional states can
distort memories leading to accurate recall of the most intense parts of an
event and misremembering of more mundane details. For example, imagine while
eating brunch at a busy intersection you witness a horrific car accident. While
you may have great memory for the anguish in the passenger’s face, you may not
have great memory for how the car accident transpired (e.g., was the driver
texting while driving?). Understanding how emotion distorts memories is of
critical importance because as a society we use personal accounts of prior
events to inform communication in both legal and media contexts. This project
increases our understanding of how individuals form memories for complex
emotional events by defining the features of learning that contribute to
distortions in memory. The project leverages rodent and animal models of how
emotional arousal influences brain structures underlying memory and extends them
by employing more real-life, threatening events. There is accumulating evidence
that emotional events heighten threat-related arousal, such as increases in
sweating and heart rate, which can impair the function of regions known to
construct episodic memories, such as the hippocampus. However, most laboratory
based studies use static word lists or pictures as experimental stimuli, which
preclude the ability to understand how threat changes individuals’ ability to
construct accurate memory-based narratives of real-world situations. Threat may
bias memory formation towards the most emotional parts of events while also
encouraging the ignoring of mundane details (like where or when the event
happened) which makes it difficult to accurately reflect on how events unfolded.
A series of behavioral, psychophysiological, and neuroimaging experiments, using
highly arousing naturalistic stimuli, address arousal’s role in fragmented
memory by placing individuals in more complex, threatening environments than
previous research. Understanding the intersection of emotion, arousal, and
memory cohesion has broad implications for improving methods to make sure when
individuals convey their interpretations of past events to broader
audiences—such as an individual sharing their interpretation of a traumatic
event to a news outlet or a courtroom—we can accurately determine which parts of
their memories are more or less fallible. Alongside the research project are
plans for the mentorship of a diverse body of undergraduate and graduate
trainees, public outreach through theatre events and digital media, and a plan
to develop collaborations with experts in eye-witness testimony, digital media,
and memory research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project translates models of
arousal-mediated biases in episodic memory into the domain of naturalistic,
ecologically-relevant stimuli in humans. Research in both rodents and humans
shows that emotional memory is supported by a cascade of events which are
triggered by threat detection in the amygdala, which then increases
physiological arousal and noradrenergic tone in concert with facilitating medial
temporal lobe-dependent encoding. These neuromodulatory signals are specifically
thought to bias memory encoding towards cortical medial temporal lobe-based
memory representations over hippocampal-dependent representations, which in turn
results in greater memory for the most salient features of an emotional event at
the expense of more mundane details. Critically, intact hippocampal function is
necessary to form cohesive memories that maintain their temporal order,
contextual details, and a continuous narrative. It follows that, due to amygdala
involvement, memories of emotionally arousing events would lack typical markers
of hippocampal-dependent memory such as a cohesive temporal narrative. However,
prior research has precluded testing such hypotheses based on the use of more
simplistic stimuli that are static and lack narrative structures (i.e., word
lists, pictures). Emerging work in the cognitive neuroscience of memory has
provided behavioral, computational, and neuroimaging techniques to assay memory
processes that unfold over time by utilizing more complex memoranda that include
a narrative structure. In the first set of studies, participants attend a highly
arousing haunted house during the collection of physiological data and then
complete free recall tests characterizing the cohesive structure of their
memories. In a second series of studies, the investigators leverage neuroimaging
methods during the encoding and free recall of horror and neutral movies clips
to better understand the relationship between amygdala-medial temporal lobe
interactions, physiological arousal, and memory distortion. In the final series
of studies, the investigators manipulate individuals’ agency while playing a
horror-themed video game, testing a novel hypothesis that agency may protect
individuals from arousal-based memory distortions by providing them control over
the event, a form of intrinsic emotion regulation. Thus, these studies expand
our knowledge on emotional memory by moving beyond simple laboratory-based
stimuli into more naturalistic memoranda (i.e., staged events, movie viewing,
videogame play). Together, this project tests a model by which physiological
arousal disrupts hippocampal-dependent encoding resulting in fragmented,
distorted representations of past events which are less communicable to the
public. Understanding the behavioral and neural mechanisms that drive memory
distortions for complex, aversive events provides a foundation of knowledge to
more accurately assess the veracity of individuals’ memories for traumatic
events, and provides targets of remediation to reduce distortions in memory.
Thus, the findings from this project inform practices of incorporating first-
person narratives in service of societal well-being in legal and media
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.