* 2123781
* Expeditions: Mind in Vitro — Computing with Living Neurons
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2029
* Taher Saif, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 03/31/2029
* USD 3,096,000.00

Can computing systems be built out of living neurons? Can they achieve basic
hallmarks of cognition such as learning, attention, curiosity, or creativity, so
pervasive in biology yet elusive in modern computing? This Expedition imagines
computers and robots that are human designed but living. That can be programmed,
but whose behaviors are not specified, and instead, emerge. These systems will
grow, heal, learn and explore. They will open a new space of possibilities yet
to be imagined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By shifting from digital, rigid
architectures to plastic cellular substrates, speed, accuracy, and exactness are
traded off for statistical robustness, extreme parallelism, healing, growth, and
superior energy efficiency. Rather than Boolean logic, these post-von Neumann
systems will harness the compositional dynamics of billions of neural elements
to generate 'out-of-the-box', emergent forms of computations. They will
interface with muscles and sensors, to give rise to organic machines able to
probe their environment and explore it. This technology will have profound,
lasting impact in virtually every field related to information processing,
robotics, health and medicine, with deep ramification across human knowledge.
Modern deep-networks implemented on power-hungry supercomputers may be dwarfed
by bio-computing systems the size of an apple and running on sugar. Neuroscience
could be revolutionized, with radically new behavioral models. Ethics research
will be catalyzed. The legacy will be the inception of an in-vitro third form of
‘intelligence’, separate from AI and animal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
recent advances in the engineering of multi-cellular constructs, insights into
their dynamics via statistical physics, and guidance from information theory,
this Expedition will develop the science and technology to fabricate, model,
program, scale and embody biological processors. Research will unfold across
four thrusts, structured around what makes a system compute and act: (1) Wetware
– integrate neural cultures on engineered platforms; (2) Architecture – create a
programmable substrate to support useful computations; (3) Programming – develop
a software stack and a programming model to configure and run the substrate; (4)
Robotic embodiment – demonstrate multi-sensory processing and probe the
emergence of rudimentary cognitive traits in motile biological robots. A robust
in-design ethics program will be pervasive of all aspects of research. The
evocative power of this Expedition will excite students from all backgrounds and
at all levels about computing. This will be leveraged to grow a Mind in Vitro
community, through internships, workshops, seminars, and a dedicated mini-
curriculum. Art-of-Science exhibitions in massive public spaces will allow us to
connect with a broad and diverse audience. Finally, full commitment to open
science is core, and protocols, software, hardware, and educational material
will all be made freely available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.