* 2123343
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: Infusion of data science and computation into engineering curricula
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Robert Kimel, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,376,068.00

The goal of this project is to develop a curricular framework for data science
education and workforce development that is transferable between diverse
institutions, so STEM-related programs can plug and play data science lessons
with existing curricula without much overhead. These lessons will be created in
conjunction with community stakeholders and industry partners to ensure a focus
on real-world problem solving and include student organizations in course
development to promote flexible learning pathways. The proposed additions to
undergraduate STEM education will provide an evidence-based blueprint for best
practices in integrating data science with existing engineering curricula.
Implementation across multiple engineering departments will result in a
significant impact on society through the training of a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce with high data literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to (1) facilitate data science education and
workforce development for engineering and related topics, (2) provide
opportunities for students to participate in practical experiences where they
can learn new skills in a variety of environments, and (3) expand the data
science talent pool by enabling the participation of undergraduate students with
diverse backgrounds, experiences, skills, and technical maturity in the Data
Science Corps. This work will support the Data Science Corps objective of
building capacity for education and workforce development to harness the data
revolution at local, state, and national levels. The institutions gathered for
this project will develop training programs and curate datasets that will be
made available so they can be included in undergraduate instruction nationwide.
Furthermore, the training materials will be shared with industry partners,
facilitating workforce development. The project team will develop a website to
house data science training programs, didactic datasets, and other resources for
educators. These resources are intended to reduce barrier to entry for faculty
seeking to incorporate data science into their instruction, as recruiting and
retaining faculty to create and teach integrated introductory courses in data
science has been recognized as a significant hurdle by the National
Academies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.