* 2123508
* HSI Planning Project: Designing an Online and Integrative Interdisciplinary Data Science Community College Curriculum and Pathway
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nancy Livingston, Western New Mexico University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2023
* USD 0.00

With support from the NSF 20-599 Improving Undergraduate STEM Education - HSI
Track 1 Planning and Pilot Program grant, Western New Mexico University (WNMU)
and Western Governors University (WGU) will collaborate on the design and
development of an interdisciplinary, online, two-year Associate of Science Data
Science curriculum, degree plan, and pathway for HSI community college and
university learners and for incoming dual enrollment, high school, community
college, and non-traditional learners. Community colleges play an outsized role
in Hispanic student enrollments and yet most two-year colleges do not offer data
science pathways with only 15 of circa 600 data science programs in 2017 offered
by community colleges versus four-year colleges. Even fewer data science degrees
are offered at community colleges with the HSI designation. This collaborative
planning project will address studentsâ€™ needs for a spatially and
institutionally contextualized data science two-year online curriculum and set
of nested, discipline-specific certificates. Through a prototype set of online
data science introductory learning modules targeting HSI community college
learners, the project will analyze the cognitive and social needs of HSI
community college learners in the critical learner domains of self-efficacy,
sense of belonging, and identity. WGU will offer the required instructional
designers and learner support structures to design and test an integrated and
engaging online learning experience, and effective support for diverse learners.
WNMU will provide the local subject matter expertise in data science and
education, and a framework for student and family participation in the
development of the curriculum and support structures.

Applying a Design-Based Research (DBR) framework, this project will render a set
of data points needed by HSI and community college researchers toward assessing
the constellation of critical determinants of success for a typical community
college STEM data science degree program designed specifically for early
learners and non-working professionals. The participatory design process
proposed will join WNMU and WGU faculty experts, students, and program staff
together with industry partner reviewers toward creating a data science
curriculum that can be implemented at WNMU. The data science curriculum will
offer colleges a set of shareable online and hybrid instructional resources that
serve as a template to customize a data science curriculum within an authentic
institutional expert domain and context, whether in healthcare, transportation,
business, education, social sciences, or other disciplines. These outcomes will
serve as a roadmap for other typical, disadvantaged two- and four-year colleges
and HSIs everywhere that already offer standard math and statistics courses. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation
in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI
Program will also draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.