* 2123367
* Transitions: Rational design of viral vectors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jean Peccoud, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 749,998.00

The ability to use genetic data to accurately predict the attributes of living
organisms would have a profound impact on many fields of biology, including
genetics, molecular biology, synthetic biology and biomedical engineering. One
goal of this project is to develop approaches for genotype-phenotype predictions
using a simple viral system (Vesicular Stomatitis Virus). Additional project
goals are to allow the PI, who is a well-respected computational biologist, to
gain hands-on experience using several crucial experimental techniques and to
establish a research program that has experience in both experimentation and
modeling. This project will also provide research opportunities for many
undergraduate and graduate students, including students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to build a
multiscale model showing how fluctuations of discrete events at the molecular
level determine the quantitative virulence of a virus population. This model
will be developed as a genotype to phenotype map that captures the relationships
between genotype and phenotype observed in a library of 9,600 engineered
vesicular stomatitis virus variants. This model will establish how the genetic
control of the transcription and translation of the vesicular stomatitis virus
five genes can determine viral propagation in cell culture without introducing
mutations that alter the function of the proteins coded by the viral genome. The
model derived from experimental data will guide the design of optimized vectors
that combine a low-virulence and a high-degree of reproducibility. The project
will proceed through iterations of the Design-Build-Test-Learn cycle that will
allow the characterization of 96 virus variants per month by the end of the
performance period. Libraries of virus variants will be designed and assembled
before being transfected in cell cultures. They will be tested by flow
cytometry. Experimental data will be used to refine the mathematical model of
viral replication by adding new data to that collected in previous
iterations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.