* 2123583
* MCA: Integrating immune system and microbiome function during amphibian development
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Valerie McKenzie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2024
* USD 413,329.00

Microbial organisms, such as bacteria, often live in a symbiotic relationship
with animals and provide beneficial functions that support health of the host
animals. For many of these bacterial and animal symbiotic relationships, we know
very little about their specific biology and what kinds of beneficial functions
the symbiotic partners provide. Like most vertebrate animals, amphibians have
complex immune systems with innate and adaptive immune functions, however
amphibians do not develop a fully capable immune system until after they
metamorphose from the aquatic tadpole life stage. The investigator proposes a
novel hypothesis postulating that the symbiotic skin bacteria on aquatic
tadpoles provide protective defensive functions while the immune system is not
yet mature. The project will test this idea using an experimental approach that
will examine the immune system and bacterial symbionts of an amphibian during
its development from the egg and tadpole stages through metamorphosis. The
Colorado Boreal Toad will be featured in this work, and it is locally endangered
in the Southern Rocky Mountains due to a fungal skin pathogen. This project will
advance understanding of the ways in which Boreal Toads defend themselves
against the pathogen which can be helpful for conservation of the species. The
investigator is a mid-career scientist who will work with a collaborator and
mentor to expand learning how to apply immunology methods to amphibian disease
research. The investigator is also dedicated to service in her position to
support diversity, equity and inclusion as the director of graduate studies in
her unit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Host-associated microbes provide a range of
beneficial and necessary functions for their host organisms, yet the processes
that drive the assembly of host-associated microbial communities is a
significant knowledge gap. This project will study microbiome function on the
skin of amphibians in order to examine the role of symbiotic microbes in
pathogen defense and how that functioning changes during amphibian development.
Growing a complex immune system that is capable of targeting and ridding harmful
pathogens takes significant developmental time, and most of the adaptive immune
system of amphibians does not come online until after metamorphosis. This begs
the question, how do larval, aquatic amphibians defend themselves against a sea
of opportunistic pathogens prior to the full functioning of the immune system?
This project will test the idea that larval amphibians assemble a symbiotic
microbial community with pathogen defense as a primary function, the ‘microbial
surrogate defense system hypothesis’, prior to the maturation of the immune
system. The investigator proposes a time-series experiment that will track the
symbiotic skin bacteria and immune function during boreal toad development and
conduct three pathogen challenge trials that will occur before, during, and
after metamorphosis, respectively. The project will use both culture-dependent
and sequencing tools to characterize the bacterial symbionts and immunogenomic
and transcriptomic tools to characterize immune function. This project
represents a first-time collaboration between the PI and a research Partner who
will provide expertise on amphibian immunogenetic tools as well as mentoring
related to career advancement for the PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.