* 2123506
* I-Corps: Ultra-Low-Cost Mechanical Ventilator for COVID-19 and Other Respiratory Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Kevin Wood, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an ultra-low-cost intensive care unit (ICU) ventilator to provide
critical care to underserved areas around the world. COVID-19 put a strain on
the world’s medical supply and exposed the inadequate ventilator stockpile and
manufacturing supply chain. The proposed technology is designed to meet the
growing demands of hospitals in several markets, ranging from county health and
human services to local hospitals in developing nations. In addition, the
proposed technology may enable manufacturing and repair within local regions of
the developing world. As a result, there may be two benefits to underserved
areas: an increase in accessibility to medical care and an increase in local
medical device production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of an ultra-low-cost intensive care unit (ICU) ventilator.
This development has been made possible by combining three mechanical
ventilation approaches: a mechanically driven breathing circuit, a mechanically
controlled positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) valve, and a predictive
patient feedback algorithm that provides doctors with real-time patient
information utilizing only five pressure sensors. These three technologies are
designed to create a cost reduction while still enabling a high degree of life-
saving care for the ICU or surgical setting. Initial prototypes have been tested
by physicians and respiratory therapists and have provided input for the user
interface to reduce the complexity associated with user training. In addition,
this proposed device has been developed with components that may be sourced
locally for long-term sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.