* 2123241
* Advancing Refractometry for the Measurement of Absolute Salinity
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Raymond Schmitt, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 836,012.00

Accurate measurements of ocean salinity and density are critical for almost all
areas of ocean science. Some of these include, ocean circulation and mixing,
biological productivity, nutrient transport, pollutant dispersal, and the
ocean’s capacity to store heat and carbon dioxide. For decades, much of the
field work to measure salinity and density has relied upon traditional sensors
for detecting conductivity and temperature within ocean water masses and at
their interfaces, and from millimeter to global scales. However, conductivity
sensors for measuring salinity still have shortcomings due to their temperature
cross-sensitivity and because they detect the electrical charge of seawater
instead of its true mass. Accordingly, measuring refractive index has been
suggested as a complimentary and in many cases superior alternative to measuring
conductivity. For example, refractive index’s low sensitivity to temperature
makes it particularly valuable for studying the arctic pumps which drive many of
the world’s currents and influence global climate. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
difficulty with measuring refractive index, however, has traditionally been the
extraordinary precision with which the measurement must be made. Nevertheless,
modern optics technologies have begun to increase its feasibility. Accordingly,
this project seeks to develop and utilize two technologies that together will,
for the first time, enable accurate measurements of refractive index and
Absolute Salinity in the ocean. The first technology is an in-situ refractometer
that improves upon an existing experimental seagoing refractometer. The second
technology is the benchtop equipment necessary for developing an accurate
equation-of-state for seawater refractive index. To date, no sufficient
experimental reference data exists for which to compare seawater index
measurements. Thus, developing equipment capable of producing this data is a
critical step for refractive index’s utility. Overall, the technologies
developed in this work will provide the means and the experimental reference
data for an additional measurement, the refractive index, to be widely used in
observational oceanography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.