* 2123264
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: Delaware and Mid-Atlantic Data Science Corps
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Hacene Boukari, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Data science is having an enormous impact on society and the economy. As the
field of data science evolves, there is an increasing need for a qualified and
diverse set of professionals with skills in data science. The Delaware and Mid-
Atlantic Data Science Corps network will bring together three partner
institutions from the Delaware Valley, the University of Delaware (UD), Delaware
State University (DSU), and Lincoln University (LU). The resulting network will
strengthen and promote interdisciplinary training in foundational and applied
data science, both in the classroom and in projects with internal researchers
and external collaborations. This project will provide equitable pedagogical
opportunities in data science across students’ backgrounds, resources, and lived
experiences, focusing on inclusion of student populations traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. The program will offer traditional (classroom-based)
and active (participatory workshops and research experiences) opportunities
providing job-ready skills to students, including training in the ethics of data
science, visualization and communication, and collaborative skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year of the program will focus on a different area of
data-intensive pedagogy and research selected to be maximally relevant to one of
the three partnering institutes, maximizing student engagement and empowering
each institute to contribute domain expertise and data to support hands-on
research opportunities for in-classroom and out-of-classroom activities. DSU and
LU, two Historically Black Colleges and Universities with growing interests in
data science, will leverage UD’s established portfolio of pedagogical and
research initiatives in data science throughout the program to develop
independent data science initiatives. A modular approach will be used that will
allow the program to meet the needs of students at any point of their career
path, regardless of previous exposure to data science and STEM. Coding and Stats
Bootcamps will be offered to the uninitiated. Data science foundational classes
will level the playing field and offer all students basic skills. Master Classes
will enable participatory discussion and hands-on training in ethics,
collaboration skills, and scientific communication, and facilitate engagement
with external partners. Topical advanced classes and research opportunities will
complete the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.