* 2123995
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic and Systems Biology Approaches to Semi-synthetic Cells with Expanded DNA Alphabets
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project focuses on novel forms of DNA that are not built only from the
standard four nucleotides found in natural DNA, but with two or four additional
nucleotides, to form an "Artificially Expanded Genetic Information System"
(AEGIS). Expanded DNA has already seen widespread use in human diagnostics and
environmental surveillance for pathogens. This project will break new ground in
developing our understanding of DNA, and develop new technology for business,
defense, and health. It will do so by studying the interaction of AEGIS DNA and
its components with living microbial cells. As AEGIS can support Darwinian
evolution, seen by many as the essence of life, this project will drive a deeper
understanding of life. Further, it will allow laboratory evolution of new
functional materials, adding evolution and adaptation to points in biotechnology
where description and design are inadequate. Finally, this project emphasizes
public outreach efforts and the training of early career scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will complete engineering of bacterial
strains that replicate, evolve, and use DNA built not from 4 different
nucleotides, but from 6 or 8, DNA in an Artificially Expanded Genetic
Information System (AEGIS). These strains, "Second Examples of Genetics
Undergoing Evolution" (SEGUE) will use one (or both) of two 6-letter genetic
alphabets, GACTKX and GACTZP. A multidisciplinary team of chemists, molecular
biologists, philosophers, and bioengineers will exploit comprehensive
preliminary data. Here, critical points are integrated to yield results
beneficial across multiple platforms:&lt;br/&gt;• Broader Impacts in training,
outreach, and risk analysis by having direct contact between experiments and
those who study the history of and "science of" science.&lt;br/&gt;• Work to
develop polymerases that replicate AEGIS DNA in vitro and in vivo SEGUE. These
will themselves have value in environmental pathogen surveillance, diagnostics,
and therapeutic development, as well as the creation of new materials for
biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;• Protein engineering to build a metabolic pathway to
biosynthesize, inside of living cells, AEGIS triphosphates, allowing AEGIS to be
used inexpensively.&lt;br/&gt;• Study of interactions between AEGIS and living
cells, specifically to identify "third party" genes and regulatory systems that
improve the performance and lower the cost of AEGIS in SEGUE.&lt;br/&gt;•
Broader impacts include the training of experimental scientists in philosophical
and ethical features of synthetic biology, iGEM projects, and training for
undergraduate and graduate students. The implications throughout science are
enormous, and touch on concepts of shadow biospheres, life on Mars and elsewhere
in the Solar System, and how life in general is conceived and understood by
scientists and the general public alike. Two updated books will provide a
framework for thinking about these and other issues, Cleland's "The Quest for a
Universal Theory of Life" and Benner's "Life, the Universe, and the Scientific
Method." Other outreach materials will include the blog: "Primordial Scoop",
which discusses science and technology from philosophical and ethical
perspectives. Educational materials will be internationally available, including
in classrooms, museums, and planetariums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.