* 2123529
* Seismological Investigations of Earthquakes and Deep Earth Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 579,568.00

This project will use decades of records of seismic waves generated by thousands
of earthquakes all over the world to learn about both earthquakes and deep Earth
structure. Analyses of earthquakes will focus on the high-frequency components
of the seismograms, which provide key constraints on the energy radiated by
earthquakes and information about the speed and complexity of fault ruptures.
These results should help improve forecasts of damaging ground motions produced
by strong earthquakes. Planned analyses for Earth structure will examine sharp
changes in seismic wave velocities that occur at depths of 50 to 400 miles below
the surface that are related to changes in crystal structure or the presence of
fluids, such as water or magma. A related project will examine scattering of
seismic waves, which provides clues regarding small-scale variability in rock
properties at depths extending from the surface to Earth's liquid core. These
results will help in understanding the internal composition of the Earth and its
relation to tectonic processes. The project will support undergraduate,
graduate, and postgraduate students and involve them in research. Educational
components include graduate student and postdoc support, as well as sponsoring
an undergraduate summer intern in a long-standing and successful SIO program
designed to increase student diversity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systematic
analyses of large datasets recorded by both permanent and temporary seismic
stations all over the world provide rich opportunities to study problems
concerning earthquakes and Earth structure. Planned research includes innovative
investigations of upper-mantle discontinuity structure within and near the
transition zone and the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary, observing and
modeling of seismic scattering to characterize small-scale compositional
heterogeneity in the mantle, and spectral analyses of earthquake radiation to
constrain earthquake rupture dimensions and dynamics. Some key questions this
project plans to examine include: (1) What is the role of the low-velocity layer
(LVL) above the 410-km discontinuity in mantle convection and water recycling?
(2) What causes the mid-lithospheric discontinuity (MLD) observed under many
continental cratons? (3) How variable is the sharpness and roughness of the
660-km discontinuity and what does that imply for mantle composition? (4) What
is the strength of small-scale heterogeneity in the mid- to lower mantle and
does it vary laterally? (5) What causes the large scatter in earthquake stress
drop estimates, i.e., how much is due to modeling uncertainties versus real
differences in earthquake dynamics? (6) Does earthquake stress drop vary
systematically with tectonic region? (7) How do improved global high-frequency
body-wave attenuation models compare to tomographic models and to surface-wave
attenuation models?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.