* 2123794
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Rapid Evaluation of Coastal Ocean and Nearshore - RECON
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Herbert Tanner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/29/2024
* USD 99,573.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) estimates that the
ocean economy can add up to $1.5 trillion of value to the global economy by
2030, doubling their 2010 levels. The data sets that our envisioned ERC can
produce can help policy and decision-making through a more thorough assessment
of the impact of human activity and economic development on the coastal
environment. The technology that can be developed can enable faster, safer, and
more effective emergency response, and search-and-rescue operations.
Specifically for the activities of this planning grant, we believe that they can
contribute uniquely to workforce development, by offering a unique opportunity
to participating students across institutions for inspiring, hands-on applied
field work, as well as for networking and mentoring with academic, industry, and
community leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal communities are heavily
dependent and reliant on the nearby complex and dynamic marine geo-eco systems,
whose extent, structure, interactions, and function are not fully understood.
What is more, estuarine and coastal regions in the US currently face multiple
additional marine spatial planning issues and challenges, including the effects
of episodic storms, climate change, and other stressors. Obtaining scientific
insights on the morphology and evolution of these natural multi-scale dynamical
systems, and how they are influenced by human activity, will help assess the
impact of long-term coastal and offshore development projects. It will also
enable us to facilitate a more timely, coordinated, and effective response to
natural and man-made emergencies and disasters. The envisioned RECON ERC is
intended to help create the science to understand the underlying processes;
develop the technology to efficiently and accurately observe, measure and record
the associated phenomena; engage with industry to transition the technology to
the field and innovate with new products and services; partner with local
government to help them effectively leverage the technology and serve their
communities; reach out to the communities to understand better their perspective
and problems, and give them a more complete picture of how automation technology
and engineering can contribute to their solution; and finally, educate the new
generation of leaders and practitioners who will field, maintain, and grow this
new technology-driven industry segment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) Division and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.