* 2123469
* NCS-FO: Cognitive maps as a framework for organizing relationships in large-scale real social networks
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Oriel FeldmanHall, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 775,948.00

Human life plays out in the vast landscape of our social networks. Successful
social navigation can help buffer against loneliness and negative interactions,
but it requires learning who is connected to whom: the latent structure
underlying social relationships (e.g., cliques or hubs). The goal of this
project, led by a team of researchers at Brown University, is to reveal the
behavioral and neural signatures of how people learn and reason about real-world
social networks. Despite the importance of understanding how people learn
relational social knowledge, much remains unknown about how the brain organizes
this knowledge. Spatial cognition research offers a window into this problem: A
long line of animal research has demonstrated that the brain represents
information about physical space in a ‘cognitive map’ that binds information
about entities in the world and their relationships. Cognitive maps have been
shown to speed learning in new or changing environments. This project tests
whether, in mentally navigating their social networks, people recruit cognitive
map-like representations similar to those used to navigate external physical
space. By integrating advanced human imaging methods, computational modeling,
social network science, and longitudinal sampling, the investigators will study
a large cohort of first-year undergraduate students as they develop new
friendships over the course of an academic year to investigate the behavioral
and neural signatures of emerging knowledge about real-world social networks.
The investigators will identify the neural representations of social information
in this complex and dynamic environment. The results of these studies have the
potential to transform our knowledge of how humans learn about and navigate
through their social world. It has implications for advancing our understanding
of social factors that contribute to the persistence of undergraduates in STEM
fields. This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding
Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly
supported by the Directorates for Biology (BIO), Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering
(ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work aims to provide a foundation for understanding
human learning in real social contexts. An incoming undergraduate class
(comprised of individuals who have yet to establish their college social
network) provides a unique testbed to track the emergence of a social network
and its shifting configuration over the course of the students’ first academic
year. The main hypothesis is that an individual’s cognitive map of their social
network enables them to navigate more adeptly through their network. The study
will probe neural representations of this cognitive structure by means of
function magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) focusing on the hippocampus and
orbitofrontal/entorhinal cortex). Different classes of computational models
(i.e., state transition-based, successor representation-based, and latent-cause
based) will be built to test competing accounts of social network learning and
the format of social cognitive maps. These models will probe for person-level
parameters to assess whether individual variability biases this learning
process, including whether an individual’s position in their community, and thus
their capacity to gather information, shapes their ability to build cognitive
maps of their social environment. By harnessing both a cross-sectional and
longitudinal design, the research will provide an organizing framework that can
identify how the brain represents social knowledge about complex environments
while precisely modelling how cognitive maps of a social network enable
efficient social navigation. This work will provide a window into the
neurobiological mechanisms underlying the social learning processes that unfold
in the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.