* 2123574
* Middle childhood growth and development in the evolution of human life history
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Rafaela Takeshita, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Humans are characterized by a uniquely extended period of dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA) secretion, yielding blood concentrations 10-fold those of chimpanzees,
our species' closest living relative. This adrenal neurosteroid has been
associated with longevity and plays an important role in regulating brain
development. A number of non-human primates secrete very low levels of this
hormone and the reason for these interspecies differences is unclear. The
investigators use comparative primate endocrine, genetic, and morphological data
to examine whether DHEA secreted by the adrenal gland may have contributed to
brain steroid input during human evolution and provide insights into the
biological mechanism of adrenal steroids in primate body and brain. This
research fosters international collaboration, supports the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, and develops public science outreach
activities at zoos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The developmental period in humans and
great apes is marked by middle childhood growth (adrenarche), the post-natal
increase in the adrenal hormones dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and
dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate (DHEAS). Both hormones are also secreted in the
brain and have been associated with longevity and brain maturation. However,
adrenarche is not apparent in lower primates, and the reasons for these
interspecies differences are not well understood. This project uses
endocrinology, microscopy and genetics in a comparative framework to examine the
origins of adrenarche and its potential impact on primate brain and life history
traits. Adrenal steroids and the enzymes necessary for steroid synthesis are
quantified peripherally in living nonhuman primates as well as centrally in
human and nonhuman postmortem brains to determine the connections between age,
brain function, and adrenal steroids in primate life history. This study can
impact our understanding of adrenal function in regulating primate development
and contribute to debates about the role of DHEA in human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.