* 2123372
* AGS-PRF: Leveraging High-Resolution Modeling and Dynamical Theory to Elucidate Changes in Extreme Precipitation in a Monsoonal Regime
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jane Smyth, Smyth, Jane E
* Fellowship Award
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 190,000.00

Monsoon low pressure systems (MLPS) are synoptic storms that generate the
majority of monsoon rainfall over South Asia, including the heaviest rainfall
events. This densely populated region is already prone to severe impacts from
extreme precipitation, and the sensitivity of MLPS to warming is poorly
understood. With coarse spatial resolutions, climate models do not produce
realistic MLPS, as the simulated tropical precipitation extremes are highly
dependent on how models portray convection via numerical parameterizations. This
proposal seeks to better understand MLPS and how their changes affect the
monsoonal precipitation extremes. The findings will advance the goal of
improving regional predictions of how precipitation extremes will respond to
increasing temperatures, with direct implications for climate change mitigation.
The proposed activities include the mentoring of undergraduate and graduate
students in research and public outreach activities to promote increased science
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the study will utilize an idealized
high-resolution, convection-permitting configuration of the System for
Atmospheric Modeling framework with an extended equatorial beta-plane, fixed sea
surface temperatures (SST), and a simple representation of land. The analysis
will examine how the presence of tropical land and the accompanying synoptic
dynamics influence the extreme precipitation sensitivity to uniform SST warming.
The work will utilize a moist dynamical framework and draw on several
alternative theories to characterize precipitation extremes and MLPS
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.