* 2123546
* Mapping Dissolved Oxygen using Observations and Machine Learning
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Takamitsu Ito, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 347,930.00

Oxygen is produced by algae in the sunlit surface waters and is released into
the atmosphere. This process contributes to about the half of atmospheric
oxygen. However, there is a growing consensus in the scientific community that
the global ocean oxygen inventory has declined in recent decades. Ocean heat
uptake causes the reduction of solubility, and changes in circulation and
biogeochemical processes associated with the ocean warming can further change
ocean oxygen content. The reduction of dissolved oxygen can have far-reaching
impacts on the marine habitats. Recent estimates of the global oxygen decline
are in the range of 0.5-3.3% over the period of 1970- 2010. Distribution of the
historical O2 measurements is irregular and sparse, causing significant
uncertainty in these estimates. The objective of this project is to determine
changes in the dissolved oxygen content of the oceans based on observational
data and machine learning techniques. The overarching hypothesis of this project
is that there are significant, regional relationships between O2 and other
observed quantities. Dissolved oxygen is ultimately controlled by the
combination of ocean circulation, air-sea gas transfer and biological processes.
These processes can be linked with other observed quantities such as temperature
(T) and salinity (S), but such relationships can be complex and non-linear.
Therefore, it is difficult to determine a universal relationship that governs
the distribution of O2 based on the first principle. However, machine learning
algorithms can extract empirical relationships between O2 and other variables
from existing observations, allowing us to estimate O2 where direct observation
is not available. The work will also support one graduate and one undergraduate
student research and outreach activities at local
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, machine learning will be used to
fill data gaps in the historical O2 dataset and to generate an improved, gridded
estimates of O2 from 1960 to present. This approach takes advantage of the large
amount of accumulated in-situ observations over multiple decades including not
only O2 itself but also other related variables such as T and S. The proposed
work revolves around three hypotheses. First, the current estimates of global O2
trend and variability are strongly influenced by relatively data-rich regions
such as North Atlantic and North Pacific. Machine-learning based O2 dataset with
an improved gap-fill approaches is hypothesized to better represent relatively
data-poor regions such as tropics and southern hemisphere oceans. Secondly, the
current estimates indicate that less than half of O2 decline is explained by the
solubility effect. The global O2-heat relationship measures the reinforcing
effects of ocean ventilation and biogeochemistry. Machine learning can estimate
empirical relationships between O2, T and other physical variables, which can be
manipulated to perform sensitivity experiments. The empirical model of O2 can
constrain the regional and global O2-heat relationship. Thirdly, it is
hypothesized that observed O2 decline in the tropical thermocline are driven by
the combination of natural climate variability and long-term trends. In the
proposed work, sensitivity experiments are performed with the empirical model of
O2 to evaluate the influences of long-term trends and decadal-scale changes
associated with the modes of natural climate
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.