* 2123691
* Collaborative Research: FOCUS: Florida Current and Sea Level
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Lisa Beal, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,289,108.00

The project will investigate the relationship between sea-level changes in
coastal Florida and variations in Gulf Stream transport of water and heat. To
address this goal, the project will use in-situ measurements of current
velocity, pressure and sound signals as they travel throughout a cross-section
between Florida and The Bahamas. Results of this project should help explain
reasons for exacerbated 'sunny-day' flooding in Florida, and perhaps other
coastal regions of the United States. Results should also help illuminate the
linkage between variations in Gulf Stream transport at regional scales and ocean
motions and heat content at global scale. Investigators will interact closely
with resilience program managers of a county in southeast Florida that is
affected by increasingly frequent flooding from the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to understand the relationship
between Gulf Stream transport variability, in time and in the stream-normal
direction, and coastal sea-level variability. Decoupling between Gulf Stream
transport variations and coastal sea-level fluctuations is hypothesized to be
related to modes of variability in mass loading and heat content across the
Florida Straits; that these modes affect heat transport and coastal sea level at
different time scales; and that understanding these modes will improve
understanding of AMOC heat transport and coastal flood risk. These objectives
and hypotheses will be investigated over 5 years with measurements of currents,
pressure and inverted echosounders (CPIES) at the latitude of the transport
cable that monitors the Florida Current. Analyses will relate cross-shore
variability of the Gulf Stream to coastal sea level. The study might help
understand the variability in incidence of 'sunny-day flooding' in the east
coast of Florida. Results will be shared with the Miami-Dade County's resilience
program manager. The project will support development of new CPIES capabilities
for deployment in shallow, dynamic sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.