* 2123481
* MCA: Enhancing Discrete Fracture Network Modeling Using Evolutionary and Quantum Computing to Expand Opportunities of Convergence Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rishi Parashar, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,904.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient and accurate numerical
modeling of flow and transport processes in fractured rocks is necessary in a
wide array of fields. One common numerical method to simulate groundwater flow
and contaminant transport in fractured rocks is the discrete fracture network
(DFN) modeling approach. The project enhances the computational performance and
functionality of DFN models by integrating them with techniques from the field
of evolutionary and quantum computing. This will lead to more robust tools for
ensuring safe and sustainable use of fractured rock systems, and will enable
scientific advances at the convergence of subsurface hydrology, quantum
computing, and artificial-intelligence-inspired methods. The project also
contributes to a course on computational methods in fracture networks and
provides training to a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
approach focuses on: 1) graph representations of fracture networks and
determination of reduced-order models to include diffusional exchanges with the
surrounding impermeable rock matrix, 2) customization of evolutionary computing
optimization (ECO) encoding schemes and fitness evaluation computations to
further reduce complexity of networks, and 3) use of quantum computing
algorithms for large linear systems to obtain flow solutions across a multitude
of scales in fracture networks. Existing DFN models will be enhanced by adding
heat transport capabilities to create DFN-Thermal models. Identification of
backbone in DFNs, which is traditionally done through extensive particle-based
simulations or machine learning methods, will be approached in this project as a
multi-objective optimization problem where ECO algorithms will simultaneously
optimize a “population” of backbones rather than a single backbone, and along
with effective operators (selection, crossover, mutation) would determine the
optimal solution. By providing improved simulation platform and evaluation
framework to assess controls on flow and transport processes in fracture
networks, the project will serve to expand the application of DFN models to
problems of higher degrees of complexity and at larger
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.