* 2123987
* FMitF: Track I: ComScaN: Composition and Scaling of Network Service Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 06/30/2024
* USD 765,829.00

In today’s interconnected world, network operators need the ability to rapidly
deploy, update, and scale services on-demand. Building such systems is
challenging, and assuring their correctness and performance has been elusive.
The project team aims to develop a “green field” approach to support future
networks and emerging services in such a manner that scalability is inherent by
design and correctness and performance claims can be backed up with mathematical
rigor. This is achieved by bringing together and extending recent research
advances in the areas of networking systems, programming languages, and
software-verification methods. This is intended to provide network operators
with the ability to express desired requirements for a diverse range of
services, the flexibility to easily adapt those services to keep pace with
changing demand and evolving network infrastructure, and the assurance that
performance and correctness goals are upheld. The research is expected to
produce a viable prototype demonstrating the core ideas along with an ecosystem
of open-source software tools, experimental data and, example applications. The
learnings from this project will be incorporated into the academic curriculum to
equip the workforce with the skills needed to build reliable and performant
networking infrastructure. The work is being carried out by attracting, engaging
and mentoring a diverse group of budding researchers, with an intentional focus
on welcoming and encouraging participation by hitherto under-represented groups
in advanced computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the
principal investigators advance a green-field approach to enable quantitative
performance reasoning of Network Function Virtualization (NFV) scaling. It is
designed from the ground up based on formal foundations and principled
approaches. At the basis of the proposed framework, referred to as ComScaN, is
an extensible, declarative domain-specific language (DSL) framework using a
novel actor model. It is designed with flexible and rich built-in language
constructs to support ease of specification and separation of concerns. Co-
designing with the flexible and extensible actor-based DSL framework, the
project team is developing a formal foundation for ComScaN with a suite of
semantic models, formal methods and tools for automatic program analysis,
verification and synthesis, with the goal to facilitate quantitative performance
reasoning of NFV scaling. Quantitative performance reasoning techniques for
scaling NFV as well as algorithms for verifying correctness and performance of
service function chains (SFCs) and synthesis-based approaches for generating
dynamic workloads for testing and evaluation of SFCs are being
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.