* 2123404
* Collaborative Research: GCR:Can improved ecological forecasting accelerate sustainability transformation in urban lighting?
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Jeffrey Kelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 09/30/2026
* USD 778,913.00

Achieving national sustainability goals will require rapid adoption of more
sustainable practices in many areas of society but transitions to sustainable
practices are often slow. This project tests whether these transitions can be
accelerated by (1) creating innovative ecological forecasts that predict where
and when more sustainable practices would have the greatest benefits and (2)
engaging impacted communities in the process of co-implementing forecasts and
advocating for sustainability transitions. The study system is the proliferation
of artificial lights at night (ALAN) and its impacts on migrant birds. ALAN is
increasing rapidly worldwide, and its benefits are countered by pervasive
negative consequences for biodiversity, ecosystems, and human health. A major
ecological consequence of ALAN is disruption of bird migration – millions of
birds die annually in collisions with well-lit buildings – which contributes to
widespread bird population declines. The ALAN-bird migration system is ideal for
this study because, like many wicked environmental problems, environmental
concerns emerge as a product of complex social and cultural processes that have
proven difficult to resolve using traditional approaches. This project employs a
transdisciplinary convergence approach to integrating advances in ecological
forecasting with those in the social and political science of community engaged
scholarship. Experiments testing sustainability impacts of innovations in
ecological forecasting will be co-designed and implemented with a coalition of
convergence research partners. The project will generate an understanding of
pathways by which sustainable practices are adopted for ALAN, this new knowledge
can be used to help address other societal-environmental
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on testing a key prediction
of sustainability transformations science theory – that innovations originate
within advocacy coalitions then accumulate at the subsystem level to drive
sustainability transformations (e.g., new policies). During phase one the
investigation gathers detailed national survey information on the ALAN system
and creates transformational technological improvements in existing bird
migration forecasts specific to impacts of ALAN. This new social and ecological
knowledge will then be used to engage with advocacy coalitions in specific urban
testbed sites to co-implement sustainability transformation experiments during
phase two. These experiments will use targeted messaging campaigns to foster
ALAN mitigation. Experiments will be focused on sustainability-oriented
coalitions because these advocates are predicted to have high leverage to affect
radical transformation toward sustainability across the ALAN subsystem. Impacts
of the experiments on ALAN, impacts of ALAN on migrant birds, and human
behaviors and attitudes toward ALAN will be quantified. Through this two-phase
approach this project will produce a new understanding of how innovations
derived from a convergence research approach can be employed in a sustainability
science and policy framework to accelerate transformations. These outcomes will
contribute understanding of how communities and researchers can co-engage with
wicked environmental problems more broadly to drive transformations toward
sustainability. Results will create new, and potentially transformative,
understanding of how ecological forecasting contributes to sustainability
transformations. This project is jointly funded by the Growing Convergence
Research Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.