* 2123327
* How Do Energy Fluxes Link Precipitation Variability across the Tropical Weather-Climate Continuum?
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Michela Biasutti, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 11/30/2024
* USD 682,038.00

Near the equator, a nearly permanent band of high rainfall circles the globe. It
moves north and south with the seasons, and in the summer over land it becomes
Earthâ€™s monsoons in places like India, providing rainfall that billions of
people rely on. Its movements are closely related to north and south transports
of energy by the atmosphere. Because of traveling disturbances along the
rainband, however, the relationship between the rainband location and the north-
south energy transports is complicated. The prevailing theory thereof and many
climate models fail to capture this relationship. The investigators will use the
observed temperature, wind, precipitation, and moisture to establish, for the
first time, the precise contribution to north-south energy transports by the
different types of tropical disturbances. Combining this information with
climate model simulations, the investigators will develop new theories for the
energy transports by individual disturbance types and incorporate these into
existing theory. Finally, in collaboration with the City College of New York
(CCNY), the investigators will build three state-of-the-art rotating tank
platforms for teaching concepts in climate science, weather, and oceanography
and use the devices to contribute to CCNY science outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will improve our fundamental
understanding of traveling tropical disturbances (such as the Madden-Julian
Oscillation) which are known to influence the likelihood of extreme weather
events. It will unify work across seemingly disparate time and spatial scales
spanning the weather-climate continuum from small, short-lived waves to the
semi-permanent, circum-global rainband. It will pinpoint likely sources of error
in tropical rainfall and ways to address them in weather and climate models,
helping to reduce uncertainties in projections of future changes in monsoon
regions home to billions of vulnerable people. The collaboration with CCNY will
bring core earth science concepts to underserved K-12 students, potentially
stimulating interests in STEM and encouraging them to pursue
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.