* 2123920
* SCH: Blazing Data Trails: Digital Pathology and Specialist Attention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Joel Saltz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,199,980.00

When looking for cancer in clinical slides, pathologists move the focus of their
attention around the slides in complex ways. These skilled shifts of attention
are critical to how pathologists make expert diagnoses. This research program
seeks to understand these shifts in attention in order to build an artificial
intelligence (AI) system that that will be able to look at a slide the way a
human pathologist would. Building an “AI expert pathologist,” however, requires
a lot of data for it to learn, just like a pathologist needs years of training
to become an expert. In order to provide the model with many examples of expert
attention behavior, essential for it to make good predictions, the investigators
will collect a large dataset of attention behavior from human pathologists. The
human pathologists’ behavior will also serve as feedback to the AI model,
enabling the AI system to model and reproduce how the human pathologists
expertly sample the slides by moving their focus of attention. The investigators
will also build AI-fueled tools that can predict where an expert would have
focused their attention in a slide, thereby giving human pathologists feedback
from the AI pathologist. The aim is to improve human accuracy of cancer
diagnoses, which is paramount to improving the healthcare infrastructure of the
country. The work also has the potential to improve histopathology training in
medical personnel and to lead to next-generation AI models for cancer
classification. The AI scientists trained through this project will be experts
in building AI-tools that understand human expert performance and
synergistically enhance it.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A large database will be
created of pathologist’s cursor-based movements during cancer interpretations,
referred to as attention trajectories. These will be collected online from
pathologists searching for metastatic cancer in Whole Slide Images (WSIs) of
lymph nodes that were excised as part of cancer surgeries. For each WSI, one of
four “diagnoses” will also be collected: negative, small, medium, or large
metastases. Using a family of AI methods called imitation learning, the
investigators will generate personalized as well as group prediction models of
pathologist attention trajectories, applying Active Imitation Learning to real
human behavior. Techniques for batch processing and pathologist-in-the-loop
learning of attention trajectories will also be developed. An improvement in the
efficiency and accuracy of pathology classification algorithms is expected
through use of a multi-resolution approach that only processes small parts of
WSIs by combining computational and human attention priors. Lastly, attention-
based diagnostic aids that suggest areas to examine at higher magnification will
be developed for human pathologists to use during slide
interpretation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.