* 2123186
* The IEC Social Justice Workshop Series 2021
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Barry Sullivan, Inclusive Engineering Consortium, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 24,750.00

Recent events have brought systemic racism and racial injustice in all facets of
society into sharp focus. The Inclusive Engineering Consortium (IEC) recognizes
the need and opportunity this has created to stimulate action on creating a more
just and welcoming environment for underrepresented minorities in engineering
education. We acknowledge that personal and institutional biases and inequitable
practices affect underrepresented minorities, including faculty and students in
electrical and computer engineering (ECE). IEC members are committed and
compelled by our mission to make a stand together along with all academic
institutions in treating everyone with equity and respect, regardless of race,
religion, ethnicity, sex, gender identity or orientation, age, disability,
citizen status, or national origin. Accordingly, we propose to deliver a series
of capacity-building workshops during the first two quarters of 2021 that will
1) promote an understanding of these inequitable patterns and 2) introduce
participants to frameworks that help to counter them. More specifically, we
believe that these educational experiences will foster the ability to identify
actionable steps to mitigate the deleterious effects of exclusion in engineering
education, and facilitate collaboration across individuals and institutions in a
way that begins to facilitate tangible change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IEC
Social Justice Workshop Series will be organized before and after the 2021
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads (ECEDHA) conference series
in March 2021 in order to disseminate the results and recommendations to
representatives of over 230 ECE departments across the US and Canada, and
establish meaningful policies and programs to counter institutional bias in
engineering. The workshop series takes a unique approach to addressing
institutional bias in engineering education starting with a recently formed
consortium of HBCU and HSI ECE programs (the IEC) to address first from their
perspective the existing institutional gaps and barriers to underrepresented
students and faculty in engineering, and from there develop a set of consistent
and actionable recommendations that will be taken to a broader audience of ECE
programs in the country (ECEDHA) for discussion and refinement, providing a
guidebook, concrete policy changes and innovative programs that can be
implemented in ECE departments. The successful implementation of meaningful
changes in ECE programs to counter systemic racism will be broadly translatable
to other engineering programs and STEM education where historically barriers
exist to underrepresented students and faculty. The broader outcomes of such
programs will be increased enrollment in STEM fields and increased diversity of
the students and faculty to be more reflective of the overall population,
leading to an increase in the domestic STEM workforce necessary to meet critical
skill needs in the future economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.