* 2123606
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Characterizing the composition, scavenging efficiency and bioavailability of size fractionated particles
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Daniel Ohnemus, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 10/31/2024
* USD 197,659.00

The Amundsen Sea adjacent to Antarctica has gained increasing attention because
of rapid melting of glaciers that drain into it. While most of the scientific
and media attention has focused on how melting glaciers will affect sea level
rise, there are also important consequences for ocean chemistry and biology.
Parts of the Amundsen Sea have the highest rates of photosynthesis of all open
water regions surrounding Antarctica, and this may be because melting glaciers
are supplying essential nutrients such as iron. A detailed understanding of how
melting glaciers affect the supply and removal of nutrients including iron is
necessary to predict the biological, chemical, and climate consequences of
melting glaciers.This project aims to study this system by focusing on the role
that marine particles play in the supply and removal of trace nutrient levels.
Marine particles include all suspended, solid material in seawater that derive
from biological, chemical, and geological processes. Some types of marine
particles supply nutrients to seawater, whereas other types remove nutrients
from seawater. The investigators will determine the concentrations and chemical
compositions of marine particles in the Amundsen Sea in order to understand
which types supply and which types remove nutrients from seawater. This work
will clarify the essential role of particles in the supply and removal of
nutrients in this quickly changing part of the world. This work will train
undergraduate and graduate students from three public US institutions in the
west coast (University of California, Santa Cruz), northeast (University of
Rhode Island), and southeast (University of Georgia). This project will also
support a journalist to participate in the cruise and pitch, report, and write
stories from the expedition to communicate the results of this collaborative
project to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Amundsen Sea is a classic “warm
Antarctic continental shelf”, where intrusions of warm Circumpolar Deep Water
(CDW) onto the shelf have resulted in the highest glacial basal melt rates on
the Antarctic Margin. The US GEOTRACES program has been funded for a 60-day
research cruise in the Amundsen Sea to bring geochemical tools to study the
biogeochemical consequences of this high melt. Particles are a key parameter for
all GEOTRACES section cruises because of their importance in the supply,
internal cycling, and removal of many trace elements and isotopes (TEIs).
Previous cruises to the Amundsen Sea have suggested that particulate Fe,
abundant in meltwater-influenced regions, may be helping to fuel the high NPP in
the Amundsen. Particles also play an essential role in the removal of dissolved
Fe and other particle-reactive TEIs via scavenging. Indeed, models have shown
that scavenging by particles is by far the largest loss term for dissolved Fe
(dFe), even larger than biological uptake when integrated over the entire water
column. So far, particles have been represented only as particulate organic
matter (POM). The inclusion of other particle types besides POM is likely
important for scavenging: for example, Fe and Mn (oxyhydr)oxides have been shown
to be 1-3 orders of magnitude more efficient at scavenging some TEIs compared to
other particle types, including POM. Thus, the composition of particles, not
just their concentration, is important for the scavenging removal of TEIs. To
address this gap in the understanding of particle biogeochemistry in the
Amundsen Sea, this project has the following three main goals: &lt;br/&gt;1) To
determine the distributions of major and minor phases (particulate organic
carbon, opal, CaCO3, lithogenic particles, Fe oxyhydroxides, Mn oxides), and
trace element and suspended particulate mass concentrations of size fractionated
particles collected by in-situ filtration&lt;br/&gt;2) To determine the
speciation and bioavailability of particulate Fe in the Amundsen Sea to assess
its role as a source and sink of TEIs &lt;br/&gt;3) To examine the factors
affecting the formation, reactivity, and stability of Mn oxides in the Amundsen
Sea&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.