* 2123055
* Parsing the biogeochemistry of marine carbonic anhydrases
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mak Saito, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 883,136.00

Although carbon dioxide (CO2) is found both in the atmosphere and in sea water,
it does not react quickly with water. This presents a problem for marine
organisms that need to wait for CO2 to react with water before using it for
photosynthesis. Therefore, organisms use an enzyme to greatly speed up this
reaction. The enzyme, known as carbonic anhydrase (CA), is so useful that it is
found across the entire tree of life. However, the role of carbonic anhydrase in
the CO2 cycle has been hard to measure. In this project, a team of investigators
from the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will use a combination of
instrument techniques and laboratory experiments to investigate the role of
different types of CA in marine organisms. The team will identify the different
types of CA and their inherent catalytic rates. The team will then identify the
metal cofactors present in these enzymes, which are key for enzyme function.
This work will deepen our understanding of the biochemical basis for carbon
dioxide cycling in marine phytoplankton, and will provide key insights into one
of the most ubiquitous and fastest enzymes on the planet. The team will
collaborate with Professor Indu Sharma and her students from Hampton University
which has just launched a new marine science major program. Team members will
visit Hampton University for a workshop on careers in oceanography. In Year 2,
Professor Sharma and her students will accompany the team on a research
expedition to the Bermuda-Atlantic Time Series and will help design a sampling
campaign focused on the shared research interests of Professor Sharma and the
investigators. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are ubiquitous
enzymes involved in almost every carbon transformation in the marine
environment. Every CA uses a metal cofactor in its active site, and the
expression of CAs is tied to the uptake and utilization of trace metals such as
zinc and cobalt in the surface ocean. We are starting to understand that
organisms express many different forms of CA, all of which serve distinct
physiological roles; exhibit unique catalytic rates; and can use different metal
cofactors at the enzyme active site. In this proposal, the team will exploit
this enzymatic diversity to investigate carbonic anhydrase kinetics in marine
diatoms. By combining an isotope-based enzyme activity assay with quantitative
proteomics, they will document the inherent kinetics of multiple CA isoforms. In
addition, they will identify the metal cofactors associated with the most
abundant CAs, therefore providing a direct linkage between enzyme activity and
trace metal utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.