* 2123997
* Dual gas tracer measurements during the Central Baltic Sea Air-Sea Exchange Experiment (CenBASE)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 260,258.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process that controls the
exchange of gases between the atmosphere and the ocean plays an important role
in regulating global climate, since it influences the amount of atmospheric
greenhouse gases and aerosol precursors. Once in the atmosphere, these
substances influence global and regional climate. Over the past 30 years,
significant advances have been made in understanding this process in the open
ocean away from the coasts, and how wind speed controls this process. These
advances are mainly due to improvements in experimental techniques, and a number
of successful scientific experiments in the open ocean. However, it is not clear
if the same understanding applies to inland seas like the Baltic Sea. There, the
presence of surfactants, which are biological and chemical substances that
concentrate at the sea surface, and the lower salinity, could influence how wind
affects this process in a different way than in the open ocean. In this project,
a team of investigators will conduct an experiment that aims to assess these
processes in the Baltic and compare them to previous experiments in the open
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Central Baltic Sea Air-Sea Exchange Experiment
(CenBASE) is a collaboration between scientists from the US, UK, and Germany to
measure gas exchange rates in the central Baltic Sea on the German research
vessel Elisabeth Mann Borgeseat. This proposal will provide funding to US
scientists to make measurements of two gas tracers used to determine the gas
exchange rate. German scientists are independently funded to measure
surfactants, and make direct flux measurements of carbon dioxide and dimethyl
sulfide, as well as make continuous measurements of pCO2, CH4, N2O, O2, and CO
in the sea surface, and discrete measurements of dissolved inorganic carbon,
total alkalinity, and pH in the water column. A UK colleague will make
measurements of bubble size distribution. The ultimate goals of CenBASE are to
determine whether the relationship between wind speed and gas exchange in the
open ocean also applies to inland seas like the Baltic, shed new light on the
effect of natural surfactants on gas exchange, and examine whether different
techniques for measuring gas exchange are in
agreement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.