* 2123777
* SCH: New Statistical Learning Methods for Brain-Computer Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Jian Kang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,100,000.00

Brain-computer interfaces (BCIs) are an emerging communication and computer
access option for people with severe physical impairments, such as those who are
in a "locked-in" state due to an acquired or congenital disability. One of the
most successful non-invasive BCIs for communication is the P300-BCI design,
named after the brain activity that is called the P300 event-related potential
(ERP). This model works by presenting stimuli (flashing groups of keys) to an
on-screen keyboard. The individual's electroencephalogram (EEG) after each
stimulus is then classified according to whether it contains the ERPs produced
only for the stimulus the user has selected as their target. This ERP-based BCI
design can be calibrated for an individual in a single session. However, the BCI
still takes time for user calibration and the selection speed is slow. The
calibration process has been especially challenging for people without other
communication methods and for children, who have limited attention spans. This
project will create new statistical methods that 1) reduce the time required to
calibrate the BCI for an individual user, 2) reduce the calibration effort for
individual users by leveraging prior knowledge from other BCI users, and 3)
improve the selection speed of the BCI through dynamic adjustments to the
patterns of stimuli. This contribution is significant because the proposed
methods will substantially improve the classification process and communication
speed. The research outcome of this project will also provide new insights for a
better understanding of brain functions and neurobiology of thinking, and
provide valuable information for the future design of the BCI system. The team
will involve undergraduate and graduate students in the project, educate them on
state-of-the-art research in BCI and statistical machine learning, organize
summer training workshops, and develop free software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop a series of statistical methods and study their theoretical
properties for analyzing brain signals from BCI systems and making statistical
inferences about brain activity. The project will focus on three unique but
related problems. First, the project will establish a dynamic statistical
learning framework for analyzing BCI brain signals, including the split-and-
merge Gaussian process for classification, a new logistic stick-breaking process
for synchronization, and the novel information-guided autoencoder for extracting
the latent factors in the signals. Second, the team will address BCI data
integration problems, such as combining EEG from multiple users by utilizing
subgroup identifications to capture the heterogeneity in the brain activity
across the population, and integrating useful prior knowledge, such as brain
functional connectivity networks, into statistical inferences on brain
responses. Finally, the project will develop a reinforcement learning method
that dynamically adjusts the presentation of groups of stimuli by the BCI for
optimal identification of the target stimulus, based on the development of a
Markov decision process and the Q-learning method via deep neural
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.