* 2123900
* Collaborative Research: SCH: A Causal AI Digital Twin Framework to Transform Intensive Care Delivery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Ognjen Gajic, Mayo Clinic Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2025
* USD 784,182.00

This Smart and Connected Health (SCH) award will contribute to the advancement
of the national health and welfare by developing a causal AI digital twin
framework to support critical care delivery and facilitate the realization of
“Healthcare 4.0.” Critical illness from sepsis and pneumonia is the leading
cause of in-hospital mortality and a global health priority. While early
diagnosis and error-free treatment consistently achieve good outcomes, the
progression of critical illness to multiple organ failure often translates to
either death or loss of independence. The COVID-19 pandemics have exposed long
standing deficiencies in critical care knowledge and practice in hospitals
worldwide. The National Academy of Medicine has called for a novel systems
science approach to clinical medicine and new methods and strategies to
facilitate timely and accurate interventions are needed. This project will
provide valuable solutions to critical care delivery by developing a virtual
counterpart to the intensive care unit (ICU) bolstered with decision support to
inform patient health and care delivery at multiple levels. A multidisciplinary
team with engineers, scientists, and clinical professionals has established an
ongoing, successful collaboration, and will be committed to this research. In
addition, through this research, a diverse group of students and clinical
fellows will receive a blend of interdisciplinary training in machine learning,
systems engineering, and critical care medicine. This causal AI digital twin
framework will be a critical leap forward in support of a more efficient medical
education and eventually less error-prone bedside decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this collaborative research is to
tackle the challenges in critical care delivery through three integrated tasks:
(1) learning a causal AI model underpinning the clinical pathway of critically
ill patients, (2) investigation of optimal treatment decisions for critically
ill patients in the first 24 hours, and (3) enabling system-level interventions
through a digital twin framework. Supported by expert knowledge, the clinical
pathway of critically ill sepsis patients will be represented by causal Bayesian
networks. Computationally efficient approaches will be developed to learn the
networks given high-dimensional and unobservable variables. Reinforcement
learning approaches will be developed to investigate the optimal treatment for
individual patients in the early stage of patient care. The Systems Engineering
Initiative for Patient Safety (SEIPS) 2.0 model will be adapted to the ICU
system to identify the principal factors affecting critical care delivery.
Lastly, to enable the analysis of the patient-level and the process-level
interactions of critical care delivery, the hybridization structure and design
between agent-based simulation and discrete-event simulation will be
investigated, thereby achieving a reliable hybrid simulation model. The
application of this research is expected to enable an ICU digital twin platform
that supports the bedside clinicians, educators, and hospital administrators to
choose optimal strategies for critical care delivery, thereby mitigating risk of
real-life patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.