* 2123683
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Optimal Desensitization Protocol in Support of a Kidney Paired Donation (KPD) System
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Naoru Koizumi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 677,361.00

This Smart and Connected Health (SCH) award will contribute to improved patient
access to kidney transplantation by studying the inclusion of a personalized
antibody removal regimen known as “desensitization” into a kidney paired
donation (KPD) system. Kidney transplantation is the definitive, gold standard
treatment that provides the best quality of life for end-stage renal disease
patients. The treatment, however, is not accessible to many due to constraints
such as blood type or human leukocyte antigen tissue type incompatibility
between transplant candidates and their kidney donors. To overcome these
incompatibilities, the transplant community has devised several novel schemes
including KPD and desensitization. KPD allows patients with a willing - but
incompatible - living donor to swap their incompatible donor with a more
compatible donor, also in the KPD donor-patient pool, while the desensitization
procedure removes antibodies from transplant recipients’ blood streams prior to
surgery to reduce the risk of potential rejection of donated kidneys. Currently,
both of these schemes have limitations. To overcome the limitations, prominent
transplant experts have been advocating for combining the two schemes. This
project aims to develop stochastic simulation and optimization-based algorithms
for matching donors and recipients in a KPD system with desensitization therapy.
In contrast to a conventional KPD system where transplant candidates simply swap
their incompatible donors for more compatible donors in the system, the
envisioned KPD systems would offer patients the additional option of undergoing
a personalized desensitization therapy along with the option of swapping donors
to significantly increase their likelihood of a match. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is to develop an integrated dynamic stochastic simulation-
optimization model comprised of: (i) an optimization strategy to identify the
optimal personalized protocol for desensitization; (ii) improved
robust/stochastic optimization methods to integrate the desensitization therapy
into the KPD matching; and (iii) a decision-support tool to help patients decide
whether to accept the desensitization regimen with a less compatible kidney, or
wait for a more compatible one. The output of the integrated dynamic stochastic
simulation-optimization model will include the suggested paired matchings from
the combinatorial and simulation optimization algorithms, the realized matchings
based on simulated patient behavior, and statistical estimates of key
performance system metrics. In the last year of the project, the team will
tailor the algorithms for the George Washington University Transplant Institute
(GWTI) and Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) Health Hume-Lee Transplant
Center, which are interested in developing a joint local KPD
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.