* 2123243
* Expanding the functions of a 57 codon recoded E.coli genome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* George Church, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,996,695.00

A fundamental and highly conserved code is embedded in all genomes and underlies
biological life. This code is known as the ‘standard genetic code’, which
defines how genetic information translates amino acid building blocks into
proteins during their biological manufacturing process. Harnessing the
universality of the standard genetic code has revolutionized the material, food,
chemical, and energy industry. Although minor deviations from the standard code
exist in a few organisms, the standard genetic code has withstood nearly 3.5
billion years of genetic drift by being highly conserved across all domains of
life. The genetic codon is a triplet unit of a genetic material (DNA or RNA)
that can define a protein building block. The mapping of 64 triplet codons to
the 20 canonical amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, results in the
same amino acid being encoded by multiple synonymous codons. By rationally
building synthetic genomes in living cells, with a reduced set of synonymous
codons, the liberated codons can be reassigned to incorporate non-natural amino
acids into proteins. By systematic codon replacement, researchers are
progressing towards the final assembly of a computationally designed bacterial
genome that relies on 57 codons instead of the universal 64 codons. In this
project, the fully assembled 57-codon synthetic bacteria cell will be explored
and further modified for safe bio-containment and genetic isolation to prevent
exchange of genetic information with the environment. The researchers will also
build an open-access database to enable streamlined computational approaches for
non-canonical amino acid incorporation. As a form of outreach, the researchers
will organize a two-day open webinar series annually with philosophers, early-
career researchers, STEM graduate students, and scientific experts engaged in
synthetic cell engineering projects globally to discuss future perspectives and
ethical issues associated with synthetic cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
standard genetic code maps the 64 triplet codons in the genome with the 20
canonical amino acids. Translating the information encoded in the standard
genetic code to proteins further involves adaptor tRNA molecules, ribosomes, and
amino-acyl tRNA synthetases. Researchers are progressing towards assembling a
57-codon Escherichia coli genome by replacing seven codons that encode the
canonical amino acids serine, leucine, alanine and the amber stop codon with
their synonymous alternatives. The liberated codons will incorporate multiple
non-canonical amino acids and establish biocontainment for engineered genetic
information. The researchers will gain fundamental insights on cellular
plasticity by studying the adaptations of the proteome towards long-term non-
canonical amino acid dependence. The study will also provide biological insights
into genetic code evolution by tracking for processes such as codon-capture and
ambiguous decoding during the long-term adaptation and dependence of the recoded
genome to non-canonical amino acids. The project will also build an open-access
database for genetic code expansion and make available computational tools to
facilitate the research with non-canonical amino acids. In sum, it is expected
that this project will provide new tools and knowledge for academic and
industrial efforts related to genetic code and synthetic cell engineering while
simultaneously facilitating the safe use of synthetic biological systems and
communicating these aspects to a wide range of researchers and STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.