* 2123516
* Role of electric fields and a dynamic local environment in protein-RNA molecular recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rodrigo Noriega, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 07/31/2024
* USD 492,516.00

Ribonucleic acids (RNA) are biopolymers with substantial amounts of negative
electrical charge, and the surfaces of proteins that bind them often contain
amino acid residues with electrical charge that can help attract, direct, and
bind their targets. Importantly, these are large and flexible molecules so
fluctuations in their structure and local environment play a significant role in
their function. This project seeks to understand how the process of molecular
recognition between RNA and proteins is influenced by their electrostatic
interactions and by the dynamic environment in which binding occurs by
developing a multimodal instrumentation that combines a variety of spectroscopic
techniques. This research will train students in a multidisciplinary skillset at
the interface of physical chemistry and biophysics, with broader impacts that
include the development of transferrable methods for quantitative
characterization of biomolecular interactions. In this project, scalable and
quantitative experiment kits for remote learning will be designed and
implemented with the goal of expanding hands-on, experience-based education
beyond typical teaching laboratory settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions
between proteins and RNA show significant diversity – proteins can recognize
their RNA targets in ways that are specific to their sequence, to their
structure, to both, or to neither. To uncover the molecular-scale mechanisms
that tune substrate recruitment, complex stability, and cooperative target
recognition by multiple protein domains, this project integrates electrochemical
and spectroscopic tools to measure the dynamic signatures of protein-RNA
binding, their conformational fluctuations, and their response to non-
equilibrium perturbations – all under the effects of a controlled electrostatic
environment. RNA substrates will be localized at an electrode surface to tune
their electrostatic interactions with proteins in solution, and the resulting
protein-RNA complexes will be probed with a multimodal instrument that combines
electrochemistry with mid-infrared plasmonics, ultrafast multi-channel
fluorescence, and pump-probe spectroscopies. The outcomes of this research will
reveal the way electrostatic interactions and fast dynamics of biomolecular
structure and solvation affect the thermodynamics and kinetics of formation,
stability, and dissociation of protein-RNA complexes. This project is supported
by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.