* 2123637
* Nanoscale structure and dynamics of nucleosome arrays assembled on DNA templates with physiologically relevant sequences
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Yuri Lyubchenko, University of Nebraska Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 649,999.00

Chromatin dynamics define how chromatin assembles into higher order structures
and its function. However, molecular details of the assembly mechanism remain
unexplained, including the role of DNA sequence in chromatin organization,
specifically the interactions of nucleosomes. The research will address this gap
in knowledge by examining the effects of DNA sequence on the interplay between
chromatin structure, dynamics and function. This project also facilitates
integration of scientific and technological advances in graduate and
undergraduate student education. For example, the concepts of DNA and single
molecule biophysics are incorporated into a biophysical chemistry course, and
the research offers training opportunities for students at all levels in the
university. The PI is also a member of the state EPSCoR committee and
participates in the Young Nebraska Scientists (YNS) program that provides STEM
enrichment activities for middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interaction between nucleosomes is a fundamental
property that defines the assembly and function of chromatin. The central
hypothesis examined in this project is that DNA sequence is a critical factor in
the interactions between nucleosomes and their assembly into higher order
structures. Nanoscale structural studies will be conducted by single-molecule
high-speed atomic force microscopy (AFM) to address the role of DNA sequence in
canonical nucleosome interactions, in the conformational dynamics of centromere
nucleosomes, and in the assembly of higher order structures of canonical and
centromere nucleosome arrays. The outcomes will advance the knowledge of
chromatin structure and dynamics at different levels of organization and yield
new insights into function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Genetic Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.