* 2123946
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Next Generations of Wireless  Telecommunication (WiTeC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Chunting Mi, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,712.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Covid-19 pandemic reinforced the need and importance of telecommunications more
than any other event in the history of mankind. It, single-handedly, kept
businesses, governments, academia and societies running in spite of the mandated
social isolations and quarantines. The need for the human race to survive in the
face of adversities and natural calamities continues to evolve where a world of
ubiquitous connectivity becomes a necessity. From precision agriculture to
artificial intelligence driven precision medicine, from holographic
teleportation to space connectivity, it is important to create a world which
pushes the boundaries of our current telecommunication technologies so that we
can survive the next pandemic and/or calamity better and stronger. 1.5 billion
children required online education during the COVID-19 pandemic and 51% of
Americans worked from home in 2020. However, 44 million households in America
and about 40% each of African Americans, Hispanics and Native Americans residing
on tribal lands do not have access to broadband services owing to the lack of
access and affordability. It is not surprising that the pandemic has taken its
most severe toll on the socio-economic and mental well-being of these ethnic
classes. Without access to online healthcare and government mandates and
notifications about the spread of the virus, the Navajo Nation had the highest
per capita infection rate in the country and the highest job-losses occurred in
the African American community. Exposure, affordability and literacy in
technology can bridge the gap. The goal of this planning grant is to understand
the needs of these communities and thereby design impactful telecommunications
systems to help level the playing field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WiTeC ERC
aims to amalgamate a convergent research team from across the nation to
successfully create the next generation of telecommunication with omnipresent
connectivity and unprecedented reliability and latency -leaps beyond what
current telecommunication systems can offer. It will be a hub for breakthrough
technological research challenges like Tbps-level of data rates and microsecond
orders of delay that even current millimeter wave technology cannot achieve. It
will serve as a platform for discourse on futuristic and widely variant use
cases, ranging from precision agriculture to CubeSat (cubic millimeter sized
satellites) communication that can provide connectivity even in the remotest
part of rural America. The intellectual merit of WiTec will lie in the
fundamental research challenges it will undertake, namely (i) exploring radio
technologies for ubiquitous connectivity with unprecedented speed, reliability
and latency, (ii) innovating greener and power efficient future
telecommunication systems and (iii) novel ways of utilizing pervasive artificial
intelligence to build a telecommunication system that is smarter and more robust
than ever before. The Center will also be the seat for developing groundbreaking
telecommunications research test-beds in novel radio
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.