* 2123470
* Elucidating the interplay between two chromatin regulators HDA8 and ELP3 in dynamic control of primary and secondary metabolic networks
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ying Li, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,002,041.00

This project will yield knowledge on how plants coordinate metabolic networks to
produce specialized metabolites that facilitate plant interactions with their
environment, ranging from attracting pollinators and seed dispersers to
protecting themselves from biotic and abiotic stresses. To date, it remains
largely unknown how metabolic networks are regulated to balance the needs for
maintaining essential functions and producing specialized metabolites. This
project will shed light on chromatin regulatory mechanisms that coordinate
metabolic networks to produce volatile secondary metabolites, by testing the
hypothesis that an interplay between two chromatin regulators controls the
dynamic metabolic flux through primary and secondary metabolic pathways. The
obtained knowledge has practical implications for both agriculture and ecology,
with potential to improve plant reproductive success, plant defense and stress
responses, crop nutritional value, and yield of high value phytochemicals. This
project will provide multidisciplinary training for the next generation of
scientists, including minorities and high school students, in STEM research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary studies using Petunia hybrida flowers as a
model system led to the hypothesis that Histone deacetylase 8 (PhHDA8) works
with the histone acetyltransferase PhELP3 to regulate primary and secondary
metabolic networks responsible for the biosynthesis and emission of volatile
secondary compounds. To test this hypothesis, the following research objectives
will be performed: (1) determining the impact of PhHDA8 and PhELP3 on dynamics
of primary and secondary metabolic networks via metabolic profiling; (2)
deciphering the genome-wide targets of PhHDA8 and PhELP3 in primary and
secondary metabolic networks using functional genomics approaches; and (3)
elucidating the molecular mechanisms coordinating PhHDA8 and PhELP3 activities
through biochemical approaches. This work will provide important mechanistic
insights into the mode of action and interaction of histone acetylation
proteins. The obtained knowledge will have a far-reaching impact on
understanding chromatin level regulation underlying the chemical diversity found
in nature and airborne communications in the plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.