* 2123085
* Coastal Sustainability: Clean, Safe, Smart, and Equitable Communities
* O/D,OIA
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2021
* John Coley, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 10/31/2021
* USD 99,316.00

This project will organize and host a virtual workshop to identify the
parameters for a potential future convergence accelerator track on nature-based
solutions to support coastal sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
communities and economies are concentrated along the world’s coastlines. Yet
ongoing changes in climate continue to drive complex interactions between
geophysical and social-ecological systems that amplify environmental threats
facing coastal communities and their economies. Sustaining human coastal
communities has become an urgent societal priority. The Coastal Sustainability
workshop will leverage nature-based solutions and develop a framework that
identifies the interactions and "friction points" to determine what suite of
nature-based solutions are best suited for a given coastal community and what
the barriers are to their implementation. The workshop organizers intend to
support an inclusive process that considers the existing inequities in the
hidden coast – non-oceanfront regions where rural, minority, and/or impoverished
communities reside. The goal is to shape the co-development of convergent
research that is stakeholder-driven, inclusive, and focused on implementation of
sustainability solutions that promote clean, safe, smart, and equitable coastal
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework that the workshop seeks to
create will be shaped by substantial stakeholder engagement during collaborative
discussion and analysis of factors (including Ecological and Geophysical,
Cognitive and Social, Technological, and Economic). The goal is to identify and
create opportunities within a landscape of uncertainty: in management practice,
in scientific and societal understanding, and in cognition of threats and
opportunities. The workshop will collaboratively identify the basis of
uncertainties around development and implementation of nature-based coastal
sustainability solutions as well as mechanisms for overcoming them. This process
will facilitate the identification, assessment, and optimization of viable and
implementable sustainability solutions across a variety of coastal communities.
The synthesis report that will result from the workshop will provide a blueprint
that outlines the specific inflection points where investment in convergent
research will be most effective in accelerating sustainable outcomes for
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nature-based solutions are most likely to be
effective when communities co-create them in collaboration with expert
practitioners, ensuring that the solutions are tailored to meet specific
community needs. This workshop plans to actively engage with diverse community
organizations, government officials, and broad range of technical experts across
many disciplines to ensure that the resulting framework is inclusive of all
necessary voices. Diverse groups have been shown to outperform homogeneous
groups in problem solving and assembling diverse stakeholders is expected to
improve the creativity of the solutions explored and create new avenues for
scientific collaboration. By bringing together individuals and organizations
from around the country that do not typically interact directly, this workshop
seeks to facilitate relationship-building and partnerships that has the
potential to extend beyond the Convergence Accelerator topic ideation process,
helping to also advance the science and practice of coastal
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.