* 2123061
* Mechanics of the Formation of Cortical Folding Patterns in the Developing Human Brain
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Weiying Dai, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2024
* USD 587,853.00

This project aims to understand the mechanics of growth and folding of the human
brain at the early fetal stages of development. This work will advance the
fundamental understanding of the relationship between brain folding, brain
connectivity, and brain function. Brain folding provides important information
about both normal and abnormal development of the human brain. Currently, the
development of folds is based on simple simulation models that do not reflect
the complicated structure of the human brain. This research will use advanced
brain imaging and innovative computational simulations to elucidate how the
human brain grows and folds during the early development of a normal fetal
brain. The results of this work will characterize folding in normal brain
development. Future studies may reveal the origin of brain disorders that have
structural discrepancies and connectivity disruptions such as autism and
schizophrenia. The outcome of this research will promote the progress of health
science and benefit national health. In addition to the scientific outcomes,
this research will be integrated into a range of educational and outreach
programs aimed at attracting underrepresented groups to engineering, improving
undergraduate and graduate learning on biomechanics and mechanobiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this research is to discover
the roles of differential tangential growth and neural wiring on the
morphogenesis of the developing human brain, and their contributions to the
variability and regularity of folding patterns. The research will contribute an
in-depth understanding of the underlying mechanism that forms the secondary and
tertiary folding patterns in the developing human brain on a comprehensive human
brain scale. This research will use an innovative image-based multiscale
modeling approach to the simulation of brain development, linking the mechanics
at the tissue and organ level with the effect of axonal fiber bundles on the
cellular level. The outcomes of this study are expected to fundamentally advance
the field of brain folding mechanics and lay a foundation for investigating
abnormal brain folding processes for brain disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.