* 2123354
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Dissolved concentrations, isotopes, and colloids of the bioactive trace metals
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Timothy Conway, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2024
* USD 277,791.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes (TEIs) in the
oceans. Many trace metals such as iron are essential for life and thus
considered nutrients for phytoplankton growth, with trace metal cycling being
especially important for influencing carbon cycling in the iron-limited Southern
Ocean, where episodic supply of iron from a range of different external sources
is important. The primary goal of this project is to measure the dissolved
concentrations, size partitioning, and dissolved isotope signature of Fe on a
transect of water-column stations throughout the Amundsen Sea and surrounding
region of the Antarctic Margin, as part of the GP17-ANT Expedition. The
secondary goal of this project is to analyze the concentrations and size
partitioning of the trace metals manganese, zinc, copper, cadmium, nickel, and
lead in all water-column samples, measure the isotope ratios of zinc, cadmium,
nickel, and copper in a subset of water column samples, and measure the Fe
isotopic signature of aerosols, porewaters, and particles. Observations from
this project will be incorporated into regional and global biogeochemistry
models to assess TEI cycling within the Amundsen Sea and implications for the
wider Southern Ocean. This project spans three institutions, four graduate
students, undergraduate students, and will provide ultrafiltered samples and
data to other PIs as service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US GEOTRACES GP17 ANT
expedition, planned for austral summer 2023/2024 aims to determine the
distribution and cycling of trace elements and their isotopes in the Amundsen
Sea Sector (100-135°W) of the Antarctic Margin. The cruise will follow the
Amundsen Sea ‘conveyor belt’ by sampling waters coming from the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current onto the continental shelf, including near the Dotson and
Pine Island ice shelves, the productive Amundsen Sea Polynya (ASP), and
outflowing waters. Episodic addition of dissolved Fe and other TEIs from dust,
ice-shelves, melting ice, and sediments drive seasonal primary productivity and
carbon export over the Antarctic shelf and offshore into Southern Ocean.
Seasonal coastal polynyas such as the highly productive ASP thus act as key
levers on global carbon cycling. However, field observations of TEIs in such
regions remain scarce, and biogeochemical cycling processes are poorly captured
in models of ocean biogeochemistry. The investigators will use their combined
analytical toolbox, in collaboration with the diagnostic chemical tracers and
regional models of other funded groups to address four main objectives: 1) What
is the relative importance of different sources in supplying Fe and other TEIs
to the ASP? 2) What is the physiochemical speciation of this Fe, and its
potential for transport? 3) How do biological uptake, scavenging and
regeneration in the ASP influence TEI distributions, stoichiometry, and nutrient
limitation? 4) What is the flux and signature of TEIs transported offshore to
the ACC and Southern Ocean?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.