* 2123440
* HDR DSC: AI across the statewide curriculum
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Aavudai Anandhi Swamy, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,110,554.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is reshaping the society we live in a profound
manner. AI is changing how a nation protects its homeland and population,
manages its natural resources and infrastructure, diagnoses and treats diseases,
travel, communicates and creates artistic works, etc. AI has the potential to
generate tremendous benefits for the society and people. However, the future AI
workforce must represent the diversity of racial, ethnic, gender-identity and
socioeconomic backgrounds reflective of the nation as a whole, otherwise, an AI-
enabled future society could exacerbate existing disparities and benefit just a
few, at the expense of too many. To address such a grand challenge, this DSC
award is to train a diverse workforce capable of integrating AI equitably across
a broad range of disciplines. The project provides unique AI training to
students from any discipline using an approach that integrates classroom
education in AI fundamentals, applications and ethics with real-world case
studies and research experiences spanning the undergraduate curriculum with a
focus on enhancing diversity. By recruiting and retaining historically
underrepresented minorities in AI-related education and research, this project
helps ensure that a diversity of backgrounds and opinions are included at all
levels of future AI developments and applications, so the AI-enabled society can
broadly benefit everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of educating
a diverse next-generation AI workforce, this project develops a vertically-
integrated curriculum in which students from outside traditional computer-
science fields can learn AI-related concepts, skills and AI applications to
address critical emerging problems in oneâ€™s field. Over 250 undergraduate
fellowships will be created to help eliminate or lessen financial barriers to
education. Further, between a research university and a historically black
college, a strategic partnership provides flexible avenues to engage diverse
undergraduates in AI-related education and research. This project develops a
core curriculum covering AI fundamentals, ethics and discipline-specific
applications that can be deployed across traditional university disciplines and
leverages distance-learning to enable students to participate on their own
schedule from anywhere with internet. The award also provides unprecedented
access to some of the most advanced computational resources in the world while
maintaining the flexibility to adapt to a rapidly-changing field by providing
financial assistance supporting the development of new courses and undergraduate
research in academic, industry and community studies. It is expected that this
approach of integrating "AI across the curriculum" will equip all interested
students to equitably engage AI in their chosen
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.