* 2123216
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the role of topography and magma properties on dike pathways beneath stratovolcanoes using field data, analogue experiments, and modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrew Harp, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 54,395.00

Volcanic eruptions are a major natural hazard in the United States, where there
are about 169 potentially active volcanoes, many of which are located in areas
with rapidly expanding populations. Although monitoring volcanic unrest is
undoubtedly important to eruption forecasting, accurate interpretation of
monitoring data and prediction of future volcano behavior require a scientific
understanding of the processes that transport magma out of storage regions in
the Earthâ€™s crust and towards the surface. This project will enhance knowledge
about what causes magma to move in different directions through the subsurface
under large stratovolcanoes such as Mount Rainier and Mount Hood. The work will
test how the physical properties of magma and the size of the volcanic edifice
influence eruption location, which is currently poorly understood. The project
supports interdisciplinary training of graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as the development of educational materials that will be implemented in
university classrooms and made available to the public for broad classroom and
online educational use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this
project is to determine what controls the pathways of magmatic dikes under
stratovolcanoes. Stress perturbations in the crust beneath a stratovolcano are
thought to impact the propagation direction of ascending dikes, potentially
arresting propagation or deflecting dikes toward the flanks and causing
eruptions at lower elevations that can be hazardous to local communities. The
proposed three-year project will employ a synergistic approach that integrates
geologic field data, analogue gelatin experiments, and numerical models to
investigate how the stress field generated by the load of stratovolcanoes and
variations in magma properties impact the geometry and propagation of dikes
ascending from crustal sources. The proposed work includes geologic mapping and
sample collection from the radial dike sequence exposed at Summer Coon, an
eroded stratovolcano in Colorado, to measure dike outcrop geometries, flow
fabrics, and physical magma properties like density and vesicularity. Using a
novel experimental setup and input parameters constrained by field data, gelatin
experiments will include injecting magma analogues beneath a simulated edifice
to investigate the impacts of variable edifice height/slopes, magma densities,
and dike injection depths on dike propagation. Finally, field and experimental
results will inform new numerical models designed to evaluate crustal stresses
beneath a volcanic edifice and investigate how in-plane dike propagation
directions vary as a function of edifice geometry, magma buoyancy, initial magma
pressures, and dike injection depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.