* 2123199
* Collaborative Research: Development of a New Instrument for Underway High-Resolution Estimates of Aquatic Gross Primary Production
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* David Nicholson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2025
* USD 172,577.00

Photosynthesis is arguably the most critical biological process of our climate
system. It is also central to the trophic and metabolic states of ecosystems.
Refining estimates of photosynthesis is therefore critical to our understanding
of biogeochemistry and the global climate. Spatial variability of photosynthesis
is difficult to resolve due to limitations in technology; the development of
high-resolution instrumentation is needed to close this gap. To characterize the
geographical distribution of marine photosynthesis, this research will develop
an instrument for underway shipboard measurements of aquatic photosynthesis by
spectral monitoring of dissolved oxygen (O2) isotopes. Named GOPTICAS (Gross
Oxygen Production by Triple Isotope Cavity ringdown laser Absorption
Spectroscopy), this instrument will allow for high-resolution observations of
photosynthetic O2 evolution, or gross primary production (GPP) by monitoring the
dissolved O2 triple isotope signature by wavelength-scanned cavity ring-down
absorption spectroscopy (CRDS). The new instrument will extract dissolved O2
into a dried gas stream, then convert it to water (H2O) in a fuel cell
downstream of which the isotopic signature of the produced water (H2O) will be
monitored with a CRDS. GOPTICAS will 1) provide high-resolution, near real-time
and precise mapping of GPP rates to guide sampling strategies, 2) allow for
simple field deployment, and finally 3) can be duplicated by other research
groups interested in GPP in marine and freshwater ecosystems. Measurements
directly in the field will also limit artifacts associated with sample handling
and long-term preservation. The instrument will be tested on short cruises
aboard the R/V Shearwater in Pamlico Sound and in the Gulf Stream, and on
Northeast Shelf LTER cruises. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GOPTICAS will improve the
characterization of the biogeography of marine photosynthesis, a microbial
process with profound biogeochemical implications. Once developed and validated,
GOPTICAS will help constrain the global carbon budget and ultimately improve our
mechanistic understanding of the feedbacks and coupling between photosynthesis
and climate and, in the process, inform and challenge models of ocean
biogeochemistry. Finally, this study will be used as a platform to 1) broaden
participation in STEM among a diverse population of High School and
Undergraduate students through creation of research-based, experiential learning
opportunities in engineering and environmental science, 2) teach our lab members
how to communicate climate science to the public, and 3) collectively engage
students and the public in a discourse about climate change, one of the most
pressing issues facing our society in the 21st
century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.