* 2123568
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Active vision during natural behavior: More than meets the eye?
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Daniel Butts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 87,861.00

Vision is a process by which the image falling on the eyes is processed by
specialized neurons within visual brain areas. Neurons in the early stages of
visual processing convey information about small bits of the visual scene, like
pixel-detectors in a camera. For example, a neuron in visual cortex might
respond best to a small white bar at a particular location in visual space.
Should this example neuron respond differently when the white bar is part of an
object that we have seen before, or one that we are moving towards? Psychology
might suggest so, but for almost 60 years, most scientists studying the neural
basis of visual perception have implicitly assumed that responses of neurons in
visual cortex depend only on the visual image falling on the eyes. It is
increasingly clear that neurons in the visual cortex do indeed care about
behavioral context – as well as the state of the brain itself. These external,
internal, and contextual factors influence how neurons process the visual scene.
Exactly how much these “non-visual” factors influence visual cortical neurons
remains a significant open question that this project aims to
address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The experiments will record from neurons in the
visual cortex of ferrets as they freely explore a naturalistic environment.
Using position and eye-tracking cameras, the project will both recreate a movie
of what the ferret saw within the environment, and track other observable
variables related to behavior. The movie will then be replayed to the ferret
while it is anesthetized, thus directly measuring any differences in neuronal
responses to the same visual stimulation in these two very different contexts.
Analysis will compare the physiological quality and statistical properties of
neuronal responses across naturalistic and anesthetized conditions to quantify
the contribution of natural context to neuronal responses. Results will relate
the differences in the freely moving context to specific sources, like motor
actions such as eye and head movements, familiarity with specific visual
features, and their behavioral relevance. Experiments will inform models for how
these sources influence neuronal activity, setting the stage for understanding
the function of non-retinal inputs for sensory perception. The project will
provide a foundation for long-term studies of natural vision.&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the
Directorates for Biology (BIO), Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.