* 2123189
* Development of an In Situ Pore Water Sampler for Scientific Ocean Drilling
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Charles Wheat, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 592,667.00

Sediment pore waters, which are waters that exist between sediment particles,
serve as the foundation for many significant discoveries through scientific
ocean drilling. Yet, the same technique used to extract pore waters employed 50
years ago remains today, even though known sampling artifacts exist. The
proposed project will develop, test, and deliver a novel fluid sampler that will
provide pristine in situ pore waters for a range of chemical, microbial, and
dissolved gas analyses. The novel sampler will utilize inert materials to
preserve pristine fluids, account for sampling procedures that minimize
artifacts, and be operational within the context of standard procedures on a
scientific drilling vessel. In addition, the sampler will also provide new
functionality, suitable for conducting manipulative experiments to, for example,
assess microbial metabolic rate and function and collect fluids in sandy
sediment. This new capability represents one of the needed innovations that will
provide new data types to characterize and understand a broad range of
interdisciplinary-linked processes in deep-sea sediment. Elucidating such
processes will help to achieve goals and objectives outlined in the 2050
Scientific Framework, a document that was developed by an international
consortium of scientists for seafloor scientific drilling and was well received
within the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed in
situ fluid sampler will take advantage of a small space within the cutting shoe
of the Advanced Piston Corer (APC), which is a standard tool for recovering
shallow (&lt; several hundred meters) sediment. The proposed sampler will be
able to collect up to 52 ml of fluid within 15 minutes after the APC is injected
into the sediment. To achieve this rate of fluid collection we will test various
components of the sampler (shear pins, trigger spring, piston spring, and frit)
in the context of sediment composition and porosity in a laboratory setting.
Results from these tests will guide a 7-day (1 day of transit) coring operation
to assess performance and to compare chemical results with those from Rhizon-
recovered pore waters from a variety of natural sediment types. Additional
modifications and/or laboratory tests will be conducted prior to the production
of four samplers for use with the US-IODP scientific drilling program, thus
expanding the capability of shipboard science. The proposed sampler will support
a new type of fluid collection that will improve our understanding of
biogeochemical processes (e.g., eliminating the Ca and alkalinity artifact in
carbonate-rich sediment), provide fluids to test the potential for two different
microbial populations (free-floating and grain-attached), allow one to prime the
sampler with biocide, amendment, or enrichment solutions for microbial studies,
or collect fluids for dissolved gas analysis. These new capabilities will
provide new data types that will be necessary to achieve the goals and
objectives in the 2050 Scientific Framework, an international guide to
scientific priorities that can be achieved with seafloor scientific
drilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.