* 2123321
* HDR DSC: National Data Mine Network
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Katherine Ensor, American Statistical Association
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The data science community has a timely opportunity to reimagine the impact of
the data sciences on the economy, and to improve outcomes for communities, by
ensuring that students at Minority Serving Institutions have access to cutting
edge courses, research opportunities, and industry partnerships. In 2018, Purdue
University established The Data Mine, a university-wide undergraduate learning
community that teaches data science to participating undergraduates from all
majors, regardless of their previous experience. It will scale naturally to a
nationwide model because it is accessible, supportive, but also offers genuine
data science challenges that motivate students to learn the required
competencies. The National Data Mine Network (NDMN) will directly fund 300
undergraduate students at Minority Serving Institutions with research stipends
(100 stipends per year), administered directly to students by the American
Statistical Association. The leadership team leverages collaborative strengths
of the American Statistical Association, the Math Alliance, Purdue University,
American University, and the Atlanta University Center Data Science Initiative.
The students will use high-performance computing to solve data-driven challenges
that arise in every sector of industry, including biomedical engineering,
healthcare engineering, image processing, manufacturing, supply chain
management, and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable
undergraduate students to learn data science with hands-on work, in research or
data science projects informed by industry partners. Each participating
institution will have a node led by faculty members and 3-4 undergraduate
students. All faculty members will share their best practices about mentoring
research, how to establish mutually beneficial relationships with industry
partners in their community, and how to develop institutional mechanics to
support the work and to build data science programs. Some of the key
deliverables of this HDR DSC project will be: well-documented projects for
courses and for student research, a robust online training resource of data
science projects, an instructor handbook that accompanies the data science
projects, a development curriculum for the faculty to grow their own skills, and
promising best practices on how faculty can develop relationships with mentors
from industry for real-world data-driven projects. A key benefit of the NDMN to
faculty is the ability to inject data science skills into their careers, to gain
knowledge and expertise about how to carry out hands-on, data-intensive research
projects, as well as the potential to develop new industry partnerships, while
also building their own data science courses and programs. Another key impact
will be a tightly knit community supporting a new generation of 300 diverse
undergraduate trainees in the data sciences. A third key impact will be a
nationwide network of faculty who work together to build these data science
courses, programs, and industry partnerships at Minority Serving
Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.