* 2123545
* Collaborative Research: an autonomous profiling vehicle for concurrent acoustic, visual and environmental measurements in the mesopelagic ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Warren, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 118,677.00

The mesopelagic region of the ocean, between 200 and 1500 meters deep, is home
to a complex mixture of physical processes, biological environments and animal
communities that interact over a range of temporal and spatial scales. The
mesopelagic remains poorly sampled due to the inherent limitations and
asynchrony of measurements collected with ship-based instruments, acoustic
surveys, remotely operated and towed vehicle systems. This project will develop
a novel autonomous robotic instrument to collect physical, visual and acoustic
data that will provide concurrent environmental, abundance, taxonomy and size
structure data for animals ranging from 100 microns to 10 centimeters in size.
The suite of sensors, coupled with a non-disruptive propulsion system and the
operational flexibility of the new system will address critical knowledge gaps
in our understanding of the ecology of the ocean's midwater zone. The vehicle
will be tested on several cruises in the North Atlantic. The researchers will
leverage the ongoing Bermuda Atlantic Time Series (BATS) datasets for cross-
comparison and validation. This project will also create research opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students at the University of Rhode Island, Stony
Brook University and the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS). Public
outreach will be facilitated through a partnership with the William M. Davies,
Jr. Career and Technical High School, the Rhode Island Teacher-At-Sea program
and the BIOS Mid-Atlantic Robotics IN Education (MARINE) program. These
activities will develop activities to support STEM education and Next Generation
Science Standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will be a
stealthy vertical profiling vehicle. The sensor suite will consist of steerable
multiple-frequency (38/70/200 kHz) broadband acoustics, stereo low light
imaging, an Underwater Vision Profiler (UVP6), and environmental sensors for
temperature, salinity, oxygen, chlorophyll, turbidity, beam attenuation and
photosynthetically active radiation (PAR). Vertical propulsion will be achieved
by an internal pumped volume ballasting system, which will create minimal
disturbance around the vehicle to reduce avoidance behaviors known to bias
observations from net tows and thruster-powered vehicles. Low light cameras will
enable taxonomic documentation and size discrimination of larger organisms and
gelatinous animals not quantitatively captured in net tows. The concurrent
acoustics and environmental data will provide more complete habitat information
than is possible with shipboard systems alone. With these capabilities the
instrument will occupy an unfilled niche for sensing in the
mesopelagic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.