* 2123549
* LANDInG-PRFP: A Postdoctoral Research Fellows Program with the Leadership Academy and Network for Diversity and Inclusion in the Geosciences
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Stephanie Goodwin, American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 864,391.00

The AGU LANDInG Post-Doctoral Research Program will extend and leverage the the
impact of LANDInG (American Geophysical Union Leadership Academy and Network for
Diversity and Inclusion in Geoscience; NSF GOLD-EN RCN, ICER 2036823) to offer
targeted DEI professional development and mentoring opportunities for NSF’s
Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellows (OCE-PRF) and to NSF’s Office of
Polar Programs Postdoctoral Research Fellows (OPP-PRF). Specifically, this
program will engage a total of sixty-five OCE and OPP Postdoctoral Fellows in a
2-year, cohort-based community of professional development and mentoring
experiences to build their capacity for becoming diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) champions. Participants in LANDInG’s Postdoctoral Research
Fellowship Program (LANDInG-PRFP)— a hybrid (virtual and in-person) series of
workshops, webinars, meet-ups and conference activities— will benefit from a
curated experience with LANDInG’s Community of Practice (CoP) and Leadership
Academy resources. Comprehensive, evidence-based and structured learning
opportunities that draw from these resources will be coupled with exposure to
DEI mentorship models and engaged participation in DEI-related conferences
activities. Across the program, activities will maximize participants’
development of DEI awareness, knowledge, and skills. Distinctive aspects of
experiences provided to postdocs under this proposal include: engagement with a
structured, evidence-based DEI professional development curriculum (e.g.,
readings, webinars, discussion panels, etc.); participation in DEI programming
at the biennial Oceans Sciences Meeting, AGU annual meeting, and diversity-
focused geoscience conferences; formal and informal DEI mentorship opportunities
through networking with LANDInG’s DEI leaders and scholars; recognition of
participation, including a certificate of completion; and visibility in virtual
and print media through AGU platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in
LANDInG-PRFP will increase OCE-PRF and OPP-PRF grantees’ commitment to
broadening participation and inclusion in STEM and prepare them to implement
evidence-based DEI practices in their roles as scholars, scientists, mentors,
and educators. LANDInG-PRFP will establish Division of Ocean Sciences and Office
of Polar Programs postdocs, as DEI leaders in the geosciences community thereby
enhancing their portfolio of expertise. Postdoctoral Fellows who participate in
this program will contribute to changing DEI culture over the long-term via
increased engagement in DEI initiatives across the geosciences; increased
recognition of the need for broader participation in the geosciences; and
increased value for DEI service, champions and leaders within geosciences. The
LANDInG-PRFP model could serve as a framework for all STEM disciplines to
promote early career DEI professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.