* 2123318
* LTREB: Baltimore Urban Watershed Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Mintesinot Jiru, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2026
* USD 369,743.00

Urban, suburban, and exurban ecosystems are important and increasing in the U.S.
The watershed approach, which allows for the quantification of inputs and
outputs of water, nutrients, and other substances in hydrologically defined
basins, has been central to ecosystem ecology for the past 50 years, allowing
for evaluation of ecosystem structure and function over areas of differing size
and land use. This approach has been particularly useful for analysis of the
effects of disturbances (e.g., clear cutting of forests) but also for long-term
analysis of responses to more subtle aspects of environmental change such
hydroclimate variability and atmospheric deposition. In the Baltimore Ecosystem
Study (BES), this research team used the watershed approach as a basis for
comparing urban ecosystems with the less human-dominated ecosystems that have
been more traditionally studied by ecologists and as a platform for iterative
cycles of question generation, hypothesis testing, and model development. This
research sustains long-term monitoring of forested reference, agricultural
reference, and a range of urban and suburban ecosystems in the BES. Such
analysis of watershed input-output budgets and trends provides fundamental data
on urban hydrology, nitrogen, phosphorus, chloride, pathogens, and contaminants
such as metals and pharmaceutical compounds. These studies increase our
fundamental understanding of the structure and function of urban ecosystems, how
they compare with other ecosystem types, and identification of key factors
influencing ecosystem functions and services and the fate and transport of
pollutants. This research continues long-term studies that include interactions
between watershed-based monitoring, experiments, and modeling that have the
potential to significantly improve our understanding of both urban and non-urban
ecosystems. The broader impacts of this research include a better understanding
of environmental conditions affecting the diverse Baltimore human community, and
a partnership with a historically black institution, Coppin State University, to
train undergraduates in field and laboratory environmental
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project emphasizes Long Term Research in
Environmental Biology (LTREB) on urban watersheds. The project would continue
20+ years of studies carried out by the Baltimore Ecosystem Study (BES) urban
Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) project. BES established eight long-term
watershed monitoring stations along an urban-rural gradient that capture the
integrated influence of the biological, physical, built, and social aspects of
urban ecosystem structure on watershed dynamics. Since 1998, continuous data on
stream stage and discharge as well as weekly water samples for analyzing
nitrate, phosphate, total nitrogen, total phosphorus, chloride, sulfate,
turbidity, temperature, dissolved oxygen, and pH have been collected for the
larger watershed that drains into urban Baltimore and then into Chesapeake Bay.
The core data comprise 20+ years of data of continuous streamflow and multiple
elements from over 14,000 water samples, a physical archive of collected
samples, and long-term plot-scale data that provide mechanistic support for the
watershed studies. These biophysical data have been paired with periodic
residential household and governance surveys to pool human residents of their
views on environmental quality. Funding for the BES LTER studies is ending in
September 2021, creating a need for LTREB funding. Three hypotheses that have
emerged from the long-term data, which require continued long-term data
collection to test, will be addressed in the proposed LTREB Decadal Research
Plan. These hypotheses address how interactions between climate, watershed
characteristics, and human knowledge, values, and efforts to manage watersheds
will affect the flashiness of urban stream hydrology, and the concentrations and
exports of nitrogen, phosphorus, salt, and metals over the next 20
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.