* 2123131
* GOALI: Spatially selective phase transformations of glass to single crystal and electrically conducting 3D architectures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Himanshu Jain, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 04/30/2026
* USD 347,799.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Just as integrated circuit technology reduced the
size, lowered the cost and made sophisticated electronic devices accessible to
masses, a similar transformative impact is expected from the transition of 2D
assembly of discrete optical elements on a surface to a 3D integrated optics
platform, especially with ever increasing demand for information and data
transmission. Manipulation of photons that require special transparent single
crystals is inherently much more difficult, making integrated optics a
persistent challenge vs. that of electrons that flow readily through any
conducting wire. This industry-university collaborative project advances new
fabrication methods for realizing optically active single crystal architecture
in glass suitable for practical devices, while educating doctoral students
through a novel Pasteur Partners PhD (P3) model. These students pursue use-
inspired multidisciplinary research co-advised by a faculty and a company
scientist, and acquire essential skills for successful careers in industry,
academia, national labs, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: A working
integrated ‘micro-optics chip’ would not be complete without optically active
elements that are also accessible to receive an electrical signal. Such elements
need to be high quality electro-optic single crystals incorporated within a
circuit of waveguides. This project builds on the successful demonstration of
ferroelectric single crystal architecture in glass (SCAG) which is constructed
in 3D using femtosecond lasers. However, the optical loss of such SCAG
waveguides has been too high. Often the SCAG formation is accompanied by a
redistribution of elements between glass and crystal. Also, the lattice of SCAG
is modified by the stresses resulting from change in density at the growth front
during crystallization. Through a fundamental understanding of these features of
crystal growth under the confinement by the surrounding glass, this project is
reducing optical loss by creating a graded refractive index profile within the
crystal. The desired variation of refractive index is introduced through dynamic
control of temperature by a laser beam of appropriate intensity profile. In
parallel, this project is pursuing formation of conducting paths by forming
metallic nanoparticles or precipitates of a conducting oxide by fs laser
irradiation. The project is introducing new methodologies for fabricating 3D
crystal-in-glass metamaterials for a range of photonic and optoelectronic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.