* 2123532
* STTR Phase I: Development of a novel system to manufacture therapies inside the human body
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Erika Darrah, SIMMBION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 255,136.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to improve drug delivery by developing a system to synthesize much
needed drug therapies directly in patients. This advancement, if successful,
would reduce the need for complex and expensive manufacturing, eliminate the
reliance on refrigerated drug shipment and storage, and remove need for repeated
injections. Development of such a system would be adaptable for different
applications across human health and disease, would be resistant to supply chain
disruptions caused by pandemics or natural disasters, and would result in the
equitable delivery of medications to diverse patient populations across the
globe. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to develop a dynamic
living medicine capable of supporting the delivery of biological drugs directly
in vivo. Over the last decade, many attempts have been made to deliver biologics
safely and efficiently to humans using engineered bacteria and viruses as living
medicines. The current system is fraught with problems, mostly stemming from the
immunogenicity of these vectors. This critical technological and innovation gap
- the manufacture biologics directly in vivo safely for extended periods of time
- may be achieved through the genetic engineering of avirulent organism
symbionts to express proteins of interest. In this study, blood symbionts will
be genetically engineered to expresses either β-glucocerebrosidase or insulin,
with the goal of generating living medicines to treat Gaucher’s disease and
diabetes, respectively. The secretion, activity, and durability of the
engineered compounds will be assessed in vitro and in vivo. The safety and
efficacy of this therapeutic approach will be assessed in pre-clinical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.