* 2123253
* Collaborative Research: Energetic Particle Precipitation from the Magnetosphere and Effects on Ozone Dynamics in the Mesosphere and Stratosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Lauren Blum, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 12/31/2024
* USD 387,866.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The awards to the Space Science
Institute and to the University of Colorado in this collaborative project would
measure and study the effects of energetic particle precipitation into the high
latitude atmosphere. The project seeks to increase the understanding of how
electrons and ions from the Earth's magnetosphere are scattered and subsequently
are lost to the atmosphere. This topic is the subject of numerous studies
involving satellite data, ground-based instrumentation, and complex theoretical
models. The awards would support research aimed at investigating the causes of
such energetic particle precipitation (EPP) in the magnetosphere, and also to
study the consequences of such precipitation in the lower atmosphere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the duration of the awards over three years
would: use in-situ satellite data to determine when precipitation from the
magnetosphere is likely to be occurring. The award would use satellite and
balloon-based observations of the polar stratosphere and mesosphere to quantify
the effects of the precipitation in the stratosphere and mesosphere on a case-
by-case basis and also by using statistical analysis. These results would
support the conduct of a dedicated experimental campaign of balloon-based ozone
measurements in Finland to search for direct or indirect changes in the
stratosphere during periods when precipitation is likely to be occurring. The
research would also apply a complex theoretical model to reveal the
physical/chemical causes of the precipitation to quantify the dominant physical
and chemical processes responsible for such changes. The research would involve
students at all levels of the project to contribute to the training of the next
generation of scientists. The undergraduate and graduate students would gain
experience of participating in a major international project, including an
experimental campaign in which they would hold significant responsibilities. The
project is relevant to all four Key Science Goals (KSGs) of the National
Research Council Decadal Survey 2013, particularly KSG1 - Determine the origins
of the Sun’s activity and predict the variations in the space environment and
KSG2 - Determine the dynamics and coupling of Earth’s magnetosphere, ionosphere,
and atmosphere and their response to solar and terrestrial
inputs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific rationale for the proposal is
summarized in terms of two scientific objectives: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Determine and
quantify when and where precipitation of high-energy electrons/ions from the
magnetosphere is known to be occurring. this would be followed up by an effort
to quantify the resulting changes in ozone in the polar stratosphere and
mesosphere, and &lt;br/&gt;(2) Determine the physical and chemical pathways by
which the precipitation effects are manifested via satellite observations,
theoretical modeling, and in-situ observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.