* 2123323
* I-Corps: Membrane Materials for Efficient Gas and Vapor Separations
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a membrane technology for industrial gas and vapor separations.
Effective membrane separation technology has the potential not only to reduce
the energy consumption of chemical industries and accelerate the adoption of
green alternative energy sources, but also to mitigate the emission of
greenhouse gases. Replacing existing energy-intensive processes with membranes
may reduce annual U.S. energy costs by $4 billion and eliminate 100 million tons
of carbon dioxide emissions. Deploying efficient membranes for the purification
of hydrogen and natural gas also may accelerate the replacement of coal for
electricity generation, while implementing membranes for carbon dioxide
separation from flue gas may reduce the cost of carbon capture by 50%. Despite
their great potential, however, the broad adoption of membranes has been
hampered by the inadequate separation performance of existing materials. The
proposed technology uses molecular filters capable of performing precise
separations based on gas molecule size, and enables separations currently
unaddressed in industry that may realize the full potential of energy-efficient
membrane-based technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses
on the development of molecular filters engineered to have similar pore sizes to
gas molecules, making them exceptional molecular sieves. Traditional membrane
materials consist of single-stranded and flexible polymer chains that pack
efficiently in the solid state, leading to virtually no pores in the membranes.
This dense packing results in limited productivity because molecules could not
diffuse quickly through the dense material. The materials had low selectivity
because they could not distinguish molecules by size. The materials in the
proposed design represent a shift in polymer chemistry and materials
engineering. A rigid ladder, or double-stranded, molecular motif was incorporate
into the polymer chains. These rigid ladder motifs prevent the dense packing of
polymer chains in the solid-state, leading to abundant microporosity that may be
leveraged for molecular separations. By systematically tuning the conformation
of these ladder motifs, the productivity and selectivity of the membrane may be
simultaneously tailored for specific applications. In addition to the potential
applications in the energy sector, this project may provide important
intellectual insights to guide the understanding and design of porous organic
materials with other applications yet to be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.