* 2123271
* Collaborative Research: HDR DSC: DS-PATH: Data Science Career Pathways in the Inland Empire
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeremy Aikin, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 190,983.00

This project brings together six partnering institutions to advance Data Science
education in the Inland Empire, one of the most populous and diverse regions in
California and the nation. The partnership includes the University of California
Riverside, California State University San Bernardino, the three community
colleges of the Riverside Community College District, and San Bernardino Valley
College. All six partners are Hispanic Serving Institutions. The objective is
develop and deploy ‘The Data Science Career Pathways in the Inland Empire’ (DS-
PATH), a DSC program that aims to: (i) create flexible pathways for Data Science
education in the Inland Empire region of Southern California, (ii) provide
students with experiential learning opportunities, (iii) develop a community of
partners that will provide local, tangible, and impactful Data Science projects,
and (iv) broaden participation of females and under-represented minorities in
Data Science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of diverse PIs and co-PIs puts
forward a program centered around more flexible educational pathways, along with
course alignments, articulations, and shared experiential learning
opportunities. DS-PATH will create a pipeline that starts with outreach
opportunities at the high-school level, continues&lt;br/&gt;with undergraduate
experiences and innovative bridge pathways from other majors, and culminates in
professional Master’s degrees. Bridging these together is a Summer Fellowship
program that will train 120 student participants at all levels. These pathways
and the long-lasting relationships developed with local industry and community
partners will continue to offer workforce development, educational advancement,
and project-based learning opportunities not only for DS-PATH fellows but for
all future aspiring Data Scientists in the region. Moreover, a workshop focused
on Data Science pedagogy will&lt;br/&gt;offer best and inclusive teaching
strategies to Inland Empire teachers/faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.