* 2123942
* Autonomous Ocean Carbon Observer Development and Calibration
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Bishop, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,397,443.00

The very fast and dynamic ocean biological carbon pump (OBCP) plays a
fundamental role in the global carbon cycle and in setting concentrations of
atmospheric carbon dioxide. Photosynthetic organisms that that fuel the OCBP
live and die on a week to week basis, and the resulting sinking (or export) of
organic and inorganic carbon particles from the surface layer and consumption
losses of these particles in deeper waters are similarly variable. Simply
stated, the OCBP is poorly understood due to dependence on short- term, and
seasonally and spatially limited ship observations; thus model estimates of its
strength and future trajectory are highly uncertain. To address this gap, the
investigators will engineer and sea-test two robotic Lagrangian Ocean Carbon
Observer (OCO) floats capable of 8 month to multi-year missions, yet able to
resolve flux processes on hourly to daily time scales and relay data in real
time via satellite telemetry while operating anywhere in the ocean. The
development of the OCO enables the identification of specific pathways and
controls on the vertical transfer of particulate organic and inorganic carbon
(POC and PIC) from the surface ocean to subsurface waters. The project logically
follows on from the investigator’s development and successful deployment of
robotic Lagrangian Carbon Explorer (CE) and Carbon Flux Explorer (CFE) floats,
which measure optically POC and PIC concentration and flux variability to depths
of 1000 m. A unique capability of the CFE is that it is able to measure the
sinking flux of carbon carried by different sizes and classes of particles. The
project will merge CFE and CE capabilities to create the OCO. The team will
contribute to the development of a STEM workforce by engaging UC Berkeley
undergraduates and one graduate student in all phases (development, laboratory,
seagoing, and interpretive) of the project and in the class room.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, CFEs and two new Ocean Carbon Observers
(OCOs) that simultaneously measure both particle flux and concentration profiles
will be constructed and test-deployed at sea in January 2023. During the times
that these autonomous instruments drift at target depths within the upper
kilometer (interrupted by transit to the surface for location and real time
bidirectional telemetry), they will autonomously quantify the inherent optical
properties and size distributions of sinking material captured. Bishop et al.
(2016; Biogeosciences 13, 3019-3129, doi:10.5194/bg-13-3109) describe CFE
capabilities and methodology for rendering raw OSR imagery to rigorously defined
inherent optical measures of particle loading -- attenuance and cross-polarized
photon yield. Bourne et al. (2019; Biogeosciences, 16, 1249-1264;
doi:10.5194/bg-16-1249-2019) show that attenuance is strongly correlated (r^2
&gt; 0.86) with POC and PN sampled at 150 m by sampler-equipped CFEs “(CFE-Cal
floats)” over a broad range of particle flux and particle size distributions.
Planned further deployment of the CFE-Cal floats to sample sinking material to
depths of at least 500 m will enable validation of our calibration of the
attenuance proxy and to enable a first calibration of the PIC optical flux
proxy. Bourne et al. (2021; Biogeosciences, 18, 3053–3086,
doi:10.5194/bg-18-3053-2021) demonstrate the unique capability of CFEs to
resolve and quantify the vertical flux carried by different particle size
classes in the mesopelagic; furthermore, they describe prototype algorithms that
will lead to flux size-distribution analysis in real time on the CFEs. The
project will enable fully autonomous long-term deployments of CFE and OCO
systems in the global ocean. The involvement a commercial float vendor (MRV
Systems) and sensor manufacturer (Seabird Scientific) may lead to a
commercialization pathway for the OCO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.