* 2123130
* Collaborative Research: North Atlantic Dynamics - Developing and Exploiting  a Long-Term Cape Hatteras Gulf Stream Time Series
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mike Muglia, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 355,166.00

This award is funded under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law
117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a number of existing data
sources from the ocean and from the atmosphere to determine variations of the
Gulf Stream near Cape Hatteras from 2004 to the present time. The Gulf Stream
variations to be studied range in periodicity from a day or two to interannual.
Possible causes of these variations will be determined utilizing measurements
from the ocean and the atmosphere. This characterization of the Gulf Stream will
provide a description of how the Gulf Stream affects and is affected by ocean
and atmospheric circulations in the North Atlantic. The project will explore
potential influences from climate variability as well as explore the feasibility
of harnessing energy from the Gulf Stream off Cape Hatteras. The project will
support one post-doctoral scholar, two graduate students and one undergraduate
student in the pursuit of various project objectives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study will investigate the nature and causes of variability of the Gulf Stream
near Cape Hatteras and explore how the Gulf Stream affects and is affected by
oceanic and atmospheric processes in the North Atlantic. This will be done by
reprocessing and analyzing HF radar surface current measurements and comparing
these findings with ancillary data to test hypotheses about controls on and
consequences of Gulf Stream variability. Analyses will consist of examining the
position, path, structure, and location of separation of the Gulf Stream at
temporal scales ranging from event-scale to interannual. The HF radar data will
be compared to (i) in-situ and altimetry data, (ii) Oleander data, (iii) data
from Line W of the Deep Western Boundary Current, (iv) data from the RAPID line,
(v) cable data of transport at Florida Strait, and (vi) counts and trajectories
of cold and warm core rings. Gulf Stream properties will also be compared to
atmospheric forcing variability such as the NAO index, Jet Stream position,
local wind stress, and basin-scale wind-stress curl. The project will derive
Gulf Stream characteristics from observations collected since 2004 and result in
a database updated in near real-time. Measurements with HF radar will continue
after this project expires. Also, the project will provide information about the
feasibility of harnessing energy from the Gulf Stream. The project will support
one post-doctoral scholar, 2 graduate students and 1 undergraduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.