* 2123911
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FR: Volitional Control of Internal Cognitive States
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Aaron Batista, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2026
* USD 844,205.00

Humans are not, by nature, logical creatures. It takes focus to maintain our
composure and not let emotions color our judgement. When we can control our
emotional state, we can get “in the zone” and perform well. Failing to do so,
we’ll “have a bad day”, or just be “off”. Why does this happen? And, in terms of
neurobiological mechanisms, how does this happen? Our emotions are regulated by
internal states, such as arousal, attention, and motivation, brain-wide
modulatory processes that impact neural function related to perception, decision
making, and action. What are the neural mechanisms of those interactions? This
project will explore the interactions between internal states and cognitive
processing in the cerebral cortex. The investigators will leverage their
expertise in “brain training” by giving subjects visual feedback about their
neural activity so that they are directly aware of their internal states. In
this way, they will study whether subjects are able to better regulate their
internal states so that they are able to make perceptual judgments and perform
motor skills more consistently at a high level of performance. The investigators
will also organize workshops to bring together experts in areas related to this
project, train researchers to become well-versed in experimental and
computational neuroscience, and enhance the participation of undergraduates,
women, and underrepresented minorities in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves three integrated research threads.
First, the investigators will use multi-electrode recordings in several regions
of the cerebral cortex simultaneously to identify brain-wide signatures of
internal states and their effect on the communication between cortical areas.
Second, they will train subjects to volitionally control their internal states
using neurofeedback. Third, they will examine whether subjects can harness their
internal states to accelerate learning and improve performance on challenging
perceptual and motor tasks. In these studies, they will focus on three types of
internal states -- one that guides us in the spatial world around us (spatial
attention), one that manages our alertness throughout the day (arousal), and one
that aids our effort in focusing on what lies ahead (motivation). They will
study how these internal states interact and to what extent they can be
volitionally controlled in three areas across the brain: visual area V4,
prefrontal cortex, and motor cortex. Together, their work will provide i) a
unified account of the impact of multiple internal states on brain-wide neural
computations spanning perception and action, and ii) neurofeedback paradigms to
enable subjects to harness their internal states for improved performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for
Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program
jointly supported by the Directorates for Biology (BIO), Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR),
Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.