* 2123625
* Highly Efficient CMOS Transmitter for Emerging Broadband Wireless Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Silva-Martinez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Recent developments in mobile computing and wireless internet have led to an
increasing demand for portable computers and smart phones equipped with wireless
local area networks operating with multi-standard capabilities. More standards
and applications will be incorporated in the near future local area wireless
networks due to the advances of the semiconductors technology that allows more
devices on a single complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) chip. The
wireless connectivity has expanded far beyond smartphones and person-to-person
communications to now encompass unexpected device-to-device communication
systems. The trend towards faster and more efficient communication systems
demand an optimal use of the available spectrum by employing more advanced
coding schemes that increases the number of transmitted bits per symbol, and
that results in more effective transmission of information per available
bandwidth. But, these systems demand stringent transmitter/receiver (TX/RX)
specifications. The advanced coding schemes assign more bits per transmit
symbol, then the voltage difference between symbols reduces making the
communication scheme more sensitive to the background noise, then it demands
superior signal power to noise power ratio. The signal power is usually bounded
to allow other users to share the available spectrum; for handheld devices it is
a must to optimize the use of power to extend battery’s recharging time. The
major challenge is the lack of transistor’s linearity to satisfy the
requirements of advanced standards. The device non-linearities generate non-
linear replicas of the transmitted and received signals with multiple
intermodulation products falling in the signal band which degrade the quality of
the original signal. This research program will develop innovative digital CMOS
based global calibration schemes for the transmitter that addresses these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The predicted market for connected smart devices
will be over 75 billion devices by 2025. However, the emerging multimedia
applications demand more bandwidth and better system performance due to the use
of spectral efficient modulation schemes with large peak-to-average ratios. The
ultra-broadband transceivers are less tolerant to transmit errors and demand
stringent transceiver linearity, flat gain in the entire signal bandwidth and
linear phase response. In addition, the power amplifier (PA) is responsible for
most of the power consumption in hand-held devices; improving the power
efficiency and performance of the transmitter is critical for the advance of
mobile communication systems. The transmitter optimization is a complex task
that cannot be achieved by using conventional calibration methodologies. Most of
the transmitter errors are non-linear and signal dependent, then the evaluation
of these errors is a difficult task. The typical compensation methodologies are
complex and expensive in terms of power consumption and digital resources, and
it is very difficult to use them in broadband applications. &lt;br/&gt;Affective
cost is another important constraint. Currently, over 85% of the existing
transmitters are fabricated in non-CMOS technologies, while the control and
signal processing is implemented in CMOS technologies. Full CMOS transceivers
offer a system solution on chip will have significant impact on the efficiency,
reliability, and production cost of the transceivers. The proposed CMOS TX
architecture leverages on an agile envelope tracking system based on an
innovative current on demand current-steering digital-to-analog converter that
enhances the tracking capabilities and power efficiency of the power management
system. Also, the proposed broadband low-power digital linearization technique
accounts for PA non-linearities, bandwidth and phase TX limitations, as well as
memory effects. The proposed TX architecture will achieve an error vector
magnitude under -40dB and power added efficiency over 30% when handling 400MHz
signal bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.