* 2123718
* Collaborative Research: An integrated evaluation of lower crustal rheology and localization processes in plagioclase-rich rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2025
* USD 267,684.00

Earth’s crust deforms by different processes at different depths. The lower part
of the crust is difficult to access in the field and is therefore less
understood than the upper crust. Although earthquakes typically occur in the
upper crust, the lower crust affects earthquake activity by transferring stress
to shallower faults. Using a combination of field studies, laboratory analyses,
and numerical models, this project will evaluate which processes allowed
deformation to occur in narrow zones in the lower crust. This project will use
an exposure of lower crustal deformation that at the surface in Québec, Canada,
allowing us to directly study the rocks and deformational processes. In
particular, the researchers will determine if interaction with shallower
earthquake-causing faults in the upper crust is sufficient to explain the
characteristics of this region, or if additional rock weakening processes play a
fundamental role. This relationship between upper and lower crustal deformation
is important to understand the earthquake cycle and related hazards. In
addition, undergraduate students will participate in both the field and
analytical portions of this project as part of a capstone class, gaining
valuable exposure to the benefits of scientific collaboration between numerical
modelers (theoreticians) and field geologists
(empiricists).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field site selected for this project is
the Morin Shear Zone in Québec, Canada. Its western portion exclusively deforms
anorthositic rock. The large proportion of plagioclase in this rock means that
it can be treated it as effectively a single phase and take advantage of the
abundance of laboratory constraints on the mechanical behavior of plagioclase.
This project is based on tight integration between constraints from the field
and laboratory and numerical geodynamic modeling. Specific tasks will be to: 1)
document shear zone deformation conditions, structure, and evolution from the
field; 2) numerically model and predict strain gradients in the lower crust near
a brittle fault, absent of any weakening processes; 3) report from the field
evidence of microstructural or chemical changes that may affect rheology and
weaken rocks; and 4) numerically evaluate the impact of any suspected weakening
processes on shear zone geometry and structure. At the conclusion of this
project, the researchers will have determined whether the observed shear zone
results from deformation imposed by a brittle fault higher in the strike-slip
system, or whether weakening mechanisms are necessary to cause the observed
pattern. The project will also demonstrate the power of integrating field-based
studies and numerical modeling studies in structural geology. Furthermore, this
project will engage undergraduate students in research internships and in a non-
field camp capstone experience. These students will have direct exposure to our
combined observational and theoretical approaches, and will gain a better
appreciation for the range of expertise and interests of current research in the
geological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.