* 2123852
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Environmentally Applied Refrigerant Technology Hub (EARTH)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Edward Maginn, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 98,615.00

Abstract for Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Environmentally
Applied Refrigerant Technology Hub (EARTH)&lt;br/&gt;Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;PG: EARTH
will bring together leaders from the research community, industry, and
educational institutions to address critical scientific, engineering, workforce
development, and policy issues related to the future of refrigeration and air
conditioning (RAC). RAC systems are widespread throughout modern society,
enabling transportation of fresh foods, storage of medicines, and cooling of
buildings. The U.S. is a global leader in designing and manufacturing RAC
systems, and the U.S. chemical industry has been a major innovator in creating
the hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) refrigerants that replaced ozone-depleting
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). Given that RAC now accounts for nearly 20% of
worldwide energy consumption, there is an urgent need to develop new and more
energy efficient cooling technologies. At the same time, current HFC
refrigerants are being phased out due to global warming concerns. There is thus
a need to develop innovative new refrigerants and cooling technologies that are
safe for the environment and efficient processes that enable the economical and
safe recovery and reuse of millions of kilograms of deployed HFC refrigerants.
EARTH will be a critical national resource to address these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will enable stakeholders to assess a
variety of important topics impacting the development of alternative
refrigerants and novel cooling cycles. Innovation in the global refrigerants
market is often led by major U.S. companies, but the markets for their products
are global and growing rapidly. Understanding this global market landscape and
developing cutting edge technologies in this space are critical components of
EARTH and will help the U.S. maintain its leadership in innovation and
manufacturing in the strategically important refrigerants industry. EARTH will
facilitate the formation of partnerships between educational institutions,
industry, national labs, trade groups, and policy makers. The phase down of HFCs
over the next two decades is estimated to create 150,000 new jobs and increase
manufacturing by $39 billion in the U.S. while preventing global temperature
from rising by 0.5 ºC. The ERC’s foundational components will go beyond research
to include technical training and workforce development at all participant
stages. It will foster a culture of diversity and inclusion and create value
within an innovation ecosystem that will extend beyond the lifetime of the
ERC.&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;The ERC we envision will address the basic
science, engineering, education, and policy issues that are essential for
meeting the many challenges facing the RAC infrastructure. Three major issues
will shape the thrusts of EARTH. First, the high global warming potential of the
current generation of refrigerants (HFCs) is requiring the RAC industry to again
consider new fluids that balance performance, efficiency, safety, environmental
concerns, and a host of other factors. The number of small molecules and their
mixtures that could potentially be used in RAC cycles is almost limitless, but
only a small subset have been synthesized and tested. Second, the vast majority
of RAC systems are based on hundred-year-old vapor-compression technology, but
new approaches including solid-state technologies that utilize magnetocaloric,
electrocaloric, and mechanocaloric effects could revolutionize the field. Third,
millions of kilograms of high global warming potential HFCs valued in the
billions of dollars are currently in use around the world, and most consist of
azeotropic mixtures. There is currently no means of separating and recovering
these valuable compounds. EARTH will bring together experts in high fidelity
experiments, advanced atomistic simulations, data science methods, and process
design to develop novel refrigerants, energy-efficient cooling designs, and
optimized HFC recovery processes. The core planning group from the University of
Kansas, University of Notre Dame, University of Maryland, Lehigh University, and
University of South Dakota has the needed expertise and experience to bring
together a multi-disciplinary team composed of participants from academia,
industry, national laboratories, professional organizations, and policy makers
to prepare this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.