* 2123283
* Collaborative Research: Investigating the Asymmetries and Temporally Varying Nature of Gulf Stream Ring Formation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Avijit Gangopadhyay, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 316,901.00

As the vigorously meandering Gulf Stream (GS) flows between Cape Hatteras and
the Grand Banks, this western boundary current extension sheds anticyclonic warm
core rings (WCRs) into the Slope Sea and cyclonic cold core rings (CCRs) into
the Sargasso Sea. Long term observations indicate asymmetries in the generation
of warm- and cold-core rings as well as a regime shift. This study will
investigate several hypotheses for the processes behind this variability by
fully exploiting existing observational datasets. Identifying the causes and
consequences of seasonal and interannual variability in the GS and rings will
help clarify the ocean’s role in climate variability and establish to what
extent elements of the system are predictable. Reports from the commercial
fishing industry note recent increases off New England in warm water species
commonly associated with the GS, and hence likely related to WCR activity.
Results from this work will be communicated at semi-annual meetings at the
Commercial Fisheries Center of Rhode Island and also to the general public
through regional and national media. Andres will continue her ongoing outreach
efforts with an elementary school that serves a group traditionally
underrepresented in STEM. This project will support a graduate student who will
be trained in both advanced data analysis and dynamical aspects of the changes
in the North Atlantic. The research will generate observation-based derived
products (e.g., CCR census, track census, and a regional Argo-Rings census)
which will be made available to others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Analysis
of four decades of synoptic data based on Clark Analysis Charts demonstrates
three characteristics of ring formation that are not yet understood dynamically:
(i) the number of WCRs shed in a given year does not equal the number of CCRs
(“spatial asymmetry”); (ii) after a striking WCR Regime Shift in 2000, more WCRs
are usually formed each year during 2000-2018 than are CCRs; prior to this shift
(during 1980-1999) more CCRs were formed than WCRs (“interannual asymmetry”);
and (iii) the formation of CCRs peaks in winter/spring, whereas WCR formations
peak in summer/fall (“seasonal asymmetry”). Based on these observed asymmetries,
it is hypothesized that three different ring-types (“aneurisms”, “pinched-off
rings”, and “large-ring splits”) are shed from the Stream, and that each type
has distinct characteristics due to its respective formation processes. An
additional hypothesis is that an observed spatial asymmetry of relative
vorticity across the GS is dynamically linked to the observed asymmetry in the
annual rates of WCR versus CCR formations. Finally, it is hypothesized that
seasonal changes in stratification contribute to the difference in the
seasonality of WCR versus CCR formations and that seasonal asymmetry in ring
formation depends on spatial asymmetry in the stratification across the Stream.
To investigate each of these asymmetries, existing datasets will be analyzed to
test these three hypotheses. First the researchers will identify the conditions
which give rise to formation of the different ring-types. Then they will
quantify whether (and how) a set of state-space parameters changes and whether
these changes are associated with the observed regime shift, in order to
determine whether the GS System exhibits multiple equilibria. In addition to
using the Clark Chart-derived WCR and CCR Censuses, ring-types and the system’s
asymmetries will be explored with along-track satellite altimetry, Argo floats
(trajectories and vertical property profiles) and existing regional datasets
from the Line W Program (moored and shipboard measurements of velocity and water
properties), the Oleander Project (temperature profiles and velocity sections)
and the Pioneer Array (velocity, temperature, and salinity). Maps of satellite-
measured sea surface height and sea surface temperature will provide spatial and
temporal context. The analysis plan includes (i) examining all available along-
track altimeter data from 1993-2020 along the GS path (75-55W); (ii) calculating
conditional averages selected, for example, by sector, by ring-type, and by
focusing on a specific year or season, (iii) characterizing individual ring
events that are well-sampled, and (iv) examining the state-space for evidence of
multiple equilibria using available and derived long-duration time-series of
variables (including relative vorticity, stratification, transport, basin scale
winds, sea surface height) to compare and contrast the regime change period of
1997-2003 with a recent possible shift period spanning
2016-2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.