* 2123412
* Collaborative Research: GEMT: Bridging Multiple Time Scales of Erosion and Rock Uplift in Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Kaj Johnson, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2024
* USD 449,290.00

Mountains appear static to the casual observer, yet in many locations they are
actively growing upward in response to plate tectonics, while their shape,
height and width is altered by climate-driven erosion. How fast mountains change
elevation depends on the timescale and locations in which one observes them.
During an earthquake, mountains can move many meters in a matter of seconds, yet
when earthquake motions are averaged over millions of years, and combined with
the slow motion of faults that may happen between earthquakes, the rate that
mountains move is much slower. How these slow, but continuous motions combine
with short high-magnitude events to build topography of mountainous regions over
millions of years is an important question to answer to understand how short-
term, hazardous events like earthquakes, landslides, and floods integrate over
long periods to build the spectacular scenery of mountain systems. In this
proposed work, Taiwan is a natural, ongoing experiment of how uplift and erosion
is integrated over a range of timescales to build the mountain range. The
investigators will examine uplift and erosion over decadal, millennial, and
million-year timescales to document changes in measured rates and build a
framework for understanding discrepancies among the different approaches. The
project will bring together US and Taiwanese scientists across career levels and
disciplines to address this fundamental research question in tectonics. In year
2, U.S. and Taiwanese graduate students will come together for a month-long
cross-disciplinary modeling workshop. Additionally, the project will support
recruitment to STEM through an innovative course involving 1st year
undergraduates who will be exploring geodetic and geomorphic data of Taiwan.
This project is a collaborative effort between U.S. and Taiwanese researchers
under the aegis of the NSF/GEO/EAR - MOST-Taiwan (GEMT) Collaborative Research
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a new framework for
bridging measurements of deformation rates across geodetic to geologic
timescales, by building a suite of models that link deformational and erosional
processes. The active Taiwan mountain belt is an excellent location to test
hypotheses of how short-term processes such as the elastic earthquake cycle,
river incision, and exhumation aggregate to build orogens and evolve topography.
Taiwan is widely invoked as a case study for mountain belts in erosional or
topographic steady-state, however, a number of observations challenge this
classical view. Highly variable estimates of denudation and incision rates
inferred over disparate time intervals raises questions about the time periods
over which the concepts of steady-state mountain building are relevant in
Taiwan. In addition, present-day uplift rates from geodesy are also not easily
reconciled with the millennial and longer time-scale erosion rates. These
confounding observations suggest that the mechanisms of mountain building
broadly, and in Taiwan specifically, are not fully understood and fundamental
questions remain unanswered about the relationship of deformation, tectonic
uplift, and erosion over a wide range of time scales. We will build a series of
kinematic models that simulate potential fault geometry and evolution and
evaluate if the history of fault activity and geometric evolution is consistent
with &gt;0.5 Ma exhumation history constrained by thermochronology,
geomorphically inferred millennial rates constrained by erosion and incision
data, and present-day rock uplift rates constrained by geodesy. Our integrated
approach will ensure that the model fault geometry and slip rates that dictate
deformation kinematics, and their influence on the uplift field that drives
river incision and exhumation, be compatible across time scales. To accomplish
this integration, we propose a five-part research plan: (1) Build hundred-
thousand to million-year kinematic orogenic models constrained by geology and
thermochronology; (2) Build a millennial time-scale erosion model using river
incision rate data, basin-wide CRN, and channel morphology; (3) Construct an
updated geodetic vertical velocity field; (4) Construct earthquake cycle models
of present day deformation; (5) Bridge time scales through model
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.