* 2123824
* NSF-BSF: Modeling and Control of Collective Dynamics for Externally Driven Planar Microswimmers
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 305,948.00

This grant will fund research that enables innovative uses of microrobotic
devices in a variety of healthcare applications, including non-invasive surgery,
drug delivery, and treatment of infection and infertility, thereby promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national prosperity and health. Deployment
of such microrobotic devices requires an understanding of principles of
microscale propulsion, for example swimming of microorganisms in various fluidic
environments, and the development of methodologies to control propulsion. This
project aims to address a current gap in our knowledge of how to achieve
controlled propulsion of single planar robotic microswimmers and groups of such
swimmers in real fluids of biomedical relevance, including saline,
methylcellulose, and synthetic mucus. The theoretical and experimental work
conducted in this project brings together fluid mechanics, small-scale
fabrication, and control theory. The project will benefit from a unique
international collaboration between researchers in the US and Israel.
Educational activities centered on microswimmers, as well as their propulsion
and control, will be integrated in instruction and outreach, helping to broaden
participation in STEM from currently underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to the optimal design and control of robotic microswimmers for
low-Reynolds-number propulsion in both Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluidic
environments, including biomimetic tissue-like materials. It achieves this
outcome by investigating planar microstructures that can be fabricated in bulk
using standard photolithography, and exploring different gaits realized through
variations in geometry, surface functionalization, and external actuation using
laser excitation, chemical catalysis, thermal gradients, and magnetic fields.
The research will result in the development of a stochastic differential-
equation-based model of planar propeller behavior in response to environmental
disturbances, as well as the design of a feedback control algorithm that
anticipates uncertainty while tracking stochastic moving targets or realizing
optimal path-planning and navigation in the presence of stochastic drifts. The
work will contribute to a practical understanding of maneuverability and path
planning of microswimmers in complex fluidic environments, both individually and
in swarms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.