* 2123698
* Collaborative Research: In Situ Investigations and Historical Analysis of Eddy Impacts on coastal carbon chemistry and coral calcification
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nathalie Goodkin, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 128,728.00

Mesoscale eddies, often referred to as the “weather” of the ocean, are energetic
circulating currents in the ocean that can intensify upwelling of deeper waters
or downwelling of surface waters. This in turn leads to changes in water
chemistry and physical properties that can alter nutrient availability and rates
of primary production, surface ocean pH, temperature, and salinity. Along the
Gulf Stream in the mid-latitudes, eddy frequency is high with many transiting
through the Sargasso Sea. While extensive research has been conducted on eddy
physics and their impact on open-ocean biogeochemistry, there has been limited
research on the impacts of eddies on coastal biogeochemistry, and, in
particular, the effect of eddies on shallow warm-water coral reefs. Given the
increasing stress coral reefs are facing due to anthropogenic changes,
understanding how eddies may compound or relieve this stress is becoming
increasingly important. In this project, three researchers from two institutions
together with their undergraduate and graduate students will investigate the
effect of mesoscale eddies on shallow water coral reefs in Bermuda, a coral reef
surrounded island situated in the heart of the Sargasso Sea. Furthermore, the
skills and knowledge gained from this proposal will be transferred through the
STEM pipeline by a number of educational programs for high school students and
teachers, and through undergraduate research opportunities at both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three specific objectives that
aim to improve current understanding of the role eddies play in reef
biogeochemistry. (i) Does eddy activity affect water properties near shore,
including temperature, nutrient availability, and carbon chemistry? (ii) How do
the changes in water properties affect coral calcification? (iii) Can identified
seawater changes be traced in coral skeleton archives to trace past eddy
activity? This research will conduct sea water profiling along the rim reef
study site to compare to similarly timed profiles at the Bermuda Atlantic Time-
series Study (BATS) and Hydrostation S sites to understand how eddy driven
changes propagate from offshore to onshore. In-situ water samplers and sensors
will be deployed in Bermuda’s south shore rim reefs to study the impact of
coastal eddies on the environmental conditions, and incubation chambers will be
utilized to investigate how these conditions affect the primary process of reef
formation, namely coral calcification. In addition, historical data from BATS
and Hydrostation S occupations will be analyzed to identify years of high eddy
activity to investigate changes to both the physical conditions and the carbon
cycle at BATS in those years and compare them to recent records of coral paleo
chemistry to identify eddy impacts in the proxy record for past
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.