* 2123371
* CBET-EPSRC: Droplet Impact on Fluid Interfaces: 3D Effects Across Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Harris, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 397,000.00

This NSF-EPSRC project represents an integrated, comprehensive, and
interdisciplinary investigation of droplets impacting onto liquid layers, with
particular attention paid to three-dimensional effects that often arise in
applications. Droplet-liquid impacts are fundamental to a range of industrial,
agricultural, advanced manufacturing, environmental, and aerospace applications.
As a droplet impinges on a liquid layer, several distinct outcomes are possible,
which include complete rebound (bouncing), merging (deposition), and splashing.
Depending on the target area of interest, each of these three distinct outcomes
can be either desirable or undesirable. Broadening our current understanding of
droplet impact phenomena to include three-dimensional effects is of critical and
timely importance to unlocking and advancing real-world applications. This
research program makes use of slow-motion photography and cutting-edge computer
simulations. Collaborators at the University of Oxford and the University of
Warwick will carry out the high-energy impact experiments and direct numerical
simulations over all regimes of interest, respectively. Partners from the inkjet
printing and aerospace industries are engaged in this project, ensuring a direct
and accelerated track for knowledge transfer. The striking visual nature of
droplet impact phenomena will also translate directly into the development of
numerous outreach activities in collaboration with artists and graphic
designers, with a target audience of young students from underrepresented and
disadvantaged groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of prior work on droplet-
liquid and droplet-solid impact focuses on axisymmetric, normal impacts due to
the relative simplicity of experimental characterization and visualization, and
reduced computational demands. In practice, non-axisymmetric droplet-interface
impacts are far more common. Recent advances in high-speed visualization, flow
measurement techniques, multi-scale algorithms, and associated computing power
will facilitate the proposed work plans and objectives. Studies in the present
project include (i) normal impacts, with particular attention to the role of the
interstitial gas layer, (ii) impacts onto a moving liquid layer, and (iii)
oblique impacts. Each study focuses on delineating parametric thresholds between
the impact regimes of rebound, coalescence, and splashing through a synthesis of
experiments, high-fidelity numerical simulation, and reduced-order modeling and
scaling analysis. The research outputs are anticipated not only to include the
specific scientific discoveries, but also benchmarked and documented
experimental and computational tools and datasets that will strengthen the broad
global research efforts in the area, as well as a myriad of related topics
including droplet-solid impacts, particle-liquid impacts, and droplet-droplet
collisions. Having industrial partners involved in the project will ensure a
streamlined pathway for the translation of the scientific advances towards real-
world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.