* 2123768
* Measurements of stable carbon isotopes on board GO-SHIP cruises in the South Atlantic Ocean to enhance our ability to quantify anthropogenic CO2 uptake rates by the ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Wei-Jun Cai, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2025
* USD 702,050.00

Rising carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere, global climate change,
and the sustainability of the Earth’s biosphere are of great scientific and
societal concern. Approximately one-quarter of fossil fuel emissions of carbon
dioxide emitted each year are absorbed by the oceans, and it is important to
understand where and how fast this process occurs. Stable isotopes of carbon can
be used as a “signature” to identify fossil fuel-derived carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere and ocean. The investigators have developed a new method for
measuring the stable carbon isotope composition of dissolved carbon dioxide
rapidly and precisely while at sea. They will measure several thousand samples
on two research expeditions to the South Atlantic Ocean. They will compare their
measurements to ones made in the same locations approximately ten years earlier,
and determine the amount of carbon dioxide absorbed over that time period. The
proposed research will enhance ocean carbon research infrastructure, general
science education, and public awareness of climate change and environmental
issues. The investigators plan to enhance diversity in earth sciences by
recruiting underrepresented minority students in the research and have a
graduate and an undergraduate student involved in all phases of this project.
The team, including the students, will actively disseminate the research results
in international, national, regional, local education and outreach activities,
and in peer-review journals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the South Atlantic Ocean,
anthropogenic CO2 uptake rates are high and variable as mode and intermediate
waters are formed and are sensitive to climate changes. The carbon-13 Suess
effect makes delta13C-CO2 in the atmosphere a clearly defined endmember and
delta13C-DIC in the ocean a powerful tracer to independently estimate
anthropogenic CO2 uptake and storage in the ocean. The team has developed a
precise, rapid, and sea-going method to simultaneously measure dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC) concentration (to plus or minus 2 micromol per kilogram)
and stable carbon isotope composition (delta13C-DIC) (to plus or minus 0.03
permil) by combining a CO2 extraction device with a Cavity Ring-Down
Spectroscopy (CRDS) isotope analyzer. They will use this method aboard GO-SHIP
cruises A13.5 and A16S to analyze about 1000 samples onboard the ship and 2000
samples on land for each cruise. Extensive evaluation and comparison of this
method with the traditional isotope ratio mass spectrometry (IRMS)-based method
will be done. The PIs hypothesize that the formation and the strength of mode
and intermediate waters have a strong influence on the lateral transport of
anthropogenic carbon and thus the decadal variability of the water column
anthropogenic carbon inventory change. As a result, the change in inventory has
both meridional and zonal trends, and therefore a combination of A13.5 and A16S
will better represent the basin-wide changes. Two objectives will be achieved in
testing this hypothesis: (1) Demonstrate that precise and accurate delta13C-DIC
data, comparable in quality to IRMS-based data, can be collected via the CRDS-
based method, and that large numbers of samples can be analyzed onboard ships
and back home with high spatial resolution comparable to other GO-SHIP level 1
parameters such as DIC; (2) Assess the spatial variations and temporal changes
of the anthropogenic carbon uptake and storage rates in the South Atlantic
Ocean. In particular, the PIs will compare estimated anthropogenic carbon
inventories independently from delta13C-DIC and DIC observations from transect
A13.5 (2022 vs. 2010 and earlier data) in the eastern basin with those of
transect A16S (2024 vs. 2013 and earlier data) in the western basin. They will
also compare the basin-wide water column anthropogenic 13C-DIC inventory with
the surface ocean anthropogenic 13CO2 uptake flux estimated from air-sea carbon
isotope disequilibrium, the difference being anthropogenic carbon carried by
lateral transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.