* 2124734
* Developing an Ethics and Society Review for Research
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Margaret Levi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,508.00

With the advent of new technologies and methodologies, academic research has
been routinely criticized for its negative impacts on society. We lack adequate
institutional responses to this responsibility: the crux of the criticism of
such research often falls outside the purview of existing research mechanisms
such as the Institutional Review Board (IRB), which are designed to evaluate
harms to human subjects rather than harms to human society. In response, we are
developing the Ethics and Society Review (ESR), a feedback panel that works with
researchers to mitigate negative ethical and societal aspects of research. The
ESR's main insight is to serve as a requirement for funding: researchers cannot
receive grant funding from major funding programs at our university until the
researchers complete the ESR process for the proposal.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
this proposal we describe a new set of institutional arrangements: the Ethics
and Society Review (ESR). The goals of the ESR are to: (1) design a process that
involves ethicists, social scientists and technologists in providing productive
feedback to research projects at their proposal stage; (2) integrate that
process as a requirement to receive funds from three major on-campus grant-
giving institute; (3) gather evidence from grant PIs and ESR panelists as to the
effectiveness of the process for changing researchers attitudes and behaviors
toward research ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many researchers, the task of
considering the broad ethical and societal effects of their research, outside of
research participants, is foreign. Therefore, our first objective is to develop
improved guidelines for researchers and ESR panelists to reflect on the ethical
and societal impacts of proposed research. To do this, we will utilize a
combination of additional literature reviews, process feedback from the pilot
program survey and interviews, and PIs’ own experience. Our second objective is
to use the learnings from our pilot program to design and implement a revised
version of the ESR at three on-campus funding organizations. The deployment of
the program will occur over three years, during which time we will collect data
on the ESR process for our evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;Our third and final objective
is to evaluate the effectiveness of individual components of the ESR as well as
its ability to engender cultural change within existing institutional structures
around ethics in research. To do this, we will use a stepped wedge trial design
(SWT). This objective will allow the ESR to determine the effect each aspect of
the ESR process has on researchers’ attitudes and behaviors regarding ethics.
With that information, we will be able to further improve the ESR process and
promote the ESR as a mechanism for cultural change around this
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.