* 2124606
* EAGER: Requirements Domain Specifications for Machine-Learned Software Components
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Mona Rahimi, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2023
* USD 146,385.00

Software components are traditionally built according to a set of pre-defined
specifications that define what a software component is expected to do in a
given context. These specifications are traditionally gathered from stakeholders
and customers during the domain-analysis and requirements-engineering phases. In
contrast to deterministic software components, software components built using
Machine-Learning (ML) algorithms learn their specifications from a set of
collected examples rather than a set of agreed upon specifications. When the
functional correctness of ML-enabled software depends only on the training data,
there can be a significant gap between specification of a real-world concept and
what a collected dataset represents as the concept. The goal of this research is
to define the meaning of requirements satisfaction for software with machine-
learning components, and to investigate methods for engineering those
requirements. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigators will
formally specify partial requirements for Machine-Learned Components (MLCs)
instead of allowing them to learn these specifications solely from a set of
collected samples in an ad-hoc manner. The goal is thus to make machine-learning
components better meet requirements by augmenting the inductive nature of ML
with domain analysis, in order to characterize the extent to which the dataset
contains or lacks important features that are necessary to meet requirements.
This project provides a framework for formally specifying partial requirements
as well as validating the presence of such specifications in the collected
samples, which in essence characterizes the extent to which the dataset contains
or lacks features important to learning the task. The proposal considers this
problem in the context of automated driving systems where the correct definition
of real-world concepts is critically important for safety reasons. For example,
correct image recognition is needed to classify objects to avoid; the objective
is to show that combining training by datasets with partial domain models from
elicited requirements can outperform brute-force ML.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.