* 2124511
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Quantum Dynamics on Modular Quantum Devices (CQD-MQD)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Victor Batista, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Quantum Dynamics on Modular Quantum Devices (CQD-MQD) is
supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division
of Chemistry. This Phase I Center is led by Professor Victor Batista from Yale
University. Other team members include Professors Michel Devoret from Yale
University, Sabre Kais from Purdue University, Lea Ferreira Dos Santos from
Yeshiva University, and Eitan Geva from the University of Michigan. The project
is motivated by the huge gap that currently exists between the problems for
which a quantum computer could be useful in chemistry and what can actually be
simulated today with state-of-the-art quantum computers. The challenge is that
most well-known quantum computing (QC) algorithms have hardware requirements
that far exceed the capabilities of current state-of-the-art quantum computers
by several orders of magnitude. Closing that QC gap is thus essential to make QC
technology finally available to studies of reaction dynamics and spectroscopy,
beyond the rather simple proof-of-concept applications that so far have been
developed. Demonstrating a new generation of quantum electro-dynamics (cQED)
platforms, in conjunction with quantum algorithms and fundamental studies of
quantum reaction dynamics, has the potential to change the landscape of quantum
simulations and lead to significant advances in chemistry with impact on other
fields ranging from biology to materials science to engineering. Partnerships
with the Stern College for Women at Yeshiva University, the Yale Pathways Summer
Scholars program, and programs at Purdue and the University of Michigan will be
developed to specifically establish an ecosystem for development of a well-
trained workforce in quantum information science and in the modeling of
molecular systems with quantum devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
the CQD-MQD is to investigate chemical processes by using modular 3D circuit
quantum electro-dynamics (cQED) platforms that can enable efficient realizations
of molecular problems at the hardware level. An example of the type of quantum
dynamical processes to be studied with the proposed quantum computing modules is
the dynamics of photoisomerization that initiates the process of vision in
vertebrates, involving non-adiabatic quantum dynamics at a conical intersection
of potential energy surfaces. Thus, the CQD-MQD will design bosonic modular
circuits described by potential energy surfaces that directly map the
corresponding molecular Hamiltonians of interest, thereby enabling quantum
simulations with fundamentally new and potentially very efficient quantum
devices. The CQD-MQD will embrace a climate of inclusion and diversity so that
underrepresented minorities and women are included in the interdisciplinary,
team-based research. Specific goals for Phase I include (i) the design of
modular 3D circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) platforms for molecular
quantum dynamics simulations, (ii) development of algorithms for quantum
simulations and quantum computing on the new cQED platforms, and (iii)
applications of the developed bosonic modular devices and algorithms to
simulations of photo-induced quantum reaction dynamics, vibronic many-body
systems; and quantum chemical dynamics in the condensed phase. The CQD-MQD
research and training program will establish an ecosystem with emphasis on
recruitment and retention of female scientists and other members of
underrepresented groups to advance the frontiers of knowledge in this burgeoning
field and to train the next-generation workforce. The scientific and
technological outcomes have the potential to be transformative for the quantum
simulation of chemical systems and have the potential to out-perform
conventional quantum computing platforms and find application across a wide
range of molecular systems and quantum phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.