* 2124705
* NCS-FO: Characterization and Decoding of Cortical Oscillatory Dynamics of Complex Hand Function
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Giuseppe Pellizzer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 983,513.00

In daily life, people grasp and hold an object with their hands, such as a
hammer or an egg, frequently and dexterously. These tasks require different
levels of steady grasp force and exert different sensations on the fingers and
palm. This raises questions of how the brain regulates sustained grasp force and
processes sensory input from different parts of the hand. This project will
investigate cortical oscillations using high-density electrode grids while human
subjects perform sustained hand grasp tasks and feel tactile stimuli such as
touch and vibration. Novel computational algorithms will be developed and
applied to the neural data to predict the produced grasp force and differentiate
tactile inputs to the hand. This project will provide novel knowledge regarding
the organization of sensorimotor cortex activity in relation to grasp force and
tactile sensations. Brain regions that show unique activity in response to touch
and vibration will then be stimulated with electrical pulses to elicit
artificial sensations. Insights gained from this project will play a critical
role in the development of closed-loop neuroprosthetics that can replicate
natural hand function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite considerable progress
regarding our understanding of the neural bases of sensorimotor behavior, there
is very limited knowledge about the neural dynamics of sensory and motor
cortical circuits during the generation of sustained complex hand function, such
as grasping and tactile exploration, which are essential for common daily
activities. A better understanding of the spatio-temporal neural dynamics
associated with sustained complex hand movements and somatosensory processing is
a necessary requirement for the construction of more efficient closed-loop
neuroprosthetics. Utilizing advanced electrode technology, this project will
record cortical activity with high-density electrocorticography (ECoG) grids,
then decode multichannel data with computational intelligence for the
identification of oscillatory patterns of the sensorimotor cortex during the
execution of sustained hand grasp function. The high-density ECoG grids will
provide recordings of brain activity across a large cortical space and with sub-
centimeter resolution. Simultaneously, tactile sensory inputs--such as vibration
and touch--will be delivered to different fingers and palm. The project will
examine to what extent the cortical oscillations can be used to predict the
produced grasp force and distinguish between different prolonged somatosensory
inputs to the hand. The project will also develop a real-time system for the
mapping cortical activations online, then stimulate cortical regions using
channel suites and temporal patterns mimicking the ECoG modulations using a
computer-in-the-loop system. The project will integrate neuroscience,
neurosurgery and biomedical engineering expertise, to uncover spatio-spectral
dynamics of somatosensory and motor cortical oscillations, and decode these
patterns for the control of closed-loop hand neuroprosthetics. Outcomes will
enable the design and development of neuroprosthetics more akin to the natural
function of the hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by Integrative
Strategies for Understanding Neural and Cognitive Systems (NCS), a
multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the Directorates for Biology
(BIO), Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE), Education and
Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral, and Economic
Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.