* 2124405
* SCH: Movement as a Vital Sign in Preterm Infants
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* David Paydarfar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 525,000.00

Each year in the United States, one in ten live births or roughly 380,000 babies
are born prematurely, with a mortality of 27%. Nearly one third of those
surviving suffer from lifelong neurological conditions including cerebral palsy,
autism, and psychiatric disorders with substantial personal and societal costs.
Despite advances in neonatal intensive care, little progress has been made in
monitoring maturation of neurological function in preterm infants. This proposal
addresses an urgent need for continuous monitoring of neurological function in
the neonatal intensive care unit to advance our understanding of normal and
abnormal neurological maturation and to develop timely clinical interventions to
improve the health outcomes and reduce costs of prematurity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program aims to show that bodily movements of
infants are a vital marker for the functional integrity of the nervous system.
In Objective 1 the team will quantify movement bouts in routinely obtained data
sets over ~3 months, from birth (&lt;29 weeks gestational age) until discharge
from the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Pursuing the hypothesis that
complexity of movement patterns increases with age as a sign of maturation, they
will examine the evolving entropy of movement signals over several months.
Objective 2 will quantify the strong physiological interactions of movement
bouts with the respiratory and cardiac rhythms, and correlate movement to apneic
events and cardiorespiratory instability. Objective 3 seeks to develop machine
learning algorithms using features of movement and other physiological events
for online prediction of apneic episodes. In return, the algorithms will reveal
physiological features and mechanisms that enhance clinical insights.
Preliminary data promise results that support our thesis that movement in
newborn infants is an important vital sign. Taken together, this quantitative
approach will advance understanding maturation of the neonatal nervous system
and how movement can stabilize or disrupt cardiorespiratory control in neonates.
The team has also identified multiple outreach activities to foster the
integration of scientific research, technology and STEM education, including a
workshop on Movement Science, Data, and Technology, in collaboration with a
minority-serving institution to increase minority representation in the
movement, data, and computational sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.