* 2124953
* Collaborative Research: Standard: Exploring the Variation in Understanding and Experiences with Ethical Engineering Research among Faculty in Biomedical Engineering
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Justin Hess, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 341,093.00

Engineering faculty prepare engineering students for ethical research conduct
and practice. Thus, it is important to identify how faculty understand ethical
engineering research because these perceptions influence how they teach ethics
to their students. It is especially important to focus on biomedical engineering
(BME) because biomedical engineers play a critical role in promoting the health
and well-being of the public and must confront novel ethical issues associated
with emerging technologies, such as genetic engineering, stem cell technologies,
rapid COVID detection, and vaccine development. In this work, we seek to
investigate how BME faculty understand ethical engineering research and how they
reached those understandings. Using these findings, we will then be able to
design better educational strategies to prepare BME students for ethical
research. We will collaborate with BME faculty interested in BME ethics through
a Community of Practice (CoP) and in partnership with the Online Ethics Center
(OEC). This CoP will provide perspective on the research findings and will help
translate the research findings into actionable educational practices for use at
CoP participantsâ€™ specific institutions and throughout the nation. Sharing the
research findings and these educational practices through the OEC will provide
the BME community with appropriate educational tools to prepare future
biomedical engineers for ethical BME research and practice, which will in turn
help future engineers better promote the health and well-being of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty act as stewards of culture in their
research groups and departments and play a significant role in ensuring ethical
research conduct and practice within these contexts. Thus, identifying the
variation in how faculty experience and understand ethics can inform the
development of valid strategies to establish and maintain ethical cultures in
engineering departments and research groups. Due to the significant role of BME
research and development products on the health and well-being of the public, it
is imperative that we understand how to train ethical engineering researchers in
this specific discipline. Yet, strategies for training BME faculty and students
to effectively engage with ethical challenges remain unclear. To derive
empirical insights on effective approaches to cultivating ethical cultures of
BME research, we believe it is necessary to study the specific challenges and
variations in ways BME faculty members across programs experience, understand,
and practice ethical engineering research. In this work, we will (1) use
phenomenography to identify the variation in ways BME faculty across the US
experience ethical engineering research, (2) use critical incident technique to
identify the critical factors that influence these ways of experiencing, and (3)
use design heuristics as a lens to generate educational approaches appropriate
for fostering cultures of ethical engineering research in BME. Throughout the
project, we will engage a CoP of BME faculty and students from a diverse set of
research institutions across the US who will reflect on findings; thus, the CoP
will help validate emergent findings and identify effective strategies that may
be diffused across this STEM community to guide related efforts at cultivating
cultures of ethical research. This project will generate new knowledge that
reveals the range of variation in experiences with and understandings of ethics
and ethical research cultures among BME faculties as well as critical
experiential and cultural factors that have shaped those understandings. This
new knowledge will guide approaches to fostering ethical cultures of research.
Finally, integrating this new knowledge within a CoP will ensure effective
transfer of research into practice, which will benefit society by ensuring
biomedical engineers graduating from these programs are prepared to respond
effectively to the critical ethical issues of BME research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.