* 2124838
* Asking Different Questions in Climate Change Science, Impact, Mitigation and Adaptation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amanda Crump, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,261.00

Asking Different Questions in Climate Change Science, Impact, Mitigation and
Adaptation examines how integrating cultural and social literacies into research
training for climate and environmental scientists can produce more ethical,
effective, and relevant research. The project will test the hypothesis that
training in understanding the relationship between environmental change and
culture will produce scholars capable of engaging in research that addresses the
disproportionate environmental impact on vulnerable and historically
marginalized communities. An expected outcome is that providing climate and
environmental scientists with training in environmental justice, science &amp;
technology studies, indigenous studies, ethnic studies, and community-engaged
research will elevate their capacities to be agents of ethical change. The
result will be a diverse group of scientists engaged in research that addresses
the challenges of climate change, mitigation and adaptation, while also
producing greater social equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's objectives
are to (1) create a customized training on equity and ethic challenges in
climate science, (2) deliver these trainings in climate science graduate
coursework across seven different departments, (3) engage in a comparative
analysis to study their efficacy and (4) disseminate the training. A key measure
of success for the program will be the achievement of learning objectives and
students' level of engagement in questions of ethics and equity. The study will
contribute to research on the ethics engagement by examining the efficacy of an
equity-oriented ethics training. The proposed training is likely to spur
projects that reduce the impacts of climate change on under-resourced
communities. The training may also contribute to cultural changes within
scientific communities, which may help with the retention of women and
underrepresented populations in climate science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.