* 2124836
* NSFDEB-NERC: Collaborative Research: Vertebrate functional traits as indicators of ecosystem function through deep and shallow time
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michelle Lawing, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 534,477.00

Animals interact with their environments via specific sets of traits, or
characteristics. For example, tooth shape has adapted to enable animals to
process different foods efficiently, and variation in limb structure allows
animals to move across the landscape to attain food and avoid predation across
different habitats. Relationships between animal characteristics and
environmental conditions typically co-evolve over long timespans. However,
habitat alteration and climate change have the potential to rapidly disrupt
existing relationships that have been refined over many generations. An
important challenge in modern ecology is to identify which traits are necessary
to maintain ecosystem function, but because trait-environment interactions
manifest over long timescales, inferring ecosystem degradation requires a
historical perspective uniquely provided by the fossil record. In this project,
the researchers plan to analyze trait-environment relationships across Africa
and through time over the past 7.5 million years in an attempt to disentangle
the effects of hominine evolution and environmental change on trait
distributions and function for entire communities of animals. This project
provides international collaborative experiences for early career scientists, it
aims to translate research findings into learning modules and museum exhibits,
and plans to aid conservation planning through a partnership with the
Conservation Paleobiology in Africa Program of the International Union of
Biological Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will employ a novel
multi-trait and multi-taxonomic approach to capture feeding, locomotor, and
physiological functional aspects of terrestrial vertebrates in African
ecosystems. The aim is to produce an extensive database of hard-to-gather
functional traits from African museum specimens that will be made publicly
available. Using a combination of ecometric relationships and paleoclimate data,
e.g. stable carbon isotopes, the researchers plan to identify the relative
influence of changing environmental conditions versus anthropogenic activities
on suites of traits for mammals and squamates across much of Africa and over
geologic time. Ecometric relationships are community-level, functional trait-
environment links that do not depend on taxonomic composition. Thus, these
relationships are generalizable through space and time. The field of ecometrics
provides a quantitative framework for assessing not only the relationship
between traits and the environmental conditions in which they are found, but
also times when those relationships were disrupted by extrinsic factors. By
examining ecometric relationships at different temporal scales, the researchers
will identify what trait-environment relationships relate to ecosystem function
and calculate the degree of trait space occupancy necessary to prevent African
ecosystems from tipping to a faunally depauperate state. The researchers will
also evaluate ecometric relationships to reconstruct the onset, tempo, and mode
of African vertebrate ecosystem change over the past 7.5 million years and will
then use these histories to forecast future change, co-producing knowledge with
conservation groups to inform conservation decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.