* 2124189
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Food Resiliency through Engineered Supply Chains (FRESCH)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Patrick Phelan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2023
* USD 98,980.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary food supply chains are optimized for
high volume, low cost, and global reach—but continue to fail: food deserts and
food-borne illness persist; small producers face barriers to participation; and
natural disasters (including the COVID-19 pandemic) disrupt production and
deliveries. Engineers traditionally approach problems systematically,
sequentially, and incrementally. Breakdowns in food systems, however, are less
manageable by these methods because food systems have engrained social and
cultural elements (tastes, histories, identities, and values) which defy
technical optimization and preclude stopping rules. The targeted societal impact
of the FRESCH ERC is to improve the nation’s health and prosperity by both
avoiding or mitigating disruptions and by exploiting opportunities to expand
food variety and profitability. An important aspect of the ERC’s target goals is
to shift thinking from linear “food supply chains” to flexible and resilient
“food networks.” Resilience within food networks means that whatever disruptions
do occur will have smaller negative impacts or greater positive ones. Investment
in adaptive capacity within the food industry will balance the pervasive drive
for “leaner” food systems, which are often brittle and not aligned with
sustainable development goals, such as increasing the incomes of food producers
and ensuring decent work for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FRESCH ERC will
develop technology to serve all nodes of food systems; reduce food insecurity
and waste; expand the criteria for system performance beyond technical
efficiency; and transform education and practice in industrial, agricultural,
and biosystems engineering to include concepts of resilience. Resilience is more
than simple robustness or the ability to rebound—it includes graceful
extendibility and sustained adaptability in response to critical situations or
trends that cannot be foreseen. The planning grant will provide mechanisms and
resources to charter an ERC to address issues of food safety in small-scale food
networks and develop a food network challenge simulation to train students and
stakeholders about the interconnectedness of food systems. Our intellectual
approach to planning is grounded in the Community Capitals Framework. This
systems approach considers all relevant human, social, natural, financial,
built, cultural, and political capitals, and deploys them holistically to
greatest impact for community development. Combining resilience thinking and
community capitals is a convergent approach to define priorities and select
impactful engineering research and development
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.