* 2124431
* FMitF: Track I: Synthesis of Quantitative Network Analytics: From Left-of-Launch to Right-of-Boom
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Srivatsan Ravi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Network-security analysis is currently a tedious and detailed exercise that
starts with analysts collecting data from diverse sources (such as network
traffic, server histories and individual computer states), and then cross-
comparing this information against attack data, such as malicious host names or
malware descriptions. Analysts then make security decisions by manually
inspecting these data sets and looking for rare but dangerous events.
Unsurprisingly, this is an error-prone process, which is further complicated by
rising traffic volumes, complex network structures, and confounding factors such
as proxies and Network Address Translation (NAT) boxes. This project's goal is
to use ideas inspired by formal methods to develop a novel framework to automate
network-traffic analysis. By improving data collection through better sensor
placement and by analyzing the provenance of hostile events, the project's
impacts are an improvement in security analysis, better situational awareness
and lowered response times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a query
language that allows network analysts to describe the structure of the network
and the desired analysis objective assuming complete observability across the
network. To account for elements that confound such analyses, the project
investigates automatic methods to test feasibility of analysis under partial
observability. If this does not hold, it identifies statistically correlated
alternative quantities that can be used to give approximately correct results
with high probability. The framework also allows for the automatic synthesis of
necessary monitors and their optimal placement so as to minimize errors and
resource overheads. The system is equipped with mechanisms to track the
provenance of measurements from all deployed sensors, thus enabling researchers
to diagnose root causes after warnings are triggered or attacks
uncovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.