* 2124943
* Collaborative Research: Project Incubation - New Jersey Institute of Technology Campus Alignment Review of Ethics
* SBE,SMA
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Deni Elliott, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 44,762.00

Today’s US citizens need to be competent evaluators of scientific and technical
claims that they encounter through social media, news stories, or professional
communication. Their ability to identify and use verifiable facts impacts their
personal choices and their active participation in public discussion.
Professionals in scientific and technical careers need to approach their work
with an understanding of ethical considerations, which include how the
professional choices that they make in the face of ongoing and novel challenges
impact citizens’ everyday lives. Given the broad social impacts of scientific
and engineering research, ensuring the ethical and responsible conduct of
research is vital to the welfare of the American public and promotes the
progress of science. Universities must meet this need, both as sites of research
and, most critically, as educators of future STEM researchers and workers. In
this project, researchers examine how well institutional messaging that
describes New Jersey Institute of Technology’s commitment to ethics aligns with
students’ encounters with ethics in and out of the classroom. Ethics education
aligns with the critical evaluation needs of citizens in two ways: first, by
ensuring that the scientific and technological researchers of the future come to
their work with robust training in ethics and next, by ensuring that higher
education gives students practice in ethical reasoning. Skill in ethical
reasoning facilitates students’ personal, vocational, and civic growth. Lessons
learned from this study at this university will be used to improve alignment of
ethics education at other US universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers from
Harvard University, Stanford University, and the University of South Florida who
are members of a research consortium, the National Ethics Project (NEP), join
forces with investigators from New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT) to
build an evidence-based account of an institution’s commitment to ethics
education. Employing mixed-methodologies, we will test tools and techniques that
combine novel and traditional methods from the digital humanities, psychology,
and design thinking. These tools were designed by the NEP to benefit a broad
range of institutions of higher education in auditing and transforming
approaches to Ethical and Responsible Research. For this project, we will focus
on alignment: identifying consistency with institution, faculty, and student
statements and perceptions that include instructor goals, activities, and
assessment techniques, student perception, and stated institutional commitment
to ethics. In addition to helping NJIT examine its own approach to ethical and
responsible research and seeding a future Institutional Transformation proposal
to address identified needs, this project is the first campus-wide opportunity
for the NEP to fully test its Campus Alignment Review of Ethics, which to date
has been applied only piecemeal on separate campuses. Results from this research
will be disseminated via the NEP website, the National Academy of Engineering’s
Online Ethics Center, scholarly presentations at national conferences and
publications in scholarly journals. Data developed through this project will be
available to other researchers and to the public through the Open Science
Framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.