* 2124692
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Lattices, number theory, and distribution questions in cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Modern cryptography faces the serious concern that quantum computers will one
day break most of our presently-used cryptosystems. This would have catastrophic
consequences to internet security and privacy. As a result, it is very important
to develop and understand newer types of potentially quantum-resistant
cryptosystems. Cryptosystems based on the mathematical notion of Euclidean
lattices are presently the leading candidates for post-quantum cryptography. The
proposal studies the mathematical underpinnings of these systems, as well as
possible attacks on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the PI and
collaborators will study distribution questions (such as biased outputs) related
to the behavior of the LLL lattice basis reduction algorithm, one of the basic
tools for attacking lattice-based cryptosystems. Estimating the security of
lattice-based cryptosystems requires understanding the actual, average-case
performance of the LLL algorithm and its variants, hence the interest in such an
analysis. The PI and collaborators also plan to develop machinery from analytic
number theory and automorphic forms to study the size of the smallest basis of a
random lattice, which is also important for understanding average-case key
sizes. Finally, the PI and collaborators will systematically study various
practical aspects of implementations of elliptic curve cryptosystems, such as
unusual biases in timings or other side-channel
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.