* 2124463
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Causal Inference with Spatio-Temporal Data on Human Dynamics in Conflict Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kosuke Imai, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

How do airstrikes affect the subsequent location and nature of insurgent
violence in violent settings like Afghanistan and Iraq? How does insurgent
violence change in response to civilian casualties? And how do large-scale aid
programs affect the frequency, type, and location of insurgent violence in these
settings? These questions are examples of important issues that face policy-
makers on a daily basis. Yet while the study of human dynamics of violence has
grown enormously over the past decade, we still lack methods for conducting
causal inference in these challenging settings. Indeed, scholars have continued
to rely on approaches that do not fully account for the spatial and temporal
dynamics that characterize fast-moving interactions between governments,
insurgents, and civilians. Existing methods typically aggregate fine-grained
geo-spatial data at much coarser temporal and spatial units, throwing away the
advantages of current micro-level data and leaving scholars unable to capitalize
on future improvements to high-frequency, high-resolution geo-spatial data.
Taken together, existing frameworks risk mistaken causal inferences about the
efficacy of both violent and non-violent interventions in these settings,
leaving policy-makers blind to possible unintended consequences and negative
externalities of proposed policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a comprehensive spatio-temporal causal inference framework that avoids
data aggregation and imposes no structural assumptions on spatial spillover and
temporal carryover effects. It defines causal quantities of interest under
stochastic interventions, which represent counterfactual treatment assignment
strategies. The estimation strategy employs inverse probability weighting based
on an estimated propensity score surface. Among others, this project will
develop mediation analysis, effect modification, and sensitivity analysis for
these complex spatio-temporal settings. It will also investigate other important
problems such as optimal treatment allocations, the spatial range of treatment
spillover, and causal inference in the presence of persistent treatments. This
project team will use airstrikes and economic assistance in fragile settings as
empirical examples. The goal is to publish articles in leading general science,
statistical, and political science journals. The PIs will also publish software
packages to automate and to extend the spatio-temporal framework to other issues
and settings. The project will provide research training opportunities at a
graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.