* 2124194
* Developing Nanosensor Chemical Cytometry (NCC) to Support the Development of Cellular Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Strano, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,061.00

How biology responds to the environment at the cellular level play an important
role in human health and diseases. For example, it is common for cells of the
same type and origin to be functionally significantly different from one cell to
another. While previous methods have studied cell populations as a group, it is
becoming increasingly clear that measuring cells individually provides important
information that helps to predict their behavior as part of organisms. Thus, the
goal of this project is to develop a new platform for probing the functional
properties of cells (i. e., cell cytometry) in a nondestructive way at the
single cell level in a rapid manner. This platform will make use of novel
nanosensors that can determine the properties of single cells flowing in a
microchannel by detecting their reflections when illuminated with near infrared
light. Potential benefits of this platform include earlier detection of chronic
conditions such as diabetes and cancer, as many of the initial changes
responsible start as functional shifts within a cell population, and enhancement
of new research into the use of cells as therapeutics. Because these cells are
extracted from patients, it is important to develop techniques to examine their
quality at the single-cell level to ensure that they function as intended. The
project will also further educational opportunities for undergraduates, high
school students, and underrepresented minorities in the greater Boston area
specifically through guided internship programs for teachers and high school and
undergraduate underrepresented minority students. The new platform will enhance
an ongoing Nanopore Sequencing Laboratory Module by connecting the new cell
sensing platform to the existing platform, allowing students to study both the
genetic and physical properties of a single cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to utilize the interface of fluorescent nanosensor arrays
within high throughput microfluidic channels such that scientifically relevant
label free cellular populations can be studied nondestructively at the single
cell level. The work builds on studies that will advance a new class of
biophotonic monitoring platform pioneered by the investigator’s Lab at MIT. The
sensor consists of near-infrared (nIR) fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube
(SWNT) nanosensors along a microfluidic channel through which flowing cells are
guided. These nanosensors can be engineered to be optically responsive to local
concentrations of biologically relevant chemical signals. Preliminary results
showed that one can utilize the flowing cell itself as a Gaussian lens to
amplify the nanosensor emission signal and extract rich information on a per
cell basis in real-time. Due to the investigator’s method of imaging data
collection, the biomolecular information extracted can be cross-correlated with
individual cellular physical properties. As part of this project, first, the
capabilities of such a system to accommodate multiple targeted nanosensors for
multiplexed single cell detection will be studied. Next, the physical phenomenon
of cellular lensing, including the effects of different cell types and
experimental conditions will be studied. Finally, the newly developed sensor
platform will be utilized to study commonly used cell types used in cell
therapy, including: monocytes, macrophages, T-cells or neural stem
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.