* 2124116
* FMitF: Track I: Flow Modeling Meets Software Verification: Redesign Internet Congestion Control for Performance and Verifiability
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Hamid Bagheri, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 766,000.00

The Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) is a fundamental Internet protocol
responsible for transmitting data in daily Internet activities, such as checking
emails, reading news, watching videos, messaging friends, making online orders,
and many others. An essential component of TCP is the congestion-control
algorithm implementations (CCAIs) that determine how fast TCP transmits data on
the Internet. Therefore, CCAIs are imperative for the performance and stability
of the Internet. However, many bugs have been detected and reported in the
CCAIs. These bugs are mistakes made by CCAI developers, and some of them have
potentially severe impacts on the performance and stability of the Internet.
This project develops and studies a methodology to help CCAI developers avoid
such mistakes and thus make the Internet not only more efficient but also more
reliable. This project will provide the students with a unique opportunity to
explore and study interdisciplinary topics in computer networks, software
engineering, and operating system. In addition to graduate students, this
project will also involve undergraduate, female, underrepresented minority, and
high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Congestion-control algorithm
implementations (CCAIs) are essential for the performance and stability of the
Internet. The goal of this project is to propose verifiable CCAIs as a new CCAI
design and implementation methodology, which systematically enables CCAI
developers to design and implement CCAIs with not only efficient performance but
also verifiable correctness. Specifically, the proposed research work falls into
three research thrusts: 1) a methodology to guide CCAI developers to design and
implement verifiable CCAIs; 2) symbolic network environments to represent the
aggregate information of packets in various network environments; 3) easy-to-
adopt and scalable CCAI verification methods. The proposed work is inspired by
the scalability of the flow-modeling methods proposed by the networking
community for performance evaluation but tailored to the software-verification
methods proposed by the software-engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.