* 2124829
* Mineral Pigment Provisioning and Utilization in a Long Term Context
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Brandi MacDonald, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 112,177.00

Humans are characterized by complex behaviors and social interactions.
Understanding what drove such developments, when they occurred, and how they
enabled people to migrate, adapt, and thrive in new and changing environments
are prominent themes in archaeology. To examine these themes, archaeologists
often turn to artifact provenance studies in order to test hypotheses on
mobility, resource use, and social networks. This study will use mineral pigment
provenance to examine early and sustained human responses to new and
subsequently changing environments in a traditional context. The region
preserves a deep temporal record of human occupation, and an archaeological
record spanning fluctuations in climate and sea level, habitat change, and
megafauna extinctions. The people inhabiting this area used mineral pigments
continuously paralleling cultural transitions in diet, mobility, and stone tool
technologies. The datasets produced in the course of this project will be
compared to existing data on climate, diet, and mobility to develop new insights
into the lifeways of early humans. This project will support the research
programs of two early career scientists and support the training and education
of graduate students in STEM. The project will make impactful contributions to
local communities by engaging site owners as research partners and promote an
exemplary model for active and reciprocal collaborative research with descendant
Indigenous communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct the
first stage of a two stage project that seeks to examine long-term patterns in
mobility and resource use through a lens of mineral pigment acquisition. The
study will integrate field-based research with advanced scientific techniques to
characterize the long-term history of mineral pigment collection, preferences,
and use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.