* 2124284
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Innovative Built and Regenerative Environments for Advancing Timeless Habitability and Equity (I-BREATHE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mahour Parast, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

I-BREATHE will revolutionize the built environment to actively remove harmful
gases in outdoor and indoor environments, thereby contributing to the wellbeing
of occupants, the environment, and the community while enhancing the durability
of the built environment. Buildings and civil infrastructure are in direct
contact with the atmosphere and therefore can play a revolutionary supporting
role to trees in removing particulate matter and gaseous compounds. As people
spend a significant amount of their time indoors, buildings and civil
infrastructure also have the potential to serve as barriers that block air
pollutants from reaching their users. This planning grant activities will help
develop an impactful community-centered vision for I BREATHE followed by a well-
thought-out proposal to pursue establishment of the center with NSF ERC funding
and the support of partners and stakeholders. As part of the planning grant,
workshops would be set up for co-creation of new knowledge between university
researchers and the community stakeholders. It would go beyond gathering
information into co-creation. This helps the university researchers to gain more
knowledge on the experiences and gaps faced by the community/industrial partners
and similarly the community partners contribute to the knowledge generation by
the university researchers. Such planning meetings allow us to identify societal
and community challenges that can be addressed as part of this proposal and
further provide opportunities to work with scholars from social science
disciplines (e.g., economics, management, and psychology) to further refine the
scope and research activities to maximize social gains. The meeting outcomes
will help develop strategies for collecting and integrating inputs while
creating advocacy groups and networks around the shared vision of simultaneous
solutions for air quality and a resilient built
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center will develop regenerative
adsorptive materials to collect gaseous emissions and convert them into valuable
products. Successful collection and conversion of gasses requires advancing the
science of engineering carbon dots, mineralization, and photocatalytic
materials, as well as advancing the knowledge of metal–organic frameworks and
electrochemical conversion. To bridge the gap between the collection and
conversion of gases, the adsorbing surfaces need to be regenerated by activation
or desorption such that noxious gases, particulates, and CO2 are removed and can
be used in the conversion process. Here, we explore the role of carbon dots and
photoactive materials for the active remediation process, while taking advantage
of solar thermal heating and solar photovoltaics combined with enhanced heat and
mass transfer within/near the adsorbents to distribute the desorbed gases to
desired endpoints. We also explore how shape and topology optimization can help
increase the exposure of the built environment to the surrounding air, thereby
increasing the efficiency of the adsorbents. With the help of our multifaceted
plan for education and workforce development, we aim to bring the concept of
breathing buildings to every household, so that every individual could benefit
from the new role of the built environment in human health, environmental
wellbeing, social equity, and community resilience. The Center will further
revolutionize students' experience by centering it on use-inspired research.
This in turn will produce globally aware scientists that will serve as junior
ambassadors of the breathing building concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.