* 2124174
* Submesoscale and Surface Gravity Wave Interactions on the Continental Shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Delphine Hypolite, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 472,667.00

The region spanning the shoreline to the shelf-break serves as a primary
connection between human activity at the land-sea interface and ecological
functioning farther offshore. An arising conception is that the shelf is filled
with nonlinear, 3D flow patterns that are 0.1 - 1 km in spatial scale with
ephemeral lifecycles of hours to days, termed ‘submesoscale’. This project will
use a multi-scale modeling approach to examine 1) wave effects on submesoscale
dynamics and 2) interactions between different classes of submesoscale features.
The gained physical knowledge will transform notions of nearshore transport that
imprint onto pollution dispersal, coastal biogeochemical fluxes, and ecosystem
functioning. New physical understanding will inform management of nearshore
marine ecosystems and water-quality in recreational areas through communication
with local managers. Results will be disseminated to the general public and
historically underrepresented youth through coordination with the Surfrider
Foundation. Research collaborations will aid in the development of an online
wave-circulation model coupling; strengthen the physical oceanographic and
technological framework of a multi-institutional project on the farming of giant
kelp on the continental shelf; and modernize conceptions of coastal connectivity
for the Long Term Ecological Research Project on giant kelp in the Santa Barbara
Channel.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project explores surface gravity wave
effects on- and interactions between- the variety of submesoscale coherent
structures that uniquely coexist in the region spanning the shoreline to the
shelfbreak, including surface layer density fronts and filaments, topographic
wakes, internal tidal bores, freshwater plumes, and surfzone vortices. The
primary hypotheses are: (1) surface gravity wave effects on currents can
significantly modify the local circulation, material fluxes, and spatial
orientation of nearshore submesoscale coherent structures and (2) the
coexistence of distinct phenomena drives submesoscale interactions that manifest
as (a) sporadic collisions between individual fronts or vortices and (b)
competition to regulate stratification and material fluxes. Tools include a
suite of high-resolution, multiply-nested ROMS simulations employing non-
hydrostatic capability and realistic atmospheric, tidal, and surface wave-
averaged forcing, and complementary idealized simulations to target the
fundamental dynamics and parametric dependencies of these
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.