* 2124496
* Convection, Clouds and Sea Surface Temperature
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Dennis Hartmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2024
* USD 920,171.00

Clouds have competing effects on Earth's energy budget, as clouds warm the Earth
by trapping outgoing infrared radiation but they also cool by reflecting
sunlight back to space. For deep convective clouds in the tropics the balance
between these competing effect is very close, so that their net radiative effect
is near zero. The reasons for the close cancellation are not known, and it is
possible that global warming may tip the net cloud radiative effect to favor
warming or cooling, enhancing or dimishing the warming effect of greenhouse gas
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work under this award examines the balance
between cloud heating and cooling with a focus on differences in cloud radiative
effects at different stages of the cloud lifecycle, and on the relationship
between tropical clouds and sea surface temperatures (SSTs). The work on cloud
lifecycle effects is motivated by the PI's recent examination of satellite data
suggesting that the high ice clouds accompanying deep tropical convection are
self-sustaining through an interaction between radiation and turbulence. The
near-zero radiative effect of convective clouds would then result from a
combination of the net cooling effect of the high ice clouds and the net warming
effect of the deep precipitating clouds that generate them. The work on SST-
cloud interactions is motivated by the relationship between SSTs and the
tropospheric overturning circulations that connect them to both deep and shallow
clouds. Preliminary results show an unexpected increase in the strength of the
overturning circulations as SSTs warm, and the project explores the reasons for
the strengthening and its implications for cloud cover. The work is conducted
through analysis of observational data from satellites and other sources and
idealized modeling experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader
impacts due to the role of cloud radiative effects in determining the amount of
warming that will occur as a result of increases in greenhouse gas
concentrations. The project also considers the effect of greenhouse warming on
tropical SST contrasts, an important consideration as the regional impacts of
tropical climate change are strongly influenced by SST contrasts. The project
also supports two graduate students and contribute to the development of
educational materials including a third edition of the Principal Investigator's
textbook on global physical climatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.