* 2124510
* Speed Limits on Pattern Formation in Dynamic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jason Green, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 374,449.00

This grant will fund research that enables future engineering of materials that
form functional patterns in response to external triggers such as light or heat,
with application to chemical and optical sensors and microelectronics, thereby
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity.
Cellular materials in living systems can quickly adapt to their surroundings,
organizing their structural patterns accordingly. Engineering the next
generation of human-made materials to exhibit such behavior requires new
theoretical methods to clarify the relationship between design decisions and the
dynamics of functional pattern formation. This project will address this need by
creating new methods for the analysis of the rates of pattern formation, with
particular emphasis on upper bounds on such rates that would inform the future
creation of materials that form patterns on predetermined time schedules. Such
smart materials will benefit applications across the energy, biomedical,
chemical, and healthcare industries. Online, open-science computational
notebooks will help make the science of pattern formation widely accessible to
students and other researchers. Outreach to a local McNair Scholars Program will
help broaden participation in STEM of students from currently underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to the characterization of speed limits associated with the
transient dynamics of nonequilibrium pattern formation. It will accomplish this
outcome by focusing on pattern formation in reaction-diffusion systems, a
dynamical mechanism that has previously been leveraged to fabricate
microstructures, enable new sensor modalities, and generate work. The
theoretical framework will rely on a new density matrix formulation, inspired by
classical statistical mechanics and quantum-mechanical analogies. Analytical
results will be validated using numerical simulations that permit a broad
exploration of the design space associated with transient pattern formation. The
target theory will enable a systematic separation between the contributions of
deterministic and stochastic dynamics, and will inform the possible use of
control to regulate the dynamic response to transient fluctuations. The project
will lay the groundwork for in-silico design of the behaviors of complex dynamic
systems, produce computationally tractable links between the geometries of phase
space and information, and place bounds on the response of systems to external
stimuli that can serve as a design principle for the actuation of material
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.