* 2124826
* Fabrication and Mechanical Behavior of Hierarchical Architected Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Frances Allen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 762,630.00

This grant supports advanced manufacturing through a study of multiphoton
lithography of hierarchical architected metamaterials, providing an avenue for
both scientific and technological progress which contributes to national
prosperity. Multiphoton lithography is an additive manufacturing technique that
enables the printing of complex structures in three dimensions with nanoscale
features and resolution. While the principles of laser-material interactions for
photopolymerization are well understood, their effects on the mechanical
properties of the printed material have not been studied thoroughly. This poses
obstacles in the modeling of such structures and their utility in functional
material systems. This award supports the fundamental research required to
unravel the effects of multiphoton lithography on the mechanical behavior and
efficient design of 3D structures such as bioscaffolds. This project enables
accurate modeling of the mechanical response of these structures in relation to
the processing parameters. Furthermore, it paves the way for the scalability of
multiphoton lithography and its use in diverse fields, including healthcare,
bioengineering, and aerospace. The results from this research constitute a
critical asset in the U.S. economy and society. The research involves several
disciplines, including manufacturing, materials science, mechanics, and
biochemistry. This multi-disciplinary approach serves as a catalyst for positive
impact in engineering education for women and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphoton lithography (MPL) can surpass several
barriers related to the fabrication of extremely complex, mechanically robust
three-dimensional (3D) structures in nano- and microscale. However, a major
obstacle hindering advance of the scalability and wide applicability of this
technique is the limited understanding on the constitutive mechanical behavior
of the fabricated materials as a function of the processing parameters. This
research is designed to comprehend the effect of MPL fabrication parameters on
the mechanical behavior of hierarchical architected metamaterials. Through ex
situ TEM analysis of defect formation and in situ SEM mechanical testing
experiments, the mechanical performance of these materials is evaluated with
respect to properties such as ductility, strength, critical fracture toughness
and therefore enable accurate constitutive modeling of these materials. These
models involve finite element analysis (FEA) and molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations towards predicting the mechanical performance of complex 3D
structures, validated through the design and manufacture of bioscaffolds that
can possess multifunctional behavior. The results of the characterization
experiments are used to reveal the enhanced mechanical performance and
scalability of the architected material designs, thereby elucidating the full
potential of MPL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.