* 2124903
* Collaborative Research: MIM: Using multilayer interaction networks to predict microbiome assembly and function
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mason Porter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2024
* USD 260,535.00

Microbes play important roles in most ecosystems on Earth and contribute to
plant, animal, and human well-being. Understanding microbial community structure
and function is necessary for our ability to (1) manage human and animal health
and plant productivity and (2) predict ecosystem responses to environmental
changes. Consequently, there is an urgent need to understand how microbes
interact with each other and with the environment (including their plant,
animal, or human hosts). In this project, the researchers will combine
mathematical models and data analyses to uncover the mechanisms that govern the
structure and dynamics of microbial communities and species interactions. The
novelty of their approach is that it integrates models of different complexity
with data on microbial dynamics in different host species to guide the
construction, exploration, and testing of those models. The researchers will
develop simple models to explicitly describe different positive and negative
interactions among small groups of microbes, such as competition for resources,
mutually beneficial exchange of chemicals, or inhibition by toxins. They will
also develop multispecies, multilayer network models that reflect the complexity
of microbial communities and explore their responses to different disturbances
(specifically, invasions by pathogens, antibiotic treatments, or resource-level
alterations). The results of this project will improve understanding of how
microbial communities function and how they can be modified to improve animal,
plant, and human health. Postdoctoral researchers and students will receive
interdisciplinary training in microbial ecology, mathematical modeling, and
network science. The researchers will make the approaches and the results of the
project available through publications, teaching, and presentations to other
scientists and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines theoretical
frameworks from ecology, mathematics, and physics — including resource-based
ecology, multilayer network analysis, and metacommunity theory — to gain a
mechanistic understanding of how microbial interactions determine community
dynamics and function. The researchers will develop resource-based models of
microbial interactions, and use multilayer network theory to integrate the
interaction modules in heterogeneous network structures that include multiple
relations, multiple subsystems, multiple scales, and time-dependence. They will
use a tensorial formalism to keep track of both intralayer and interlayer
interactions. Their models will explore how different microbial interactions and
environmental conditions influence community structure, stability, resilience,
and function, and test their models with existing data sets on host-associated
microbiomes. The project will advance our understanding of microbial community
ecology and help address the problems of managing diverse microbiomes for host
and/or ecosystem benefits. Analyses of dynamic multispecies models and
multilayer networks will be applicable to other natural and social systems. The
researchers will contribute to open-science efforts through depositing the
models and the code in public repositories. They will incorporate the project
results into both undergraduate and graduate courses, including the MSU–UCLA
distributed seminar. They will also develop inquiry-based educational modules on
microbial communities to increase quantitative reasoning skills and microbial-
ecology knowledge in K–12 students. Partial funding was provided by the Math
Biology program in the MPS Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.