* 2124576
* ATD: Statistical and Machine Learning Methods for Studying the Dynamics of Weather and Climate Extremes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Bo Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 380,000.00

Weather and climate extremes profoundly impact human society and the natural
environment of all countries, rich and poor. Recent years have seen a number of
large losses of life as well as a tremendous increase in economic losses from
weather hazards. The start of 2020 found Australia amid its worst-ever bushfire
season, following on from its hottest year on record which had left soil and
fuels exceptionally dry. The fires have burned through more than 10 million
hectares, killed at least 28 people, and left millions of people affected by a
hazardous smoke haze. Higher sea temperatures have doubled the likelihood of
drought in the Horn of Africa region. Severe droughts have left 15 million
people in Ethiopia, Kenya and Somalia in need of aid, and millions of people are
facing acute food and water shortages. In the summer of 2020, the West Coast of
the U.S. saw its most catastrophic wildfires following the arguably most
intensive heat waves in its modern history. According to NOAA’s report (2020),
just during the month of August in 2020 the U.S. was hit by four different
billion-dollar disasters: two hurricanes, huge wildfires, and an extraordinary
Midwest derecho. While extreme weather is a part of the natural cycle, the
recent uptick in the ferocity and frequency of these extremes is evidence of an
acceleration of climate impacts. This project will support one graduate student
each year of the three year project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop statistical and machine learning methods to study weather and climate
extremes from three different perspectives: climate model validation,
changepoint estimation for extremes, and integration of multi-model climate
ensembles. Climate models are vital tools for scientists studying climate
dynamics and extremes. Hence, validating climate models in their capacity of
mimicking real climate extremes is a critical task. This involves comparing the
modeled and observed spatial extremes, and adjustment for multiple testing is
one of the key statistical challenges in comparing random fields. We will
develop optimal statistical techniques for comparing the return levels of two
spatial extremes random fields. The detection of changepoints and estimation of
break time in extreme weather and climate have not received due attention to
date, yet changepoints can signal a climate system’s tipping point and thus are
important for disaster preparedness and activation of adaptation measures
against climate risks. We will also develop a novel method for estimating
spatially varying changepoints for functional time series to study abrupt
changes in climate extremes. Finally, an array of methodology for multi-model
ensemble integration has been developed, ranging from simple or weighted
averaging of the models to fully Bayesian hierarchical models. The multiple
levels of hierarchy in Bayesian models motivated us to take advantage of neural
networks to learn the complex relationship between different climate models and
actual observations. Finally, we will develop a Bayesian machine learning
approach to integrating model outputs with observations to project future
climate extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.