* 2124712
* Collaborative Research: Resolving the production and fate of nitrogenous metabolites in the surface ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Oscar Sosa, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,556.00

Photosynthetic microbes provide food for nearly all other life in the ocean.
Their metabolism produces organic molecules called metabolites that can leak out
of cells, be intentionally excreted into seawater, or be released during cell
death. Once outside the cell, these metabolites are the basis for specific
interactions among microbes and determine community structure and activity. Yet,
current understanding of metabolites in the ocean is limited by a historical
lack of ability to measure them. The work proposed here will expand current
knowledge of metabolite structures, concentrations, and production rates using
recently developed analytical methods. These methods have already led to the
discovery that homarine, a substituted pyridine first found in lobster in 1933,
is the most abundant detectable metabolite in microbial communities of the North
Pacific Ocean. While homarine is known as a predator deterrent, osmoprotectant,
methyl donor, and antibiofouling agent, studies of its role in microbial
community dynamics are lacking. The work proposed will clarify the role of
homarine in the ocean’s microbial communities. This work will create an open-
source metabolite database that will serve the broader field of metabolomics, a
growing area in environmental, engineering, and medical sciences. This
collaboration will also promote the careers of a graduate student and a
postdoctoral researcher as well as an early career professor from an
underrepresented group at a primarily undergraduate institution (PUI).
Undergraduates from both institutions will contribute to project development and
implementation, local cruises on the R.V. Carson, lab work, and dissemination of
results. This research will be integrated into a curriculum-based research
experience for undergraduates in a 200-level genetics course at the PUI,
University of Puget Sound. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will carry
out field studies and laboratory experiments to test the hypothesis that
metabolites are quantitatively significant forms of carbon and nitrogen flowing
through microbial communities. The identity, quantity, and production rates of
metabolites will also be determined. For homarine, the enzymes and organisms
responsible for its transformations will be determined. Specific proposed
activities will 1) Quantify nitrogenous metabolite pools and their net
production rates (particulate and dissolved) in phytoplankton cultures and in
marine surface water communities; 2) Isolate homarine consuming heterotrophic
bacteria and use mutagenesis techniques, transcriptomics, and stable isotope
assisted metabolomics to annotate genes and characterize the biochemical
reactions involved in the degradation of homarine; 3) Carry out incubations of
stable isotope labeled homarine in phytoplankton cultures, heterotrophic
bacterial cultures sensitive to homarine, and natural communities to
quantitatively evaluate the effect of homarine on growth, track homarine through
metabolic pathways, and determine the kinetics of homarine uptake; 4) Identify
homarine consumers and biochemical pathways for homarine use in the environment
by mining existing environmental metatranscriptomes for homarine catabolism
genes. The combination of these approaches will provide better understanding of
the flow of nitrogen containing metabolites through marine microbial ecosystems.
Results from this work will be disseminated through peer reviewed open-source
publications as well as presentations to the scientific community and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.