* 2124478
* Collaborative Research:Theory-guided Design and Discovery of Rare-Earth Element 2D Transition Metal Carbides MXenes (RE-MXenes)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Babak Anasori, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 223,504.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-increasing demand for higher
computing power and data storage while reducing power consumption and carbon
footprint calls for new materials and computing paradigms. This need is
accentuated by the fact that after decades of aggressive miniaturization,
electronic devices are currently reaching the end of the road for traditional
materials as we “run out of atoms”. Two-dimensional (2D) materials, a relatively
new class of materials consisting of few-atom-thick sheets, provide a platform
to address these challenges. Particularly interesting are 2D transition metal
carbides, known as MXenes, composed of two to four atomic layers of transition
metals separated by an atomic layer of carbon. MXenes are studied for various
applications, including energy storage and generation, blocking electromagnetic
waves, and antenna. Despite significant progress, room temperature magnetism,
important for quantum computation, computer memories, and spintronics, has
remained elusive. With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor Babak Anasori
at Indiana University Purdue University Indianapolis and Professor Alejandro
Strachan at Purdue University and their research groups will design and
fabricate novel 2D MXenes that contain rare-earth elements, such as neodymium
and gadolinium, and develop a fundamental understanding of how such elements can
be used to control the electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of these
materials. Computational modeling is used to guide the experimental design of
these new materials and reduce the number of experiments to the most promising
candidates. The team hypothesizes that the use of rare-earth elements in MXenes
can lead to the first room-temperature 2D magnets. To accelerate innovation, all
experimental and theoretical results produced and models developed will be made
accessible for the researchers and educators for online computing. The
microscopic images of nanomaterials and 2D materials have been used in many
nanoart visualizations, such as NanoArtography, to promote STEM. The nanoart
images will be integrated into local nanoscience outreach activities, such as
Purdue’s NanoDays, to motivate art-enthusiastic children to have a chance to
learn about the science and engineering behind nanoart
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2D
transition metal carbide MXenes have become one of the largest 2D material
families over the past decade. MXenes have metallic electrical conductivities,
are hydrophilic, and capable of intercalating a host of ions and organic
molecules, leading to outstanding performance in applications such as energy
storage, electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding, wireless communications,
catalysis, and biomedicine. Double-transition metal MXenes are a subfamily of
MXenes that enable significant tunability in properties by changing the MXenes
transition metal compositions. The research, supported by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, aims to
design, synthesize, and characterize a new family of 2D double-transition metal
carbides: rare-earth (RE) f-element 2D MXenes opening the possibility of
magnetic properties. This will be accomplished via a synergistic combination of
theory and experiments. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
fundamental understanding of how different rare-earth elements can be
incorporated into MXenes and use it to control the electronic, optical, and
magnetic properties of these novel phases. The limiting factor hindering
f-element MXenes is their synthesis that requires the design of novel f-element
MAX phase precursors among the large compositional space. This project uses
high-throughput first principles and thermodynamic calculations to identify
stable precursors and their MXenes and use data science tools to guide
experimental efforts. Rare-earth f-element MXenes can have radically different
properties that have never been measured in regular MXenes and are absent in
other 2D and bulk materials. Rare-earth MXenes can have potential applications
from EMI shielding, optoelectronics, and catalysis to quantum computation,
spintronics, and magnetoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.