* 2124745
* Broadening Participation in Computing Ethics Curriculum Development
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ellen Zegura, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,288.00

There is an urgent need to bolster the presence of ethics within the computing
curriculum, given the significant and sometimes negative impacts that computing
is having on society. Computing professionals must seriously consider ethical
and societal impacts of the technologies they create and deploy. Part of what is
needed is to cultivate a genuine sense, within computing students, of their
ethical responsibilities to society. While valuable efforts are underway to
incorporate ethics into computing curricula, an often-overlooked concern is
whether historically underrepresented voices have a meaningful opportunity to
influence the creation of content that shapes student ethical development. Thus,
the goal of this project is to better understand and amplify the diverse range
of voices that may have been absent during the development of a traditional
computing ethics curriculum. To broaden participation in computing curriculum
development, the project will bring together a unique partnership across Georgia
Institute of Technology, Morehouse College, Georgia State University, and
Florida International University. The work will be guided by a diverse and
inclusive project leadership team and advisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enhance
the quality and relevance of computing ethics education, and the diversity of
represented voices, this project will investigate: (1) identifying current
practices in computing ethics curricula, such as which ethics and research
ethics topics are being included, prioritized, and excluded; (2) assess
expressed preferences for which topics should be featured in the computing
ethics curriculum, primarily by involving computing faculty from groups that
have been underrepresented in computing; (3) developing and disseminating sample
computing ethics syllabi, guidelines, and supporting course materials, based on
survey feedback and workshop discussions; and (4) determining experimentally if
and how a more inclusive computing ethics curricula can alter underrepresented
minority student attitudes, preferences, and behavior towards computing. The
project will survey diverse stakeholders, focusing on students and faculty at
minority-serving institutions and at other relevant organizations that serve
groups that have been underrepresented in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.