* 2124837
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for  Beneficial Energy System Transformations for Climate Change, Adaptation, and Societal Equity (BEST-CCASE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Daniel Kammen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,982.00

The benefits and impacts of energy are extensively intertwined with society and
people’s lives, making the transformation of energy systems an important
opportunity for positive, inclusive change. A new approach is proposed to co-
develop energy systems with other societal, economic and natural systems so that
they achieve multiple beneficial outcomes. Applying this paradigm to
photovoltaics (PV) systems, this project develops the concept of “solar
surfaces,” in which it leverages the large surface area of PV to address the
intertwined sustainability challenges for hot, arid, high-sunshine regions
(e.g., the West and Southwest), including: (1) climate adaptation, focusing on
mitigation of heat and water stress on urban and rural populations and
increasing resiliency; (2) negative carbon energy systems; and (3) climate
justice and social equity. BEST-CCASE’s vision – to develop multifunctional
energy systems that address energy transitions, climate adaptation and negative
carbon – is transformative goal that requires the deep integration of different
fields in engineering, social science, ecology and biology and a broad range of
stakeholders ranging from underrepresented communities, government and industry,
from small-scale agriculture to some of the world’s largest businesses. The goal
of this planning grant is to (1) build a clear and well-articulated portfolio of
research activities that are fully integrated across the three areas; (2)
establish a set of integrated metrics and milestones against which to measure
the success of the research portfolio for a large-scale interdisciplinary
initiative; and (3) deepen and expand stakeholder interactions and prioritize
different approaches and outcome, taking into account community and stakeholder
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BEST-CCASE will drive advances in three areas of
human-centered energy engineering. The first is advances in modelling complex
systems such as the energy system and its interaction with human and natural
systems, enabling insights and tools for energy systems design and analysis.
Proposed models expand the range of effects that can be analyzed, including new
technical components (e.g., distributed generation and storage, electrification,
demand response, systems resilience), impact of stochastic processes,
interactions of humans with the energy system (e.g., new patterns of demand,
societal impacts of energy systems), and emerging environmental impacts (e.g.,
wildfires). The second is new, multi-functional energy technologies enabled by
innovative materials and physical/chemical processes that allow simultaneous
electrical, optical and thermal control. This control allows, for example,
photovoltaics that also directly provide local cooling or selectively filter
light for plant growth or into buildings or new CO2 capture materials and
processes. The third is new approaches to human-centered engagement and design
and socio-technical systems analysis that deepen understanding and
quantification of human-energy interactions (e.g., the energy-poverty nexus,
value creation through multi-functional technology design and integration) and
enable strategies for improving social justice through energy systems design and
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.