* 2124319
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Connected Eldercare
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Haruhiko Asada, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Over 80% of COVID deaths in the United States were people aged 65 and older, and
over 40% of these deaths took place in nursing homes and long-term care
facilities. Current in-person eldercare practices caused numerous cluster
infection cases in nursing facilities. The pandemic has also severely impacted
home care, day care, visiting nurses, and all in-person care services in the US
and worldwide, showing current nursing practices and systems are vulnerable.
Those tragic cases could be better handled if in-person care could be
supplemented by other means. This planning project will explore a new remote
care system for supplementing all in-person services by exploiting telemedicine
technology. During the pandemic, we have observed a rapid growth of telemedicine
services; people can easily and safely get access to medical professionals from
a distance. Once people use telemedicine and realize its usefulness, they will
continue to use it even after the pandemic winds down. In this planning project,
the feasibility and potential impact of if elderly people can be supported
physically from a remote site, so that they can live safely and independently,
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to provide elderly people
with both informational and physical supports without on-site in-person care.
Remotely-operated robots will assist elderly people in moving around and
performing daily chores. Three major challenges will be investigated. First, the
technology must be established for designing a walker-type, mobility-aid robot
that can prevent the elderly from falling, assist the elderly in transitioning
between sitting and standing, and provide a seamless support throughout daily
activities. Second, under the supervision of a remote caregiver, the robot must
communicate with the elderly user and gain a cooperative attitude from him/her
in providing physical supports. Third and key to successful deployment of the
technology, a workforce development curriculum must be created. While the
technology must fit the environment of eldercare, effective and engaging
curricula must be developed for training care providers. To this end, broad
expertise, ranging from robotics, biomedical and rehabilitation engineering,
human-machine systems, networking and AI to geriatrics, nursing, psychology,
business administration, and policy, will be brought together. In this planning
project, a converging research team will be formed through expert interviews,
site visits, online and in-person workshops, and webinars. A broad spectrum of
input will be sought from technical, social, and economics experts and
stakeholders for better planning for the establishment of a new NSF engineering
research center for connected eldercare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.