* 2124459
* SBIR Phase I:  Developing Bioconjugation and Preparation of 18F-Biomolecules for PET Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Iman Daryaei, THERACEA PHARMA LC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a platform technology for the
design and preparation of a new class of highly sensitive diagnostic agents
(known as "radiotracers") for Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging. The
technology introduces a new generation of diagnostic agents for early detection
of diseases and improves existing radiopharmaceuticals for imaging and therapy
protocols. Early detection is the key to patient survival because it guides
treatment decisions and enables better targeting, assessment, and monitoring.
The technology can potentially change the standard of care in the diagnosis and
evaluation of many conditions and diseases, and moreover can provide access to
more advanced clinical care in geographically dispersed regions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will focus on developing 18F-labeled radiotracers for the detection of
prostate cancer, neuroendocrine tumors, and type 2 diabetes. The current
chemical technologies use radionuclides that either are not compatible with
commercial radiopharmacies, which causes higher cost in production process and
limited accessibility by patients, or have concerning safety issues (e.g. cell
damage from long radioactive exposure). 18F is the ideal radioisotope with many
technical, commercial, and imaging qualities for PET imaging, but it has a
challenging chemistry for production of new products. This technology overcomes
the traditional chemistry challenges and allows for the preparation of
18F-labeled radiotracers as bioconjugation kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.