* 2124923
* A framework to predict hydrologic processes at continental scales
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Hilary McMillan, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2025
* USD 294,998.00

Streamflow predictions are essential for forecasting floods and managing water
resources under intensifying pressures on water use. To make reliable streamflow
predictions for all rivers, including those with no flow gauges, we need
computer models that accurately simulate watershed processes and how they vary
across the U.S. landscape. For example, how do surface flows, recharge,
groundwater storage and flow patterns change from watershed to watershed? The
latest hydrologic models are flexible enough to simulate spatially variable
processes, but we currently lack the knowledge of how those processes vary by
watershed. This project will fill this knowledge gap by developing a new
framework to predict how watershed processes vary across the U.S.. The approach
is novel in leveraging small-scale field hydrology knowledge within a
continental-scale, machine learning application. The research will discover new
relationships between landscape features, streamflow dynamics and watershed
processes. Project scientists will work with NOAAâ€™s National Water Center to
apply the results in the design of the Next-Generation National Water Model that
provides streamflow predictions for every river in the U.S.. The project will
provide research experiences for under-represented minority students, and will
develop online learning materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project are to (1) Identify a suite of landscape metrics that quantify landscape
characteristics most likely to activate specific runoff generation processes.
(2) Identify dominant hydrologic processes across a large database of gauged
U.S. watersheds, by relating streamflow dynamics to the upstream processes that
drive them. (3) Develop a data-driven model that predicts dominant hydrologic
processes based on landscape metrics. (4) Evaluate the data-driven model by
testing it for a range of locations and case studies. The framework developed in
this project will improve on previous methods of identifying and predicting
landscape and hydrologic metrics, by redesigning the metrics to target specific
hydrologic processes. Further, the project will apply new machine learning
developments to identify and interpret predictive relationships between
landscapes and processes. Deliverables will include GIS (geographic information
system) maps of hydrologic processes across the contiguous U.S., and open-source
code to estimate hydrologic processes from landscape characteristics. Overall,
the project aspires to transform how continental-scale hydrology models
represent water fluxes in diverse climates and
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.