* 2124331
* I-Corps: Assessment Platform for Operationalizing High Reliability Organizational Hallmarks in Healthcare
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Timothy Matis, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software with embedded machine learning algorithms that seeks to
create a safer healthcare environment for both providers and patients. The
potential market includes all types and sizes of healthcare institutions,
including national healthcare systems, large regional hospitals, community
health centers, rural hospitals, and ambulatory clinics. The goal of the
proposed technology is to promote a culture of quality and patient safety by
supporting administrative and clinical partnerships as they transition toward a
goal of operationalizing High Reliability Organizational Hallmarks in
healthcare. This change in culture may reduce the incidence of avoidable medical
errors, and as a result, may make healthcare more affordable for the general
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of software that seeks to both increase the reporting of near-miss
and safety incidents by clinicians and the utilization of these reports by
administrators to make informed system-level improvements in healthcare based on
High Reliability Organizational (HRO) theory. The lack of voluntary reporting of
safety incidents arising from the inadequacy of protocols and software
addressing the common physical and psychological barriers to reporting by the
end user is problematic in healthcare. In addition, for those reports that are
collected, there are no accepted rubrics for scientifically scoring them against
the managerial hallmarks of an HRO; This marginalizes their inferential utility.
The proposed technology addresses both of these issues through the
implementation of a front-end web and application interface that is designed
using human factors principles, and a back-end machine learning and natural
language processing algorithm that classifies the corpus of safety incident
reports in real-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.