* 2124841
* Examining the Role of Racial Identity and Personal Experiences in Equity-focused Computer Science Learning
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Aleata Hubbard, WestEd
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 323,305.00

This project will explore the significance of race and equity in secondary
computer science (CS) education. Despite the importance of CS across all aspects
of life, there is little racial diversity in the field along the pipeline from
elementary school to industry. At the secondary level, even students who are
highly interested and confident in CS remain underrepresented in the field. To
address this problem, researchers have created culturally responsive computing
approaches to effectively engage more students in CS. However, progress in
implementing these approaches is limited by the low number of experienced CS
teachers. This project aims to support secondary teachers in developing both
subject matter knowledge and racial equity strategies for teaching
CS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first of three goals is to develop a set of
professional learning activities that vary in the ways they address CS subject
matter and racial equity topics. The second goal is to examine how well each
activity engages teachers in learning and talking about CS content, race, and
equity pedagogy. The principal investigator will collaborate with an urban
school district to deliver the activities during the districtâ€™s monthly CS
teacher meetings. The third goal is to interview teachers to learn how their
racial identity and past experiences in CS and in teaching influence their
participation in the activities. The project aims to identify the most effective
activities for learning about both racial equity and CS subject matter. The
outcomes of this project may support other researchers and teacher educators to
train more teachers who are equipped to provide equitable CS learning
experiences for all secondary students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.