* 2124995
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the bioethical impacts of an Indigenous scholars network in genomics
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Deborah Bolnick, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 09/30/2026
* USD 246,894.00

Engagement of Indigenous communities by scientific researchers is riddled with
examples of scientific misconduct and a lack of direct benefit to participants
and their communities. The Summer internship for INdigenous peoples in Genomics
(SING) short course offers training and tools for early career Indigenous
scientists to engage in the research process and community members to guide
their communities in making informed decisions about research. Alumni of SING
and affiliated faculty have organized through the workshop to present ethical
concerns around current frameworks of scientific engagement to the general
scientific community and to raise the collective voice of Indigenous people in
genomics research. However, the impact of SING in its mission to inform
participants in genomics research in Indigenous communities and build out
networks of collaborating Indigenous researchers have not been explicitly
tested. This study defines the role and impact of SING in shaping views of
research and incorporating&lt;br/&gt;Indigenous researchers into scholarly
networks among Indigenous alumni and faculty. Long-term assessment of training
programs such as SING have not been investigated to any great extent such that
this can serve as a model for determining the effectiveness of short course
scientific training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recognizing that genomic
research is inherent in future medical, scientific, and translational research,
the inclusion and involvement of Indigenous people is important and the role of
SING to facilitate this engagement is unparalleled. In this project, the
investigators objectively measure the impact of the SING program by eliciting
the perceptions and understandings of genome science and ethics engagement of
past SING participants and faculty through focus groups surveys, and social
network analysis. Specifically, the project engages SING alumni and participants
by 1) elucidating Indigenous perspectives on genetic research and scholarship,
2) defining interactions and influences initiated by SING among Indigenous
genomics scholars, and 3) developing and delivering topic specific training for
the general public and SING alumni. Findings from this work will inform in-
person training for the SING program and engagement of the general scientific
community to impact research approaches, scholarship, and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded through the ER2 program by
the BIO directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.