* 2124215
* Planning Grant:  Engineering Research Center for Integrated Systems Operations and Planning of a Carbon Neutral Electric Grid
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Badrul Chowdhury, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,623.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
pathway to a sustainable carbon neutral electricity ecosystem requires a
paradigm shift. While the new operational paradigm is not yet fully known, the
new paradigm must cultivate an ecosystem that optimizes for stability,
reliability, affordability, and carbon neutrality, while also accommodating a
relentless list of needs: new stakeholders, industry models, and regulatory
policies, the ever more rapid and numerous digital and technical advances, the
increasing pervasiveness of the digital and technical (i.e., IoT), the
variability and uncertainty in human behavior, the expected and unexpected
transitions to more sustainable energy solutions, the need for flexibility and
agility, and the anticipated climate variability. To achieve this, there must be
a recognition of the significance of the value of the services enabled by energy
rather than the energy itself. If successful, the planned ERC will be the first
of its kind to bring convergence to power systems modeling and simulation with
human centered modeling and simulation. The approach is critical,
transformative, sustainable, and realistic, which not only leads us to a carbon-
neutral energy grid, but also provides full human interaction and customer
participation on a highly automated, large scale planning and operational
framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERC planning grant will further identify
gaps, potential stakeholders including team expansion, key personnel and
evaluate the goal and overarching objectives for the future center.
Additionally, the potential ERC will have a broad set of university researchers
and key industrial stakeholders across a broad range of disciplines and
backgrounds including (1) power systems; (2) optimization and control; (3) high
performance computing; (3) software engineering; (4) computational social
science; (5) data science; (6) policy and government; (7) economics; (8)
behavioral science, (9) environmental economics; (10) building architecture and
design; (11) transportation planning; (12) cybersecurity. There is no base of
modeling and simulation tools, methods, or experience to support such an
unprecedented effort. Forecasting has been a science that has evolved slowly,
relying heavily on experience from past data. But new science, enabling
technology, and systems integration based on revolutionary improvements in
predicting interactions by prosumers, a new blend of consumer and producer who
responds to the available energy supply in complex ways governed by a system of
transactional energy. The proposed center liberates the proposed team from the
fundamental problems existing within the scope of current funding which achieve
incremental improvements; this ERC aims to achieve a quantum leap by utilizing a
digital twin that simultaneously manages complex scale and complex
interdependencies. The PIs’ direct involvement in cutting-edge digital-twin
development provides them the perspective to note that effectively addressing
the challenges of integrating technologies at scale in an uncertain political,
financial, and socio-economic landscape requires the type of transformative and
convergent work that can only be performed through an
ERC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.