* 2124834
* Workshop on Quantum Engineering Infrastructure. To Be Held Virtual In April 2021.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Steven Koester, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2021
* USD 18,389.00

The workshop on quantum engineering infrastructure will bring together the
nanomanufacturing and quantum engineering communities to develop short- and
long-term solutions for supporting quantum research in the National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), a network of nanofabrication
facilities at universities across the United States. The workshop presenters and
attendees will be academic and industry leaders at the cross-over between
quantum engineering and nanofabrication, and the presentations will provide
overviews of the various aspects of quantum technology, as well as detailed
information about the quantum capabilities of various NNCI nodes. This
information will help to ensure the current facility infrastructure can best be
used to enable new and ongoing projects. The workshop will also have a series of
breakout sessions, where the participants will discuss the longer-term
infrastructure needs of the network. The workshop outcomes will be compiled into
a report that will be broadly distributed, which will enable follow-up
activities on key action items developed in this three-day event. The learning
developed in the workshop will have broad benefits to the NSF and NNCI
communities, and to the broader national effort on establishing a leadership
position in quantum research and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
information systems are poised to change the way problems are solved in the
coming decades. Similar to the computer revolution of the 20th century, quantum
engineered systems offer the opportunity to access problems in the 21st century
previously unattainable with conventional computing platforms. However, quantum
technology is still in its infancy, and requires basic research, the kind that
is supported by the NNCI network. Preparing this network for the quantum
revolution is challenging, given the vastly different materials, processing,
device and integration requirements compared to conventional microelectronics,
and suggests a rethinking of the fabrication infrastructure that is needed. This
challenge is even more acute given the fact that quantum engineered systems are
based upon a diverse range of platforms including superconducting Josephson
junctions, trapped ions, spin qubits using quantum dots, Majorana zero modes,
color centers, and others. This workshop will seek to address the infrastructure
issues in two ways. First, it will inform the community of quantum researchers
that utilize NNCI facilities as to how their projects can be supported by the
NNCI network. As a long-term goal, the workshop will help to inform a strategic
vision for the future of quantum fabrication infrastructure, and how shared
national resources can best be positioned to meet the needs of quantum
engineered systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.