* 2124771
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Respiratory Bag-Valve-Mask Resuscitator
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Adam Scott, COMPACT MEDICAL SOLUTIONS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2022
* USD 255,925.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a novel resuscitator to
ventilate patients with respiratory failure or cardiac arrest. With almost
300,000 cases of out-of-hospital cardiac arrest and approximately 350,000 in-
hospital cases each year in the United States, a modest increase of just 5% in
the number of patients surviving cardiac arrest would correspond to more than
33,000 additional lives saved. In 2017, the combined direct and indirect costs
of deaths from out-of-hospital cardiac arrest for patients under 50 years of age
to be $455 billion, with an estimate of $1.8 trillion for all deaths from
cardiac arrest. On this basis, every 1% increase in the out-of-hospital cardiac
arrest survival rate would result in a $4.5 billion cost saving to the United
States economy.The proposed project addresses the technical challenges
associated with a novel device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advance translation of a bag-valve-
mask resuscitator that restricts the volume, pressure, and rate of ventilation
to safe levels for any patient, from infant to adult. The goal of the project is
to design and test a fully functioning prototype that incorporates an easy-to-
use mechanism for quickly and simultaneously adjusting both the maximum volume
of air delivered and the maximum pressure, and a mechanism for restricting
ventilation rate. The project objectives are: (1) prototype and test a novel
dial-operated mechanism for simultaneous volume and pressure control; (2) test a
flow-based mechanism for restricting the ventilation rate; (3) compare the
prototype performance with that of a standard bag-valve-mask resuscitator used
by a group of trained medical personnel. Successful completion of this project
will result in a fully functional prototype, a valuable set of data on the
device performance, and important feedback from end-users on design, ease of
use, and device functionality to inform future
modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.