* 2124999
* Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Metrology and Inspection Technology for Semiconductor Wafer-Level Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* ChaBum Lee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 10/31/2024
* USD 301,492.00

This grant supports research advancing wafer-level semiconductor manufacturing
and inspection technology, establishing the data and technical architecture
needed to ensure sustainable solutions and scaling digital innovation across the
wafer metrology and inspection processes. This research will generate new
knowledge and principles used in the wafer/thin-film inspection, metrology,
design and manufacturing needed in the electronics industry. Modeling
methodologies are created for the inspection capability of various defect types
at wafer scale. Semiconductor metrology and inspection tools are presently
stand-alone machines operated independently and there is an increasing need for
creating an automated and integrated metrology and inspection across
semiconductor manufacturing processes. This project can accelerate the
semiconductor industry’s digital transformation through hardware and software
integration, connectivity, intelligence, visualization, and flexible automation.
An integrated and intelligent framework for semiconductor wafer/thin-film
metrology and inspection technologies is developed to monitor, diagnose and
control the quality of wafer-level defects, by using super-resolution 3D imaging
process, as well as thin-film material properties. This grant supports the
semiconductor manufacturing workforce development, providing research and
education opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students including
underrepresented groups to gain knowledge and hands-on experience in
semiconductor technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The semiconductor
process automation and digitalization based on strobo-spectroscopy and dexel-
based deep learning algorithms provide for a wafer/thin-film inspection and
metrology capability to detect the wafer-level or packaging-level anomalies. A
strobo-spectroscopy capability combined with a spectral imaging technology
allows for the synchronized spectroscopic analysis and high-speed imaging
capturing of both the spectral response and spatial images as the probe scans
the wafer surface. The combined spectral response and camera images are
converted to 3D data representations to train dexel-based deep learning
algorithms and predict wafer grade, defect type, and defect locations. The
dexel-based approach to 3D wafer topography data through 3D correlation Neural
Network (CNN) and Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) architectures is established to
improve computational speed and prediction accuracy. By combining strobo-
spectroscopy and deep learning algorithms, this research will fill a critical
knowledge gap in automated inspection technology and in the fundamental
identification of the wafer and thin-film abnormalities and variation in
material properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.