* 2124775
* GOALI: Chemomechanical Failure Mechanisms in Inorganic Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Brian Sheldon, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2025
* USD 474,232.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid electrolytes are the enabling material for the
successful development of solid-state batteries. Ceramic and glass solid
electrolytes with sufficiently high ionic conductivities have been developed in
recent years, however, these materials still face significant challenges. The
research in this project addresses degradation mechanisms that are associated
with the combined effects of chemical and mechanical phenomena. The
transformative impact of this work is being demonstrated through substantial
improvements in the performance of solid-state batteries. Implementation is
facilitated by direct collaborations with the GOALI partner, which includes work
on the synthesis and testing of novel electrolytes. Researchers from Brown
University are working directly with Dr. Xingcheng Xiao and others at General
Motors (GM), in ways that expand educational outcomes and enhance knowledge
transfer to industry. Via these direct interactions with industrial
collaborators, the resulting new knowledge is being applied to commercially
viable systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Solid-state lithium
batteries provide key improvements compared to traditional lithium-ion batteries
based on liquid electrolytes. In particular, the implementation of solid
electrolytes can potentially increase energy density through the safe use of Li
metal anodes. This research project employs precise in situ stress measurements
along with other experimental methods to investigate a variety of chemo-
mechanical phenomena in solid electrolytes (e.g., Li metal penetration, large
scale bridging effects in nanocomposites, viscoplasticity in sulfide glasses,
etc.). This includes focused efforts to understand and mitigate the formation of
dendrite-like lithium filaments, a critical failure mechanism where mechanical
stresses appear to play an important role. This and other aspects of chemo-
mechanical degradation are being investigated with research on three distinct
types of materials: (1) single phase ceramic oxides (primarily garnet-type
materials) that undergo purely elastic deformation; (2) nanocomposite
electrolytes where nanoplatelets, nanotubes, and nanofibers increase the
fracture toughness; (3) sulfide glass electrolytes that are subject to rate
dependent deformation. Interpretation of these data is based on detailed finite
element modeling. Extensive collaborations with the GOALI partner facilitate
knowledge transfer to industry. Education elements of this project include a
doctoral student working as a summer intern at GM, and research training
opportunities at Brown University for undergraduate women from Wellesley
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.