* 2124611
* Numerical investigation and validation of stratified up-side down Langmuir turbulence
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ramsey Harcourt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 436,735.00

This project will investigate wind-aligned circulation features in the ocean
upper layer during conditions of low winds and strong (typically rain-induced)
stratification. Under these conditions, such features do not conform to
expectations for either typical Langmuir turbulence or wind-driven viscous sheer
induced structures. The hypothesis is that under appropriate forcing conditions,
stratified shear flow at the base of a surface-trapped jet becomes unstable to
convergence and upward displacement in the presence of surface-intensified
Stokes shear. This drives upwelling of slower, denser water towards the surface,
and recirculation. Numerical modeling and further analysis of existing data will
be used to test the hypothesis that the observed streaks in question arise from
this process of ‘stratified upside-down Langmuir turbulence’ (SUDL-T). The
proposed activity will lead to better parameterizations of mixing at the ocean
surface, with broad relevance for air-sea fluxes of heat, gas, and momentum. The
project will support a PhD graduate student, contribute to local public outreach
and educational programs, and have broad dissemination through presentations at
conferences, publication in peer-reviewed journals, and public availability of
validated numerical simulations of near-surface mixing.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Infrared imagery of the sea surface during periods of modest winds
and strong near-surface salinity stratification from rain shows wind streaks at
spacings that suggest they are generated by a different mechanism than classic
Langmuir circulations or wind-driven surface stress. The project objectives are
to investigate this potentially newly observed mechanism by: 1) characterizing
the vertical scale, kinematics, and energetics of the secondary circulation
associated with the wind streaks as a function of environmental conditions; 2)
determining the mechanism responsible for the observed elevated crosswind length
scales at low wind speeds and the balance of forcing associated with transition
to smaller scales and Langmuir turbulence in moderate wind; and 3) evaluating
the impact of the secondary circulation at low winds on near-surface vertical
mixing. To do this the project will use a combination idealized and realistic
Large Eddy Simulation modeling, coupled to further data analysis and direct
model-data comparison. Modeling will include suites of runs from spin-up, or
increasing forcing from low to moderate ranges, and spin-down, the relaxation of
forcing through similar forcing levels. Reanalysis of the observations will
focus on determining the surface forcing and subsurface hydrography and shear
during the observations, in order to form a more stable basis for validating the
project hypothesis with a more realistic modeling suite and direct model-data
comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.