* 2124052
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Studying language in the brain in the modern machine learning era
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Boris Katz, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

The project will investigate how the brain processes language, one of the most
consequential questions we can ask. Language skills significantly affect
lifetime income and social disparities. The loss of language or a halt in its
development can be devastating. At the same time, insights from the brain that
could improve machinesâ€™ understanding of language opens up new applications --
from web search, to voice assistants, to, one day, robots that can help us in
our daily lives. Using neuroscience to understand what happens during language
use, what goes right and wrong, what linguistic structures and theories are used
by the brain, would be revolutionary. To do this, neuroscientists use many of
the same tools as those created for machine learning. Those machine learning
tools have improved tremendously using large datasets, changing what machines
are capable of; yet the neuroscience of language has been largely unable to reap
these rewards. We will provide that data, the new methods and metrics, required
to enable neuroscience to scale up and take advantage of modern machine
learning. At the same time, scale in machine learning has democratized access to
tools; scientific communities can investigate questions that pertain to them.
Today, only a few groups have the resources to collect data and investigate
questions around the neuroscience of language, leaving many communities in the
dark. A large-scale central repository of data, tools, and benchmarks will
democratize access to the study of language in the brain, one of the core
aspects of what makes us human.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our technical goal is to
produce the largest dataset, by a factor of 1000, for investigating the
neuroscience of language along with new types of models that exploit this data,
and benchmarks which formalize linguistic questions to derive insights about the
language network and the structure of language. Thus far, investigations in the
neuroscience of language have only been able to provide small snapshots of the
language network on different datasets, making it hard to build a coherent
picture. A single large-scale dataset with precise benchmarks that formally
define what hypotheses in linguistics mean in terms of neural data will enable
the community to ask many questions of the same data, allowing for a synthesis
of the structure and operation of the language network. At the same time, large-
scale data is known to be required to probe the understanding of artificial
language models. It is likely that if tens of thousands of sentences are
required to probe an artificial language-neural-networks and derive meaningful
insight, the same scale of data will be required per subject to probe biological
language-neural-networks. Formalizing questions around benchmarks on a common
dataset has resulted in astronomical progress in many fields from parsing (Penn
Treebank) to image recognition (ImageNet); we will apply this same methodology
to the neuroscience of language. This process is so efficient, in part, because
it casts questions in a way that non-domain experts can access; machine learning
experts need not concern themselves with linguistic minutia, they will be able
to improve decoding of language from the brain and thereby drive insights by
following existing protocols. By putting forward linguistic questions in a
precisely-defined manner, we will also enable cross-disciplinary collaboration:
linguists will be able to propose benchmarks which are questions around the
performance of classifiers or mapping between networks and neural activity.
These benchmarks will provide a common mathematical language by which different
fields can express their key questions, in a way that has not been possible
before because no dataset existed that could even support such work. We see a
future where neuroscience, linguistics, natural language processing, and machine
learning act as an integrated whole to ask the right questions about language in
the brain, to develop new tools that support answering those questions, and to
probe a large-scale resource that supports building a coherent picture of the
language system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.