* 2124934
* Doping Effects on Excited-State Properties of Two-Dimensional Moir√© Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Li Yang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and educational activities that aim to advance the
understanding of interactions between electrons in two-dimensional Moire
crystals, which are emerging quantum materials formed by stacking two atomic
layers with a twisting angle. These twisted structures render a periodic
potential that confine electrons and significantly enhance their interactions,
giving rise to new electronic and optical properties, such as superconductivity,
magnetism, metal/insulator transitions, and highly efficient optical
absorption/emission. In this project, the PI plans to efficiently control this
confinement effect by adding or extracting electrons from the crystal. Because
of the unique two dimensionality of Moire crystals, the PI expects that a small
variation in the number of electrons can dramatically tune the confinement
potential and subsequently change the electrical conductance, magnetism, and
light-matter interactions by orders of magnitude. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accurately calculate these unique electronic interactions, the PI will develop
theoretical models and implement them in high-performance simulation packages.
The predicted tunable many-electron interactions and electronic and optical
properties can potentially lead to the realization of novel electronic devices,
programable photon emitters/detectors, and dissipationless electronic states
that are promising for energy-efficient quantum-information
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research efforts, this
award also supports the training and education of graduate and undergraduate
students as the next-generation scientific and engineering workforce. Female and
minority students will be recruited to engage in exploring new properties and
applications of quantum materials by large-scale simulations. The PI will also
develop a simulation-based condensed matter physics course for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports an integrated research, education, and outreach program focusing on
exploring doping dependent excited-state properties of two-dimensional Moire
crystals. The periodic quantum confinement formed by Moire patterns is expected
to trap quasiparticles and excitons and to realize arrays of identical quantum
dots for programmable transport and optical applications. Moreover, these Moire
potentials can enhance van Hove singularities and render unusual many-body
physics, such as the Mott insulating phase, Wigner crystals, unconventional
superconductivity, exciton condensation, and topological orders. All these
desired phenomena and applications are essentially decided by quasiparticles and
excitons, which are excited states formed by many-electron interactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the PI will calculate the enhanced doping
effects on many-electron screening and hence the excited states, functioning as
an efficient means of tuning Moire potentials, many-body physics, and
topological orders. The PI will develop first-principles many-body perturbation
theory methods to capture the coupling between Moire plasmons and excited states
for calculating quasiparticles and excitons in doped two-dimensional Moire
materials. New opportunities to realize flat exciton bands and exciton
insulators by doping narrow-gap topological Moire crystals will also be
investigated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the research efforts, this
award also supports the training and education of graduate and undergraduate
students as the next-generation scientific and engineering workforce. Female and
minority students will be recruited to engage in exploring new properties and
applications of quantum materials by large-scale simulations. The PI will also
develop a simulation-based condensed matter physics course for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.