* 2124491
* Collaborative Research: RUI: The role of interactions between organic components on aerosol hygroscopicity
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian King, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 175,548.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The goal of this project is to characterize the impact
of mixed organic fractions on the hygroscopicity of aerosol in the presence of
inorganic ammonium sulfate. The PIs postulate that the systematic differences in
organic-organic interactions will impact the dissolution process during water
uptake, activation, and subsequent droplet formation and will modify the ability
of compounds to partition to the droplet surface, influencing water uptake and
cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) activity. This research will improve predictions
of the direct and indirect effects of aerosols on radiative forcing and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis of this proposal is that changes to
the morphology of a system consisting of ammonium sulfate, an organic compound
that undergoes liquid-liquid phase separation, and an additional organic
compound will depend on the solubility and surface activity of the additional
organic compound. As the concentration of the second organic compound is varied,
the particlesâ€™ morphology will change, causing differences between theoretical
and measured hygroscopicity. The PIs propose to characterize the following
systems: (1) mixtures of ammonium sulfate and a highly soluble organic compound
that is not surface active; (2) mixtures of ammonium sulfate and a surface-
active organic compound; and (3) mixtures of ammonium sulfate and a highly
surface-active organic compound (surfactant).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.