* 2124291
* SCH: Explainable Learning of Heart Actions from Pulse to Broaden Cardiovascular Healthcare Access
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

Cardiovascular disease is the most prevalent cause of death.  Early treatment
can effectively reduce the risk of sudden cardiac death, but a many cardiac
issues show no obvious symptoms in the early stage and would benefit from long-
term continuous cardiac monitoring to capture the intermittent and asymptomatic
abnormalities of the heart. This disproportionately affects low-income and
disadvantaged populations, who have limited access to affordable preventive
care.  An electrocardiogram (ECG) is a non-invasive gold standard for diagnosing
cardiovascular diseases. Although it is currently possible to obtain an instant
ECG test through a special smartwatch or special attachment to a smartphone,
these current options require continuous user participation and are impractical
to meet the needs of long-term continuous monitoring. This project investigates
a new Artificial Intelligence (AI) powered health solution to automated and
continuous cardiac monitoring by inferring ECG from the readily available
continuous measurements, such as those sharing the same principles as in many
wearable devices.  The research from this project will provide insights on how
to transfer the ECG-based rich knowledge base to the diagnosis of cardiovascular
diseases from wearable sensors. In order to broaden participation and impact,
the project will integrate research and educational activities.  These include
supporting the workforce development in such in-demand technical areas as
machine learning and smart health, and actively engaging students in hands-on
and exploratory interdisciplinary research, especially those from the under-
represented groups.  The project will contribute to promoting national health,
welfare, and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key research issues of
inferring ECG from photoplethysmogram (PPG), which can be monitored continuously
without constant user attention, include: (1) how to apply biomedical insights
to model the relations between ECG and PPG;  (2) how to carry out explainable
learning for inferring ECG from PPG;  (3) how to make a transformative expansion
of public health knowledge based on the newly developed bridge between ECG and
PPG; and (4) how to address a variety of diverse and practical conditions,
including population diversity, disease progression, and noise/distortions in
real-world PPG sensing sources.  The investigator team plans to carry out the
core inference from PPG to ECG in several stages, starting with modeling the
biophysical relation between ECG and PPG and representing both waveform families
through the well-understood basis in the Fourier family as a proof-of-concept. 
The team plans to utilize data next to refine the representation using
dictionary learning, and incorporate a deep model when extensive data can be
leveraged to provide a refined inference.  The bridge between ECG and PPG
enabled by explainable AI can bring unprecedented opportunities to expand smart
health knowledge to benefit public health.  The investigator team will work
closely with a medical expert to explore AI-enabled understanding and promotion
of cardiovascular health in exercise physiology, and transferring rich ECG
medical knowledge base to the more user-friendly PPG domain.  The team plans to
embrace the opportunity of cross-disciplinary collaboration to evaluate the new
capabilities in practical settings as well as promote participation and feedback
from a diverse population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.