* 2124316
* SCH: Robust CT Colonography for  Local &amp; Cloud-Based Screening
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Aly Farag, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,050,019.00

Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer in the U.S. It is also the
second leading cause of cancer deaths, behind lung cancer. It originates as
small growths (polyps) attached to the luminal wall of the colon and rectum. If
polyps are not timely diagnosed and treated, they may grow and become cancerous.
Untreated colorectal cancer spreads from local invasion of the colon and rectum
(in situ) into surrounding tissues, lymph nodes (regional) and eventually to
distant parts of the body, e.g., the liver and lungs. If diagnosed early,
colorectal cancer has a remarkable recovery rate, reaching over 95%. Therefore,
the key for this largely curable disease is early diagnosis and treatment. The
American Cancer Society recommends that people at average risk of colorectal
cancer start regular screening at age 45. There are four common methods to
screen for colorectal cancer: 1) Fecal occult blood test, which detects blood in
a stool sample that is not visible; 2) A fecal immunochemical test, which
detects occult blood in stool; 3) Optical Colonoscopy, where a flexible
endoscope is inserted to visually inspect the interior walls of the rectum and
colon; and 4) Computed Tomography Colonography, which remotely visualizes the
interior of the colon using a 3D reconstructed model of the colon from an
abdominal CT scan of prepped patients. Coordination of Computed Tomography
Colonography (for polyps detection and classification) and Optical Colonoscopy
(for validation and removal of polyps) holds the best option to detect and
prevent cancer. This NSF-SCH project deals with using Computed Tomography
Colonography as a non-invasive early screening and follow-up for colorectal
cancer, and would research and create methods for optimizing it and
synchronization with Optical Colonoscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a
computational perspective, Computed Tomography Colonography involves five steps
to analyze a patient-prepped abdominal CT scan: 1) image processing (e.g.,
Electronic Colon Cleansing) to correct prep and scanner errors; 2) image
segmentation to isolate the colon tissue from the rest of the abdomen; 3) 3D
reconstruction to generate a volumetric representation of the colon; 4)
visualization of the luminal surface generated by the 3D model for polyp
detection and assessment; and 5) analysis to catalog detected polyps location,
size, shape, and potential pathology. This NSF SCH project has three goals: 1)
Establish an analytic approach for the entire pipeline of the Computed
Tomography Colonography system, to augment the published and patented progress
made by the investigators in the visualization step; 2) Develop an optimal
implementation of the newly discovered Fly-In visualization approach, which uses
a rig of virtual cameras to navigate inside the 3D model to enable expert and
automatic polyp detection; and 3) Develop a front-end Computed Tomography
Colonography system that lends itself to human and artificial intelligence-based
reading of massively large number of Computed Tomography Colonography scans
locally and on the cloud, from widely distributed geographical locations.
Novelties to be explored and implemented include: 1) use a combination of Markov
Random Field and Deep Learning for automatic segmentation of the colon from the
abdominal CT scan of prepped patients; 2) Registration of supine and prone CT
scans using deformable models and discrete optimization; 3) Optimization of the
newly discovered Fly-In visualization method, in terms of the number of virtual
cameras used for visualization, proper representation of the lumen surface,
alternating projections of 2D CT scans (axial, sagittal and coronal) and images
in the field of view of the camera rig, and discrimination of polyps with
respect to type, size and location in the lumen; 4) Create optimal detection and
classification algorithms for small-size precancerous polyps in the Fly-In
approach using novel machine learning techniques; 5) Design a robust cloud-based
Computed Tomography Colonography reading system which allows for local reading
by expert radiologists and on the cloud, using sufficient cases by renowned
experts, in order to provide a measured impact of Computed Tomography
Colonography for diagnosis of colorectal cancer. These tasks include novel
theoretical and computational methods, collaboration of a large
multidisciplinary team, and will provide a fertile environment for training of
graduate students and biomedical researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.