* 2124816
* I-Corps:  Artificial intelligence platform to provide customized power management solutions
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Arash Jamehbozorg, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI) power management system that
helps businesses and residential communities reduce their electricity bills. In
addition, the proposed technology may reduce the fossil fuel usage required for
producing electricity and, ultimately, reduce global warming. The proposed
technology may encourage more electric vehicle chargers and renewable energy
generators in the customers' internal power network due to more economical
operations. In addition, the technology also may alleviate the peak power burden
on the utility and generators, which improves the reserve of electrical energy
during the hours of a day that it is needed most. The current focus is on large
companies, however, the proposed technology may be applied directly to medium
and small size businesses and residential buildings as electric vehicle chargers
and renewable generators are expected to be widely
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
software package and real-time Artificial Intelligence (AI) power management
system that reduces electricity usage. The proposed software has features such
as comprehensive objective functions, including complex Time-Of-Use rate plans
and degradation of components, and is intertwined through an iterative process
with the proposed AI power management algorithm. Data is collected from the
client and fed into the sizing software to determine renewable energy sources
(e.g., photovoltaic panel) and battery sizes. After sizing is completed, the AI
management system controls the battery's inverter in real-time. The proposed
technology finds the most cost-effective strategy using artificial intelligence
and optimization techniques, and the real-time decision with the savings and
best resiliency outcome is released to the battery's inverter. A comprehensive
sensitivity analysis to optimize the parameters of the AI management system has
been completed. Preliminary results show that the proposed technology may reduce
electricity bills for large-sized businesses up to 15% more than standard peak-
shaving energy management methods while also increasing "resiliency under
outage.‚Äù&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.