* 2124526
* I-Corps: Digital Solution for Preventing Interpersonal Violence
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Mangai Natarajan, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this I-Corps project is the development of a
digital solution that would address a long-standing societal problem of Inter-
Personal Violence (IPV) that primarily affects women and girls worldwide. Social
science research has proven that millions of people do not report and suffer in
silence because of the normalizations of violence instilled by the “patriarchal
system.” Empowering people, especially women, girls, and sexual minorities to
take proactive measures in breaking their silence in ending violence is the
primary goal of this digital intervention. The proposed digital technology
provides a proactive capability that may have wide cost-saving public benefits
as well as commercial prospects in providing rapid IPV prevention solutions to
organizations such as the government (especially criminal justice agencies),
women’s and faith-based organizations, educational institutions (college and
universities), and corporations (companies promoting diversity and resilience).
Successful commercialization of such a product would bring this one-stop
awareness and empowerment digital platform to the market with the potential to
make significant impact on IPV prevention. The technology could improve the
lives of millions of women from varied socio-economic strata, delivering
tangible economic benefits to communities and corporations across the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
digital tool that involves unique integration of social science principles in
criminal justice and cognitive science with state-of-the-art software
engineering technology, data science, and computer science. Prior research
suggests that a digital technology-based web application may overcome major
challenges in digital privacy, safety, accessibility under low resources
environments, and usability in dealing with Inter-Personal Violence (IPV). IPV
is a sensitive, personal issue, and its varied ecosystems and archetypes posit
unique challenges. The proposed technology is a software product grounded in
social science research using mathematical algorithms (e.g., based on data
mining, machine learning, and artificial intelligence) at its core. The focus is
on proactively empowering people to understand their personal circumstances from
social science research-based evaluations and then providing them with resources
to prevent IPV or to better manage an ongoing situation. The product is
envisioned as a digital modular platform that would be designed to be usable on
all mobile phones and laptops, and bandwidth limited cellular environments. The
data analytics built into the software and integrated with artificial
intelligence will provide instant feedback to users to help them make informed
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.