* 2124127
* SCH: Tackling Progressive Disease - Learning from Longitudinal Observational Clinical Data in the Presence of Noise and Confounding
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Jenna Wiens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,150,000.00

There is a pressing need to improve our ability to stratify and treat patients
with or at risk of developing Alzheimer’s disease (AD). To this end, efforts
like the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) aim to collect data
on a wide range of biomarkers and have enrolled hundreds of participants who are
followed longitudinally. While such studies are important and necessary, there
is evidence to suggest that the development of AD starts as early as 22 years
prior to symptom onset. Thus, it will be some time before such prospective
studies produce enough data to shed light on the long-term progression of the
disease. This project moves beyond curated datasets like ADNI and develops new
techniques that can leverage routinely collected electronic health record (EHR)
data for novel analyses of patient trajectories prior to and following a
diagnosis with mild cognitive impairment and AD. Tools for estimating patient
risk from observational data have the potential to generalize beyond AD to other
conditions that progress slowly over the course of years. We expect the proposed
work to lay the groundwork for clinical systems that directly impact society by
identifying patients most likely to benefit from early intervention and
recommend actions to reduce risk through measuring the effect of modifiable risk
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work advances the fields of machine learning
(ML) for patient risk stratification and individual treatment effect estimation
in the context of developing tools for estimating patient risk for AD. In terms
of risk stratification, new approaches for learning in the presence of label
noise and for multi-event survival analysis that leverage information about the
constraints on the ordering of events (e.g., death cannot precede AD) are
explored. In addition, novel ML techniques are developed to advance our ability
to estimate causal effects using observational data (e.g., how does hypertension
affect one’s risk of developing AD), with a focus on addressing bias related to
confounding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.