* 2124855
* International Society of the Learning Sciences (ISLS) 2021 Conference: Reflecting the Past and Embracing the Future through Doctoral Consortium, Early, and Mid-career Workshops
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Marcela Borge, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 20,330.00

This project supports a group of 25 US-based doctoral students and early career
professionals to virtually attend the Doctoral Consortium, Early Career
Workshop, and Mid-Career Workshop at the Annual Meeting of the International
Society of the Learning Sciences to be held virtually in June 2021. This
workshop will enhance the capacity of the learning sciences as a field to
address important challenges associated with the transformation of education and
broadening of participation in the digital age. Additionally, the workshop will
target diverse participants within the field and mentor scholars who are
underrepresented. The overall goal is to support new scholars in the
interdisciplinary learning science research community and contribute to
impactful research on learning that will benefit society as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the virtual setting due to the Covid-19
pandemic, the project will employ new technologies to create virtual-based
opportunities for community building and networking for the participants. The
workshop organization builds on a successful model documented as effective in
similar past workshops, providing opportunities for the participants to interact
with international researchers and practitioners. The activities provide
participants with a deeper understanding of the field combined with hands-on
mentorship. This will support early career scholars to succeed in the field and
go on to make valuable intellectual contributions. Ultimately, the workshop will
enhance the capacity of the learning sciences as an interdisciplinary field to
address important challenges associated with the transformation of education and
broadening of participation in the digital age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.