* 2124918
* Gaitprints as Predictors of Disease and Disability for Effective Rehabilitation Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Nick Stergiou, University of Nebraska at Omaha
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 446,711.00

After decades of human movement research, there are still many unknowns about
human gait. One of the most challenging and intriguing unknowns is related to
the following fundamental research question: are there characteristics
as­sociated with human gait that are unique to each individual in the same
manner as fingerprints? This project sheds light into this question by focusing
on the fact that, despite being similar, no two steps that humans take are
identical. This natural feature of variability that human walking exhibits can
reveal critical information about human well-being. In addition, the
investigation of the uniqueness of human gait characteristics under the lens of
gait variability can be utilized to predict disease and physiological decline
and improve rehabilitation. The knowledge gained through this project will be
incorporated into university course curriculum and summer internship positions
will be made available for K-12 students, so that students acquire vital skills
for their prospective undergraduate studies in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goal of this project is to investigate whether each individual exhibits a
unique “gaitprint” (i.e., each individual’s gait exhibits unique
characteristics/properties) in the same fashion that each individual has unique
fingerprints. The characteristics that may constitute a gaitprint will be
explored and identified through a series of biomechanical experiments under
different settings (indoors and outdoors), where gait data will be collected
from research participants that belong to both healthy populations and
populations with disease and disability. The collected data will be
statistically analyzed through novel techniques and the existence of properties
related to gaitprint uniqueness and persistence will be investigated. The
transformative nature of this project lies in its focus on human gait
variability patterns as the key element for the investigation of the gaitprint
existence. Through the involvement of an interdisciplinary team of
investigators, this project is expected to result in fundamental knowledge that
will enable the use of gaitprints as a potential predictor of aging and
pathology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Disability
and Rehabilitation Engineering (DARE) Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.