* 2124908
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: HARMONIA: New Methods for Colocating Multiple QoS-Sensitive Jobs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Samee Khan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 289,926.00

Data centers and high performance computing (HPC) systems are considered the
backbone of all modern-day computational needs for services ranging from Web
search to emails; from video streaming to file sharing; from social media
platforms to scientific computing. Today, contemporary data center job
schedulers employ conservative resource sharing strategies among applications
co-running on the same physical server. Current strategies are conservative to
ensure that tight latency requirements for latency-critical applications are
met; however, this conservatism leads to huge underutilization of expensive
computing resources, which incurs both capital and operational expenses.
HARMONIA proposes a family of novel unconventional resource strategies
leveraging the principles of Bayesian Optimization (BO), but introducing novel
innovations to BO and demonstrating its usefulness toward data center resource
management. HARMONIA will capture the impact of resource allocation on
application performance using BO-based learning models, and partition the shared
resources and adjust hardware/software knobs accordingly to maximize the
performance of individual applications and the system utilization. To achieve
practicality and scalability, HARMONIA employs a pool of approximately-accurate
online learning models which are lightweight instead of a heavyweight, fully-
accurate model. Incoming applications are placed and co-located with existing
applications in a dynamic, efficient, and non-intrusive manner by the HARMONIA
runtime framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes of this project will influence
and impact the operations of modern data centers, which serve our computational
needs for a variety of workloads including short-running latency-critical
application (e.g., machine learning inferences, web search queries,
microservices) and long-running throughput-oriented workloads (e.g., scientific
simulations). Improving the utilization of large-scale data centers and HPC
systems will lead to better cost savings and a lower carbon footprint. Planned
educational and outreach activities for the project HARMONIA include enhancing
graduate coursework and introducing a new monthly podcast on ``concepts in
computer systems'' to better engage and prepare high school students. All
developed tools, software artifacts, measured datasets will be made available to
the research community for further enhancing the project outcomes and their
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.