* 2124850
* US-Japan Joint Workshop on Thermal Transport, Materials Informatics and Quantum Computing
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Tengfei Luo, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2022
* USD 19,897.00

This award is to support the US-Japan Joint Workshop on Thermal Transport,
Materials Informatics and Quantum Computing to be held virtually on March 22-25,
2021 over the ZOOM and Gather.Town platforms. With the recent advances in
artificial intelligence (AI), there is an opportunity to leverage AI to further
advance thermal transport so as to maximize the ability to systematically
develop thermal materials with desirable properties, i.e., materials-by-design.
This workshop seeks to promote conversations among the thermal transport
communities and the greater machine learning and materials informatics
communities to cultivate international collaborations with Japanese researchers.
Quantum computing, as one of important topics in materials informatics, is also
a key element of this workshop. The workshop is designed to maximize diversity
and inclusion via broadening participations of researchers and engineers from
diverse backgrounds and inviting speakers from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This US-Japan joint workshop brings together researchers
from academia, national lab, and industry in both US and Japan to cultivate
research collaborations in AI, Materials Informatics, Thermal Transport, and
Quantum Computing. It features four themes: Data Infrastructure, AI-driven
Experimental Discovery, Simulation-aided Materials Informatics &amp; Thermal
Transport, and AI and Quantum Computing. The new opportunities and future
research directions identified from this workshop will be disseminated through a
perspective article. The AI- and quantum-fueled advances in thermal transport
research will also benefit innovations in industry. The workshop will initiate
exchanges of students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty, as well as sharing of
research facilities between the U.S. and Japan. This workshop will also provide
the next generation of scientists and engineers a platform to interact with
established researchers and their peers from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.