* 2124527
* I-Corps: Neurologic assessment tool to identify patients with traumatic brain injury
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2021
* James Richardson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to measure the brain's ability to make split-second
decisions (brain speed) to identify traumatic brain injury (TBI). Executive
function is the brain’s ability to focus on what matters. Paired with quick
reaction time, executive function allows humans to make important, split-second
decisions. However, the methods currently used to measure these “brain vital
signs” are expensive, inaccurate, and overly reliant on computers. Reaction time
and executive function are known to be associated with concussion/TBI, aging,
fall risk, sleep disorders, drug use, and driving safety. The proposed
technology has the potential for use in a variety of applications. Athletic
departments and the Department of Defense (DoD) have a clear unmet need for a
portable, objective measure of cognitive function following head injuries, and
emergency departments and hospitals would benefit from the speed, simplicity,
and cost of this technology. Geriatricians and physical therapists have
expressed interest in allowing rapid testing of their patient’s brain speed.
Lastly, this technology tests the ability to make split-second decisions, so
there may be applications for law enforcement and the Department of Motor
Vehicles to enhance driver safety with this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a clinical neurologic assessment tool for the assessment of
reaction time, short latency impulse inhibition, and executive function for
patients with traumatic brain injury (TBI). The proposed device is designed to
measure reaction time and quick decision making based on a ruler-drop method.
Accurate measurement of reaction time has been shown to be useful in the
diagnosis, prognosis, and recovery monitoring of those suffering from
concussion. In addition, recent data from the National Collegiate Athletic
Association (NCAA)-DoD funded Concussion Assessment Research and Education
(CARE) study indicate that the proposed technology is more effective than the
industry standard computerized test (ImPACT) at diagnosing concussion, while
being faster to administer, more portable, and more cost-effective. There is
published evidence that the accuracy and precision of screen-based reaction time
tests suffer due to hardware/software inconsistencies and due to the non-
motivating quality of the tests. The proposed technology has been shown to be
inherently motivating and results in faster and less variable response times as
compared with computerized testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.