* 2124332
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Green and Climate Resilient Built Environments (Green CRiB)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Terri Long, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The vision of the proposed ERC for Green and Climate Resilient Built
Environments (Green CRiBs) is to enhance the climate-resilience of our society
by improving indoor temperature stability as a means of dramatically increasing
passive survivability, environmental justice, and providing a pathway to
accelerate energy system decarbonization. The Green CRiBs ERC planning grant
activities will focus on identifying cutting-edge, sustainable, engineering-
based innovations in transparent envelope materials and enabling smart
manufacturing technologies that will transform how natural and artificial light,
heat and energy are managed in the built environment. Window and transparent
envelope technologies leveraging innovations in super-insulating materials and
novel light management paradigms will enable dramatic reduction of the overall
need for active cooling/heating in buildings and agricultural greenhouses, while
maximizing access to safe temperatures for both human living and economic
activity, including food production. Green CRiBs is envisioned as an essential
strategy for addressing climate change and environmental equity through energy
savings and grid protection, while catalyzing innovation in the $0.42 trillion
glass/window industry and multiple sectors it serves, and training the next
generation of diverse, convergence- and innovation-minded engineers to solve
complex societal problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this ERC, we aim to
dramatically improve indoor temperature stabilization against outdoor
temperature variations, which will lead to residual load reductions essential
for grid decarbonization using an entirely new approach predicated on dynamical
management of heat, light and energy at the level of the built environment. A
diverse ERC team in terms of expertise, gender, race, geographic location, and
career stage will be formed to establish an integrated research, innovation,
learning, and mentoring environment with broad participation to produce a highly
diverse group of convergent thinkers and problem solvers that reflect the
increasing diversity of our society. System-level implications on safety,
climate resilience, environmental equity and justice, reduction in greenhouse
gas emissions and grid decarbonization will be sought and enabled through
enabling technologies, fundamental research, smart manufacturing innovations and
stakeholder engagement. Intellectual merit outcomes of this planning grant are
to: i) establish linkages between how multi-functional and dynamic transparent
envelope technologies and innovations therein will impact climate resilience,
energy equity, and grid decarbonization, ii) identify system-level and
technology-level testbeds (residential and commercial buildings, greenhouse
agriculture, etc.) that will maximize system-level benefits and societal
impacts, iii) chart a path towards developing enabling technologies that advance
thermal and light management properties well beyond the current state-of-the-art
to become responsive to system-level needs, iv) identify critical pathways for
advancement of aerogel thermal insulating windows, macroelectronic devices in
fundamental areas of reversible electrodeposition, light energy modulation
required for optimal plant growth and human comfort, on-glass energy harvesting
and storage, and v) improve sustainable, low-cost and large scale manufacturing
of advanced technologies on glass and other envelopes. System-level evaluations
in primary testbeds in conjunction with stakeholders will be identified to guide
research with an eye on minimizing cost and maximizing acceptance, adoption and
societal impact. The Green CRiBs planning activities will also seek to identify
the broadest possible stakeholder community and foster convergence of diverse
disciplines related to systems, technologies and fundamental
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.