* 2124244
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Accelerated Formulations Engineering (CAFE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nathan Gianneschi, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Vaccines, paint, fuels, cosmetics, dyes, plastic packaging, and many other
products are formulations: one or more active ingredients mixed or chemically
packaged with other supporting ingredients. Successful products depend on
carefully crafted formulations to meet multiple design requirements: stability
during storage and transportation, cost, safety, environmental impact, and
others. A range of factors, such as adoption of sustainably sourced ingredients
or emergence of new diseases, create a constant need for new formulations. Such
formulations are hard to develop. Ingredients can interact in a complex way and
datasets are often limited, making it difficult to know a formulationsâ€™
properties without trial and error. Compounding the challenge, the number of
ways that ingredients can be combined becomes enormous as the ingredient list
grows. This makes formulation development one of the most vexing, time-
consuming, and costly steps in bringing a new product to market. Overcoming this
challenge to create a paradigm for faster and more reliable formulation
development would lead to new products and accelerate US
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We see a path toward radically transforming
formulation development, supported by a new effort, the Center for Accelerated
Formulation Engineering (CAFE). This would nurture and build on recent
convergence research at the intersection of artificial intelligence (AI) and the
chemical sciences, while being responsive to societal need for new formulations,
regulation, manufacturing and business development. Here, we propose a series of
workshops devoted to advancing along this path. The central idea is to engage
stakeholders from academia, industry, consultancies, and regulatory agencies
into considering how recent advances in machine learning, AI, and high-
throughput synthesis and characterization can all be leveraged to mitigate the
formulation-development burden. Workshops with diverse and broadly
representative speakers and attendees will be organized around the three central
themes of Public and Personal Health, Agriculture and Food. This would bring
together an interdisciplinary team of researchers to begin teambuilding for a
full Engineering Research Center proposal to be submitted in
2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.