* 2124797
* STTR Phase I:  Innovative Two-Phase Cooling with Micro Closed Loop Pulsating Heat Pipes for High Power Density Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Patrick Phelan, GLOBAL COOLING TECHNOLOGY GROUP, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of improved thermal cooling
solutions for mobile devices. Cooling solutions today are often unable to meet
the demands of 5G/6G telecommunications with thermal heating rates up to 10
times that of 4G technologies. Even current high performance 5G mobile phones
have greatly increasing thermal loads, which, in turn, increase the external
touch temperature of the smart phone and often trigger the phone to slow down
its speed. The proposed technology may result in improved cooling for increased
performance without limitations of performance throttling. Enhancing thermal
cooling capabilities of cutting edge mobile devices may help enable widespread
adoption of 5G/6G telecommunications, virtual and augmented reality, artificial
intelligence, self-driving cars, and big data
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project develops a new passive micro-two-phase cooling based on
pulsating heat pipes, which consist of a loop of microchannels in a flat plate
in which oscillations of the coolant in the serpentine are generated by vapor
bubbles to pump liquid and vapor to transport higher heat loads. The design
harnesses complex self-induced pulsations to better perform the work of
transferring larger quantities of heat by enhancing the pulsating heat pipe's
fluid motion with localized obstructions to create distributed bubble nucleation
points. The same obstructions will be used to improve the micro-thermal heat
transfer processes. The project introduces microfluidics to pulsating heat
pipes. The research objectives of the proposed project are to demonstrate
substantial improvements in thermal performance compared to competing cooling
technology (vapor chambers) at the same thin form
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.