* 2124277
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Multimodal Algorithms for Motor Imitation Assessment in Children with Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Rene Vidal, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Balakrishnan Prabhakaran
* 09/30/2025
* USD 659,107.00

Approximately 1 in 54 children in the US is diagnosed with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Given its high prevalence, there is a need for an automatic and
scalable method to inform diagnosis and behavioral therapies. While prior work
on finding early-emerging and reliable quantitative biomarkers of ASD has
focused on non-motor features, abundant research evidence has revealed patterns
of impaired motor imitation in a wide range of children with ASD, making motor
imitation deficits a promising avenue to find a phenotypic biomarker. However,
traditional imitation assessment methods often rely on expert-based observation,
which is costly, time-consuming and error-prone, and lacks objectivity and
scalability. Recent advances in computer vision and machine learning make
artificial intelligence a promising technology to design an objective,
reproducible and highly-scalable multimodal system functioning not only in well-
equipped clinical setups but also at home for assessing imitation performance in
children with ASD. However, critical challenges such as the design of specific
imitation tasks for ASD assessment, the collection and labeling of multimodal
data for training machine learning algorithms, and the development of novel
fine-grained representations human movements and metrics for comparing such
movements need to be addressed to test the validity, scalability and
reproducibility of automatic motor imitation assessment algorithms to inform ASD
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to design,
develop and test an objective, reproducible and highly-scalable multimodal
system to observe children performing a brief video game-like motor imitation
task, quantitatively assess their motor imitation performance, and investigate
its validity as a phenotypic biomarker for autism. Accomplishing this goal will
require an interdisciplinary approach which combines expertise in autism, child
development, computer vision and machine learning. Specifically, this project
will: (1) design motor imitation tasks that are relevant for ASD assessment, (2)
design, test and validate a scalable and flexible system to collect and label
multimodal data of children imitating a sequence of movements; (3) design a
novel fine-grained representation of human movements that can be learned
efficiently and is suitable for comparing the children's movements to the
movements they need to imitate; (4) develop novel computer vision and metric
learning algorithms for learning and comparing multimodal representations of
human movements, and (5) use such metrics to generate candidate imitations
scores that can be used as potential quantitative biomarkers for ASD. The motor
imitation assessment methods to be developed in this project could be used in a
wide variety of applications beyond assessing children with ASD, such as
providing imitation performance scores for video-based rehabilitation therapy,
surgical skill assessment, athletic activities and other movement-based
instructional activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.