* 2124608
* EAGER: Bidirectional Body-Brain-Machine Interface (B3MI) for Control of Complex Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Sam Burden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2023
* USD 316,000.00

This Mind, Machine, and Motor Nexus (M3X) EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project advances a novel vision for implantable bidirectional
brain-machine interfaces. Bidirectional brain-machine interfaces read and write
information from and to the brain. These technologies have potential to help
restore function after neuromotor injury by supplementing intrinsic sensory and
motor pathways with engineered pathways that can be used to control assistive
devices. However, successful application of the technology requires users to
undergo substantial training to learn how to use the interface to control the
assistive device. This project will promote the progress of science and advance
the national health by advancing the project's overarching goal, which is to
understand and shape how the brain can use a bidirectional brain-machine
interface to control physical machines with complex dynamics. The specific
objectives of the project are: 1) to characterize how the brain learns to
combine intrinsic sensory inputs (vision and somatosensation), along with
engineered sensory inputs and motor outputs, to control novel devices with
complex dynamics; and 2) to test new ways to build high-performance
bidirectional interfaces that can co-adapt to enhance user-in-the-loop control.
The project team will test bidirectional body and brain interfaces with
foundational research using a clinically relevant model that allows the
scientifically rigorous study of complex learning dynamics. The research
promises to be impactful in the future development of assistive devices and
rehabilitation therapies, where methods to design and optimize user-in-the-loop
systems will enable improved performance and customization of devices to users'
evolving needs and capabilities. The project also supports graduate education
through research mentorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
work is to develop new knowledge and engineering tools that can be used to
optimize user-in-the-loop assistive devices. When a user receives feedback from
a device and uses that feedback to alter the device's performance in real-time,
the user becomes part of the device control loop. Current brain-machine
interfaces are designed using methods from statistics and machine learning that
are ill-suited to the closed-loop, co-adaptive, dynamic environments created
when the user is in the loop. As a first step towards optimizing multi-pathway
sensorimotor interfaces, the research seeks: (1) to discover how sensory-and-
motor pathways are integrated as a user learns to control complex dynamics in a
bidirectional body-and-brain-machine interface (B3MI); and (2) to apply this
knowledge to synthesize and test a bidirectional interface that optimizes user-
in-the-loop control of a machine with complex dynamics. The project uses using a
clinically relevant non-human primate (NHP) model that facilitates the rigorous
study of complex learning dynamics in a way that is impracticable through human
subject experimentation. The research has two aims. The first seeks to
empirically measure sensorimotor transforms corresponding to different pathways
obtained by pairing visual or neural sensory input with manual or neural motor
output as a NHP controls interfaces with different machine dynamics (1st and 2nd
order). The second seeks to synthesize B3MIs to optimize closed-loop system
performance, and to test performance while controlling physical machine
dynamics. The research uses high spatiotemporal resolution, invasive neural
recording and stimulation techniques in a NHP to create novel closed-loop
bidirectional B3MIs. The study will use a novel trajectory-tracking task wherein
spectral analysis of measured input and output signals are used to directly
quantify sensorimotor transforms. Interfaces will be synthesized using
established techniques from robust control theory. Interface performance will be
assessed using performance metrics on established assay tasks, and sensorimotor
transformations will be quantified using established metrics from human motor
control. This work promises scientific and engineering advances that will
improve the robustness and utility of bidirectional neural interfaces for
assistive device and rehabilitation applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.