* 2124634
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Workshop: Integrated research on societal infrastructure resilience to stressing events through interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary convergence
* O/D,OIA
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Ellen Rathje, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lara Campbell
* 03/31/2022
* USD 99,274.00

This project will organize and host a virtual workshop focused on developing
resilience and adaptation tools that can help society cope more effectively with
extreme stressing events. The stressing events are called “shocks” and include
natural hazard events such as hurricanes, earthquakes, floods, pandemics, and
wildfires. The premise of the workshop is that decision-making and resilience
will be improved through development of a “societal shock resilience framework”
that more effectively quantifies and visualizes hazard risks, vulnerabilities,
responses, and recovery paths. The goal of the workshop is to develop a
potential future topic (track) of the NSF Convergence Accelerator. The workshop
will identify the potential scope of the topic, the potential deliverables that
could result from supporting that topic, the disciplinary expertise that could
come together under a convergence research approach, and the partnerships that
could be engaged across academia, industry, non-profit organizations, and
government if the topic were supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Society regularly
faces “shock” events such as hurricanes, floods, wildfires, and earthquakes and
the nation is now facing the possibility that many of these shocks may become
more frequent. Existing resilience and adaptation tools are inadequate or not
implemented. A key challenge are the socio-cultural-economic barriers that exist
between the many groups working to improve shock resilience. A future
Convergence Accelerator research track on societal shock resilience can only be
realized by leveraging the collective expertise of multiple disciplines,
including hazard assessment, ecologic and environmental sciences, engineering
disciplines, mathematics and statistics, computer science and software
engineering, sociology, psychology, economics and financial stress modeling,
public health, public policy, public administration, urban planning, disaster
management and emergency response. Expertise in these disciplines spans a wide
range of sectors including academic institutions; local, state, and federal
government entities; and for-profit and non-profit organizations in the private
sector. This workshop seeks to bring together the breadth of disciplinary and
sector expertise needed to define the scope of research for an NSF Convergence
Accelerator track. The scope defined by the workshop will define efforts that
could produce tangible deliverables in less than three years that would improve
communities’ resilience to a range of potential shocks. Importantly, the
workshop seeks to also define a framework for any set of stakeholders to improve
their community’s shock resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.