* 2124080
* FMitF: Track I: Verifying System Software on an Arm Multiprocessor Hardware Model
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Jason Nieh, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 750,000.00

Software bugs and vulnerabilities pose major security risks for software systems
that provide the foundation for today’s computing infrastructure, such as
Operating System kernels and hypervisors. These risks are increased by the
growing complexity of software running on modern hardware, as vulnerabilities
are much more easily overlooked in complex software executing on sophisticated
hardware. Formal verification offers a potential solution to this problem by
proving that the system software is implemented correctly. Unfortunately,
existing verified software systems are based on over-simplified hardware models,
meaning proven properties may not reflect the software’s behavior on real
hardware. To address this problem, this project is designing, implementing, and
evaluating VArm, a verification framework for verifying complex systems software
over a realistic ARM multiprocessor hardware model. This project’s novelties are
(1) a novel hardware model that faithfully captures the behavior of
multiprocessor ARM hardware, (2) a highly abstract machine model for reasoning
about well-synchronized multiprocessor programs, and (3) a multi-layered
framework that combines these models. The combination is accurate yet easy to
use such that real system software can, for the first time, be verified over ARM
multiprocessor hardware. The project's impacts are to improve the state-of-the-
art of formal-verification methods and reduce security risks for real-world
software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VArm introduces a novel layered approach,
gradually refining a detailed low-level machine model, RealArm, to a simpler
abstract model, AbsArm. RealArm is a hardware model that faithfully and
correctly reflects ARM multiprocessor hardware behavior. This behavior includes
relaxed memory consistency, tagged Translation Look-aside Buffers (TLBs), shared
page tables, and cache coherence. AbsArm is a highly abstract machine model that
hides or simplifies low-level hardware features. Nevertheless, AbsArm allows
well-synchronized programs to be verified as if they were almost sequential
while still ensuring the proofs hold for ARM multiprocessor hardware. The
project will show that RealArm refines AbsArm for well-synchronized programs,
such that verified guarantees on AbsArm also hold on RealArm. To demonstrate its
effectiveness, the researchers plan to use VArm to re-verify various systems
such as Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM) such that their proofs will hold on
ARM multiprocessor hardware. The project will remove previously limiting
assumptions such as sequential consistency and no sharing of page tables. These
will be the first correctness proofs of system software that are verified to
hold on a realistic multiprocessor hardware model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.