* 2124438
* Predicting impacts of coastal species redistribution in a changing climate
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Cascade Sorte, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 492,382.00

This project will improve our ability to anticipate the impacts of shifts in the
geographic range of coastal species in a changing climate. Although range shifts
may be necessary for some species to avoid extinction as the climate warms, the
arrival of new ones to an ecosystem can also lead to population declines and
loss of biodiversity. The investigator is developing approaches to predict the
impacts of range shifts along Pacific shorelines using techniques that have been
previously validated for risk assessments for invasive species. The research
objectives of this study are integrated with educational activities: engagement
of undergraduate and graduate students in data collection and analysis and
implementation of a hierarchical mentoring program to serve English Language
Learners within the investigatorâ€™s Minority Serving Institution. The
investigator is also partnering with outreach organizations in the U.S. and
Mexico to educate K-12 students and multiple stakeholder groups about climate-
driven range shifts and tools for predicting outcomes of redistribution, which
can assist practitioners in creating management plans and
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is developing a framework for
understanding the impacts of marine species redistribution with a focus on
poleward-moving carnivorous whelk species in rocky shorelines from Northern
California to Baja, Mexico. Project goals are to 1) quantify the impacts of
shifting species on populations and communities in the expanded range; 2) assess
whether impacts of shifting species differ between their native and expanded
ranges; and 3) predict future impacts under climate warming. The investigator is
addressing fundamental questions in community ecology about the degree to which
species interactions are density- and context-dependent. She is combining
observational and experimental approaches with a broader data synthesis effort
to test whether the impacts of species redistribution can be predicted by key
indicators of invasion impacts: abundance, trophic level, and impacts in the
native range. Empirical data combined with paired demographic and distribution
modeling will be used to project future impacts across the expanded ranges of
these coastal marine species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.