* 2124210
* Collaborative Research: Towards a More Comprehensive Understanding of Eulerian and Lagrangian Transport of Active and Passive Tracers in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Irina Rypina, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 807,034.00

Transport of biogeochemical tracers in the ocean is a complex and multifaceted
problem that reaches across many disciplines, from physical oceanography, to
marine ecology, fishery management, search and rescue operations, natural and
anthropogenic hazard mitigation and risk assessment. This work is broadly
motivated by the problem of marine microplastic pollution, but other relevant
oceanic tracers can include nutrients, plankton, radioactive and chemical
tracers, fish larvae, Sargassum, oil, etc. This project will advance both
theoretical and practical aspects of understanding and predicting the evolution
of tracers in realistic oceanic flows. Theoretical treatments and numerical
procedures for predicting the probability of a tracer reaching a target and the
PDF of its state will be developed, bridging the gap between the Lagrangian,
Eulerian, and stochastic descriptions of the problem. When applied to marine
microplastics pollution, the theoretical framework will include proper
representations of the effects of buoyancy, rigid-body properties, inertia of
particles, and uncertainties in particle parameters. The developed methodology
will then be tested using idealized tracers in a simple analytical model of an
eddy, as well as realistic microplastic-like tracers in a high-resolution ocean
circulation model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish
links between the probabilistic Eulerian and Lagrangian descriptions of tracer
evolution, reconcile differences between them, and investigate the advantages
and disadvantages of each approach. Lagrangian methods and Generalized
Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) techniques will be linked to the Fokker-
Planck equation for the probability density function (PDF) of the tracer
distribution, bridging the gap between the Lagrangian, Eulerian, and stochastic
descriptions of the problem. The project will explore the connections between
Lagrangian Coherent Structures (LCS) and Generalized LCS, and the transport
barriers for the probability density functions. Factors to be accounted for
include changes in state, compressibility, Maxey-Riley dynamics, and eddy fluxes
resulting from bolus velocities, diffusion, and Stoke’s drift. The goal is to
develop a dual Lagrangian – probabilistic-Eulerian theoretical methodology for
transport of small solid-body particles, such as marine microplastics, in
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.