* 2124416
* Collaborative Research: Isotopic Indicators for Mechanisms of Organic Matter Degradation under High Productivity and High Carbon Flux Conditions (EXPORTS)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Brian Popp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2024
* USD 507,547.00

The downward settling of organic material transports carbon out of the ocean
surface, as part of a process called the biological pump. However, only a small
fraction of organic material produced by organisms in surface waters makes it to
the deep ocean. The rest can be fragmented or consumed (respired) by bacteria or
larger organisms; the role of each process remains in question. Guided by recent
results from the Pacific Ocean, the investigators will use the stable isotopes
of carbon and nitrogen in amino acids to identify the input of fresh algal
material, zooplankton feces, and bacteria to the biological pump in the North
Atlantic spring bloom. With data from contrasting locations, the investigators
will test and develop their isotopic models so they can be used to help predict
global patterns in carbon transport. The work will be part of a large
oceanographic field program (NASA EXPORTS). The tremendous amount of data
collected in this program will aid the development and interpretation of the
isotopic models. To share results broadly, the investigators will produce and
distribute several episodes of Voice of the Sea, a local television program that
will air in Hawaii and the Pacific islands. Episodes will be posted online and
publicized through social media to the south Florida community. The project will
support a Ph.D. student and an undergraduate student at University of Miami,
which serves a 25% Hispanic population, and a Ph.D. student and an undergraduate
student at University of Hawaii, a designated minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will assess the relative
importance of packaging organic matter in fecal material, particle
disaggregation, microbial reworking, and zooplankton dietary usage on vertical
patterns of particle flux across contrasting oceanic provinces, using empirical
methods independent of incubation techniques or metabolic rate measurements.
From their existing work in relatively low-flux environments of the Pacific
Ocean, the investigators have developed two nascent models: (1) a mixing model
that uses the compound-specific isotope analysis of amino acids (AA-CSIA) to
estimate the phytodetritus, fecal pellet, and microbially degraded composition
of particles, such that the vertical alteration mechanisms and size distribution
of these materials can be detected; and (2) an inverse relationship between
carbon flux into the deep ocean and the reliance of mesopelagic food webs on
small, degraded particles. In this project, the investigators will test these
two models by applying the same methods to the recent NASA EXPORTS field study
in a high productivity, high flux regime, the North Atlantic spring bloom. The
first EXPORTS field study in the subarctic Pacific provided some of the
materials from which the models were developed. Application and refinement of
the investigators’ newly developed isotopic indicators will enable development
of a globally generalized isotopic framework for assessing the degradative
history of particulate organic matter and its relationship to mesopelagic
dietary resources, including small, microbially degraded particles that are
often not accounted for as a metazoan dietary resource. This work capitalizes on
existing, comprehensive field programs specifically focused on building a
predictive framework relating surface ocean properties to the vertical flux of
organic carbon. The proposed work directly addresses EXPORTS Science Question 2:
What controls the efficiency of vertical transfer of organic matter below the
well-lit surface ocean? The results of this work additionally will provide
observational comparisons to global models of carbon flux composition and
pelagic food web resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.