* 2124176
* Collaborative Research: Reducing complexity in vivo enables investigation of  Cellulose Synthase-like D complex formation, trafficking and function
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Alison Roberts, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 376,935.00

Cellulose has important economic value as a component of wood, paper, and
textile fibers. It is produced in the walls of plant cells, where it controls
growth and development. The enzymes that make most plant cellulose (CESAs)
produce chains of glucose in groups of 18 and bundle them together to form
strong, durable microfibrils. Related enzymes (CSLDs) also produce chains of
glucose, but whether these chains are bundled together and how this affects the
properties of the final product is unknown. CSLDs are required for normal cell
division and growth of certain plant cells that form long filaments, suggesting
that special properties of the cellulose produced by CSLDs are important for
these processes. Attempts to study the cellulose produced by CSLDs have been
hampered by the abundance of cellulose produced by CESAs. Although most plants
cannot survive without CESAs, it is possible to produce moss plants lacking
CESAs thereby solely relying on CSLDs for cellulose. These plants will be used
to study CSLDs and the structure and properties of the cellulose they produce.
Plant cells regulate their growth and development by controlling the
distribution of CESAs and CSLDs in time and space. How cells deliver these
enzymes to the right place at the right time will be studied by adding
fluorescent tags to CESAs and CSLDs. This research will contribute to our
understanding of plant growth and how we might improve the properties of
commercial plant fibers. It will also build the scientific workforce by training
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this
project are to test the hypothesis that Cellulose Synthase-like D (CSLD)
proteins form cellulose synthase complexes and synthesize a distinct form of
microfibrillar cellulose and to characterize the functional differentiation and
cellular targeting of CSLDs to elucidate their roles in deposition of the
specialized cell wall domains that support tip growth and cytokinesis. This
research is enabled by lines of the moss Physcomitrium (formerly Physcomitrella)
patens with all Cellulose Synthase (CESA) genes knocked out. This unique
resource will be used to investigate CSLD activity in vivo without interference
from background CESA activity. The first objective is to use the all cesa
knockout lines to structurally characterize CSLD-containing membrane complexes
by freeze fracture electron microscopy and to isolate and analyze the structure
of the cellulose produced by CSLDs. The second objective is to characterize the
roles of CSLDs in protonemal tip growth and cytokinesis by sub-cellular protein
localization and mutation analysis. The final objective is to determine cellular
trafficking pathways that target CSLDs and CESAs to distinct regions of the
plasma membrane using the powerful genetic and live cell imaging tools possible
in P. patens. By defining the division of labor between CESAs and CSLDs, this
research will enhance understanding of the synthesis, structure and mechanical
properties of the specialized cell wall domains that contribute to the
regulation of tip growth and cytokinesis, and how these contribute to whole
organism morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.