* 2124549
* HCC: Small: ProSocial: A 360-Degrees Video-based Virtual Reality Game Strengthening Social-emotional Skills with Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Sri Kurniawan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 01/31/2025
* USD 513,686.00

People with developmental disabilities often suffer from deficits in social-
emotional skills, including recognizing and managing emotions and maintaining
conversations, that are crucial for education, work, and life successes. The
overarching goal of the project is to employ participatory design methods to
understand the methods for teaching and enhancing social-emotional skills of
high-functioning individuals with developmental disabilities, such as those with
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). This project also aims to co-design 360-degree
video-based Virtual Reality environments with human actors with relevant
stakeholders aimed at providing a realistic and practical learning environment
for these individuals, thereby promoting transfer of skills from the virtual
environment to real life scenarios they regularly encounter. The co-design
process will include individuals with developmental disabilities and their
families and professional caregivers. The goal of the virtual environments is to
provide effective social-emotional skill training with minimal to no support
from behavioral specialists. While the project focuses on individuals with
developmental disabilities, the project research results can be used for society
at large for a variety of behavioral and social skills training based on: 1) the
lessons learned and the methods of participatory design for teaching and
enhancing social-emotional skills and 2) the virtual environments depicting
scenarios that are common in day-to-day interactions for most adults. The
project also provides excellent opportunities for multidisciplinary education
involving computer science, game design, human-computer interactions, and
psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to employ participatory
design methods to understand the methods for teaching and enhancing social-
emotional skills of high-functioning individuals with developmental disabilities
such as those with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). The design requirement
gathering methods include interviews with adults with developmental disabilities
their family members, behavioral specialists, speech language pathologists,
vocational and community support providers and psychologists, complemented with
role-playing workshops involving common vocational and social interactions that
are analyzed using Journey Mapping and Progression Mapping techniques. Two
learning theories: Applied Behavior Analysis (ABA) and Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy (CBT), form the foundation of the project and inform the design of the
Virtual Reality environments. From methodological point of view, society and
scientific communities can learn from this project how the combination and
modification of existing theories for assisting adults with developmental
disabilities, such as ABA and CBT, may be used to promote social-emotional skill
training for these adults in “safe” (virtual) environments. Another significant
aspect of the project is the longitudinal study on the participants with
alternating VR-based and role-playing workshop-based training. This innovative
and comprehensive longitudinal study will help provide critical insights to
understand: (a) whether the skills learned in virtual environments transfer to
real-world scenarios; (b) how/whether VR-based training helps caregivers such as
Speech Language Pathologists (SLPs) to work better with people with
developmental disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.