* 2124453
* Expeditions: DISCoVER: Design and Integration of Superconducting Computation for Ventures beyond Exascale Realization
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2029
* Eby Friedman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2029
* USD 2,999,996.00

The success of CMOS has overshadowed nearly all other solid-state device
innovations over recent decades. With fundamental CMOS scaling limits close in
sight, time is now ripe for an expedition to explore emerging disruptive
computing technologies. The DISCoVER Expedition will explore novel
superconductor electronics as a viable post-CMOS computing technology.
Superconductor electronics can deliver ultra-high performance and energy
efficiency at scale. The potential transition to superconductor electronics will
be revolutionary, analogous to the transition of NMOS-only logic to CMOS logic
in the 1970s. While energy efficiency was the initial driver for the transition
to CMOS, the benefits of CMOS went far beyond energy-efficiency gains and
included ultra-scale integration and more reliable circuits. In a similar vein,
this DISCoVER Expedition will pave the way for seminal innovations in integrated
electronics, sustainable exa-scale computing, and acceleration of machine
learning. DISCoVER will enable computing paradigms that can facilitate modeling
of climate-change effects, detection of underground geological resources,
enhancement of pharmaceutical drug design for personalized medicines and
healthcare, and development of innovative smart materials and infrastructure.
DISCoVER will help ensure the preeminence of the US as a technological world
leader and guide future hardware and chip-manufacturing
investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DISCoVER team will design and demonstrate
a superconductive system of cryogenic computing cores (SuperSoCC), an artifact
built from superconductive electronic components capable of yielding &gt;100x
improved energy efficiency at the same performance as CMOS. The system
demonstration pursuit is enabled by the team’s innovations in superconducting
materials and devices, circuits and architectures that scale, advanced design-
automation tools for easing design complexity, and supporting compilers and
runtime systems. Through this multi-faceted program, the DISCoVER Expedition
will methodically lower the technology-transfer barriers related to physical
scaling, integration complexity, tool support, and interfacing to room-
temperature electronics. Through its curriculum innovations, DISCoVER will
empower a new generation of engineers and entrepreneurs who will bring
superconducting to the mainstream of computing. The hands-on superconducting
labs housed at USC, combined with K-12 outreach across partner institutions,
will allow the DISCoVER team to bring the excitement of computing hardware to
future generations of the workforce. With innovative collaboration with USC’s
I-Corp and industry affiliates, DISCoVER is poised to open the power of
superconducting technology for tackling critical societal challenges. The
DISCoVER Expedition is led by the University of Southern California and includes
faculty and researchers from Auburn, Cornell, Northeastern, Northwestern,
Rochester, and Yokohama National University (as an international academic
partner).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.