* 2124282
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Psychophysiological sensing to enhance mindfulness-based interventions for self-regulation of opioid cravings
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,04/30/2023
* Tauhidur Rahman, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Martin
* 04/30/2023
* USD 337,534.00

Opioid use disorder (OUD) is a chronic condition and a leading public health
problem in the U.S. The risk of overdose is particularly high following a period
of abstinence leading to drug-related deaths. OUD includes physical dependency
and neural adaptations in brain circuits of reward and motivation, self-
regulation, and stress reactivity that can persist years after drug
discontinuation. Substance craving is one of the primary causes of OUD patient's
relapse. Studies have shown psychological cues such as stress, anxiety, and
arousal can precipitate the cultivation of drug craving. Research has found that
mindfulness-based strategies reduce cravings, psychological cues and prevent
relapse. Mindfulness-based interventions (MBIs) bring about clinically relevant
changes to physiological arousal, stress, and addictive behavior through
cognitive behavioral skill development. This project focuses on developing and
testing innovative technologies to aid sustainable recovery of OUD with wearable
and in-home physiological monitoring and generation of adaptive, personalized,
and just-in-time MBIs. While the research is focused on OUD, the principle and
the outcomes can be expanded to include other substance use disorders. The
project includes several education and outreach activities such as machine
learning course for medical professionals and annual workshops for middle school
girls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on opioid use disorder (OUD),
related cognition, and behaviors associated with a) reward, b) self-regulation,
c) stress reactivity, d) opioid craving, e) physical opioid withdrawal symptoms
and MBIs known to be impacted by OUD and post-acute withdrawal from opioids. In
particular, the research tasks focus on there areas. First, effective
physiological feature identification and extraction to detect craving that is
generalizable across large OUD populations and consider the external factors
such as age, gender, drug use habits, etc. Second, development of an effective
multi-modal sensing integration approach to capture psychological craving cues
(e.g., stress, arousal) from a combination of acoustic and physiological
sensing. This will include novel multiple instance (MIL) multitask learning
based classification techniques that are scalable with near real-time
performance. The study will address the fundamental gaps of indoor craving-
relevant sensing where only a small fraction of a long signal may convey
information relevant to the targeted emotional state/class. The last task will
include development of a craving context-aware MBI recommender system that
models the dynamic nature of OUD subjects craving-interventions and feedbacks.
The system will be formally validated to ensure safety against adverse outcomes.
Successful execution of the research will begin to test the effectiveness of
integrating passive sensing, adaptive artificial intelligence (AI), and
mindfulness interventions on regulating drug craving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.