* 2124983
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Adapting Flaws into Features
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Christy Landes, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,827,000.00

The NSF Center for Adapting Flaws into Features (CAFF) is supported by the
Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the Division of Chemistry. This
Phase I Center is led by Christy Landes of Rice University. Other Rice team
members include Stephan Link and Peter Rossky. Additional team members are
Jennifer Dionne from Stanford University, Martin Gruebele from the University of
Illinois-Urbana Champaign, Ben Levine from Stony Brook University, Sean Roberts
from the University of Texas-Austin, and Martin Zanni from the University of
Wisconsin. Iron-age metallurgists learned that judicious addition of impurities
(nickel, carbon, etc.) could transform a metal with poor materials properties
(iron) into strong steel tools. Chemical impurities, ‘flaws’, can be detrimental
in some situations and uniquely valuable in others, creating the desirable
‘features’ of a material. In modern times, the development of silicon-based
electronics exploited the same concept. CAFF’s overarching goal is to identify
chemical flaws that hold promise, understand the structural and electronic
properties that make those flaws uniquely influential, and then to demonstrate
how the same structures can be amplified to macroscopic scales. CAFF will
examine how the type, location, and sparsity of defects on atomic, nano- and
microscales influence, in particular, optical materials chemistry. Broader
impacts for CAFF include fast-tracking the democratization of undergraduate
education and focusing on a constituency of chemists that have fallen between
the cracks of public/K-12 outreach on the one hand, and undergraduate/graduate
training on the other. Key will be to build a network of Community College
partners that includes underrepresented urban and underserved rural communities.
A diverse set of faculty and students with unique skill sets will be partners
who can help form the future of American science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Center for Adapting Flaws into Features (CAFF) project aims to transform how to
think about, study, and exploit defects, while optimizing new data-informed
imaging tools that are broadly accessible. Real-world catalysts, coatings, and
batteries are never ideal nor function in ideal conditions. Real-world synthetic
chemists never make completely pure samples. Hence, physical chemists must
identify ways to exploit, rather than avoid, the messy reality of flaws, such
that they can be turned into features. CAFF will pursue understanding of defect-
dependent exciton interconversion at organic-organic interfaces. The team will
also study heterogeneity-driven chemical dynamics in metal-metal nanoparticles.
Another goal is to identify the mechanisms underlying defect-supported energy-
transfer in inorganic-organic hybrids. CAFF aims to leverage the combined
expertise of the team in predicting, visualizing, and resolving in time
localized structure and dynamics, using methods such as electron, tunneling, and
hyperspectral microscopy as well as ultrafast laser spectroscopy and theory.
Overall research and educational goals may be summarized as: (i) Atomic and
nanoscale visualization and understanding of defects inherent to chemistry; (ii)
correlating local chemistry to ensemble chemical behavior; (ii) co-development
of novel data science approaches and modular instruments to move toward seamless
real-time, data loss-less analysis of large data sets. Broader impacts include
the development of new data-science integrated tools with potentially broad
applications in basic research. Expected broader scientific outcomes include the
development of affordable ‘smart’ instruments and modules, both experimental and
theoretical, with the ability to adapt in time, space, and spectral resolution.
These new tools will allow chemists, biophysicists, engineers, and materials
scientists to study how sub-populations of defects, obscured within the ensemble
average, critically control macroscale-level outcomes, properties and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.