* 2124655
* Acquisition of LA-ICP-MS Instrumentation for Geochemical, Hydrological, and Archaeological Research and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Nicola Sharratt, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 395,948.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2) to Georgia State University (GSU) is for the acquisition
of a laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer (LA-ICP-MS) and
a microwave digestion system for bulk sample preparation. The instrument will
support research and education in two departments at GSU: Geosciences and
Anthropology. Research topics fall into several themes: geochemical:
understanding the chemical makeup of the earth and its components;
paleoclimatic: explaining the climate of the past; hydrologic: understanding how
water moves across our landscape; and archaeological: understanding past human
life from material remains. The instrument will be used to tackle compelling
questions of significant Intellectual Merit in each theme. The geochemical and
paleoclimate research seeks to rebuild the East African monsoon hydroclimate
over the last 11,500 years and investigate the beginnings and change over time
of the continental crust. Hydrological research will study the impact of urban
beaver ponds on nutrient dynamics, determining how these ponds impact total
suspended solid dynamics, along with looking at a fingerprinting approach to
determine the sources of heavy metals to these ponds. Archaeological research
includes investigating the manufacture and trade of artefacts in multiple
regions of the ancient Americas. Specifically, data on ancient pottery from the
American Southeast, the Yucatan, and Andean South America will facilitate an
unprecedented opportunity to reconstruct how trade networks emerged and
developed in different ecological and cultural contexts in relation to wider
sociopolitical transformations. These projects are already funded by the
National Science Foundation. In addition to supporting existing funded projects,
the instrument will be used to begin new research. Further, it will be used in
undergraduate and graduate level courses that cover geochemical
instrumentations, archaeological methods, and analytical chemistry, thus
directly enhancing the teaching, learning, and training of 60 to 80
undergraduates and graduate students each year at GSU, a Minority Serving
Institution (MSI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LA-ICP-MS will be integrated in the
Experiential, Project-based and Interdisciplinary Curriculum (EPIC) program that
provides unique hands-on research for students from their first semester at GSU.
Moreover, this award will enable undergraduate and graduate students to train in
cutting edge geochemical and archaeological analyses. This grant will also
enable the diverse PI team of under-represented minorities (URM) and women to
deliver meaningful and impactful activities for the Atlanta area community. The
PIs will 1) use the instrument to analyze archaeological artifacts excavated
during the construction of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority
(MARTA) rail system and integrate those data into public exhibits, and 2) create
short online videos targeted at K-12 and college students. For K-12 students,
the videos will target general earth science literacy through short dynamic
vignettes that showcase how the instrumentation is used to solve “mysteries”
(i.e., research questions) in earth sciences. Videos targeted at undergraduates
and graduates will include advanced content and specialized applications better
suited for integration in classes and research efforts. To broaden participation
further, the PIs will 1) use grant funds to support graduate student travel to
the National Association of Black Geoscientists annual conferences, 2) partner
with faculty at the HBCUs, MSIs, and community colleges in the surrounding
metro-Atlanta and beyond, and 3) foster the retention of URM in GEOS by
providing relatable mentors in lab settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.