* 2124017
* SCH: Wearable Multi-Modal Sensing and Stimulation Arrays for Muscle-Aware Exoskeleton Control
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Xiaoning Jiang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,095,532.00

Functional electrical stimulation (FES) and powered exoskeletons are promising
rehabilitation interventions to promote the independence and recovery of persons
with neurological injury. These interventions aim to encourage active
participation of a user’s weak muscles to bring about substantial gains in
recovery. A wearable sensor that measures the paralyzed muscle’s force can
potentially inform the user’s participation levels, allowing personalization of
FES or exoskeleton assistance. Current muscle sensors such as electromyography
create poor representations of muscle force, mainly due to noise interference
and incompatibility with FES. Instead, recent evidence suggests that ultrasound
(US) enables high fidelity measurements of muscle strength due to its ability to
visualize muscle activity directly. However, conventional US probes are hardly
wearable, and their clinical deployment in FES systems and exoskeletons is
nearly impossible. We plan a US-based sensing array technology to help devise
new rehabilitation strategies that lead to faster recovery and smart health
monitoring of muscles post a neurological injury such as spinal cord injury,
stroke, multiple sclerosis, etc. The technology would be widely applicable in
several medical problems that involve a human in the loop, including upper and
lower extremity prostheses and exoskeletons, rehabilitation, and surgical
robots. The research integrates outreach programs targeting K-12 students, talks
and demos at a planetarium, and an annual summer
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project objective is to create a new
muscle-machine interface technology that combines dynamic in vivo ultrasound
(US) imaging with electromyographic (EMG) signals for monitoring voluntary and
FES-induced muscle activity. The individual objectives of the project are to 1)
develop of a sensing array composed of EMG electrodes and ultrasound
transducers, 2) use the feedback from the sensing arrays to synchronize
exoskeleton assistance with a user’s impaired motor intent, and 3) validate the
sensing array to measure muscle force changes due to FES, and 4) use the
feedback from the sensing array to coordinate FES with an exoskeleton. Once
successfully translated to practice, an ultrasound-based sensing array would
help visualize muscle fibers’ contractile behavior and muscle force production,
potentially in more than one imaging plane. Potentially, the array would
facilitate symbiotic adjustment of the exoskeleton and FES assistance when
integrated with the modeling and control framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.