* 2124929
* CIF: Small: Low Complexity Massive MIMO Systems: Synergistic use of Array Geometry, Modeling and Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bhaskar Rao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The project addresses the challenges of next-generation wireless communication
systems. A key enabling technology for reliable and high-data-rate communication
is the deployment of Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO) systems, which
consist of multiple antennas for transmission and reception. With the use of the
millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies in next-generation systems, the shorter
wavelength enables deployment of many antennas in a small physical area, leading
to massive MIMO systems. Massive MIMO systems, however, tend to have high
complexity, high power consumption and high cost. This project seeks to do more
with less: “Less” refers to limited hardware (fewer radio-frequency chains, one-
bit analog to digital converters, etc.) and “more” to being able to extract the
benefits (with minimal degradation) of massive MIMO systems by working around
these hardware limitations. To do more with less, the project adopts a
synergistic approach where innovations in system architecture and algorithms
(model-based and data-driven) complement each other via judicious exploitation
of structure (antenna array geometry and modeling) aided by powerful inference
frameworks (sparse Bayesian learning and machine-learning techniques). The
project will lead to state-of-the-art wireless communication systems that should
help with maintaining US leadership in this important technology as well to
train the next generation of researchers in this area of strategic
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop low-complexity, low-cost, next-
generation mmWave massive MIMO systems, this project has two major components.
One is to harness antenna array geometry, both for one-dimensional and two-
dimensional arrays, for rich channel sensing with fewer sensors complemented by
robust inference. A key aspect of this work is embedding a nested array into a
massive MIMO architecture employing fewer radio-frequency chains. The rich
sensing capability of the nested array is being maximally exploited using the
sparse Bayesian learning method. The channel sensing is also complemented with
enhanced channel models incorporating variable and unknown angular spreads. A
further component is the use of learning through deep neural networks to
compensate for nonlinearities introduced to reduce power and cost. Models
complemented by learning as well as fully data-driven techniques are being
developed that address the specific and unique needs of wireless systems, such
as variable numbers of users and channel coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.