* 2124849
* Temporal-Spatial Control of Electric-Driven Water Facilities for Renewable Energy Management under Combinatorial Operation Modes of Contingency Response and Nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dingbao Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,596.00

Using renewable energy to meet society's energy needs promises to help address
concerns about climate change. However, the intermittency of renewable power,
such as wind and solar power, incurs great challenges for high penetration of
these renewable energies. Given that the water sector has increasing consumption
of electric energy, the interactions between the power distribution systems
(PDS) and water distribution systems (WDS) are becoming stronger. This raises
interest in coordinating the operations of PDS and WDS for renewable energy
management (REM). However, the operation of PDS and WDS are not well coordinated
because for most cases the two systems are owned and operated by different
entities. This project aims at mitigating this issue by designing a
comprehensive framework of PDS and WDS coordination. The proposed framework
considers the coordination of PDSs and WDSs that: 1) are owned and operated by
different entities or by single entities; and 2) possess different
characteristics determined by geographical and climatic features (e.g., urban
versus rural, island versus desert). For the purposes of improving REM
efficiency in normal operations and also the systemâ€™s resilience for
contingencies, a temporal-spatial control strategy will be developed under the
coordination framework that allows operators to control electricity-driven water
facilities for energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: 1) design
a combinatorial framework for energy-water coordination in different
geographical/climatic regions, with inclusion of a normal operations mode and a
contingency response mode; 2) develop a temporal-spatial control scheme to
implement the combinatorial coordination framework, where the first and second
levels of temporal controls respond to contingencies caused by renewable power
fluctuation while the third level temporal control is a spatial optimization; 3)
solve the spatial optimization problem effectively under a decentralized scheme
for city-scale systems and a distributed scheme for small-community systems; and
4) validate the proposed approaches on two real-world systems via computer
simulations, and produce publicly accessible datasets. This research, which
encompasses power, water, optimization, and control, will advance knowledge for
handling coupled energy and water networks. The outcomes of this project are
targeted to improve the overall efficiency and resilience of the two critical
infrastructure sectors, and may also be applicable to other critical
infrastructure, such as gas and transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.