* 2124975
* Ethical and Responsible Research in the Design of Sociotechnical Systems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Camille Nebeker, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

In this project, the research team will facilitate the development of ethical
and responsible research (ER2) instructional prototypes designed to prompt
dialogue about ER2 practices in social and computing (sociotechnical) systems
for health research. The ER2 instructional prototypes will be developed through
a three-phased process that includes: (1) an assessment of existing ER2 training
and practices in academic programs that provide training in human computer
interaction (HCI) (2) interviews with health researchers who use/study/develop
sociotechnical systems, and (3) conducting community co-design workshops. Key
contributions will include the ER2 instructional prototypes for use by those
designing technologies for use in health research as well as recommendations for
educational interventions/strategies that are anchored to stakeholders within a
behavioral ecological systems model. This research will be of interest to health
researchers, health care providers, and health care users and their families, as
well as be used to inform the training of the health care workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore how ethical and responsible
research (ER2) is cultivated in academic programs that provide training in HCI
at the intersection of health research. The research team will examine and
document the current ER2 landscape of HCI and design school programs to identify
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats to introducing formal and ad
hoc instructional activities to foster respectful sociotechnical systems design
applied to health research. Using a human centered design process, the research
aims to increase awareness of ER2 practices and related social responsibilities
that occur throughout the day-to-day cycle of health research. First, activities
related to Phases 1-2 will generate academic contributions that include data
from a systematic review of relevant literature and prospective interviews to
examine ER2 attitudes and practices among and within human computer interaction
and interdisciplinary design programs. These programs are targeted as these
settings are where sociotechnical systems are being conceptualized and developed
for use in health research and healthcare. Second, by creating a map of the
existing ER2 training landscape, using an ecological framework, the research
team will document how ER2 training is applied in practice (e.g., designing
databases, creating hooks into the data, developing data visualization
dashboards). This will shape strategies for implementation of an ER2 Toolkit for
sociotechnical health systems research. Third, the instructional prototypes
developed through the community co-design process outlined in Phase 3 will
contribute definitions and examples to a "design space" for tools to promote ER2
training and practice in HCI educational programs. In terms of broader impacts,
the research will develop instructional tools and recommendations for ethics
educators and the larger sociotechnical health systems research community that
are anchored to the behavioral ecological systems model. A long-term impact of
this research is to promote dialogue among health researchers about the ethical,
legal, and social implications associated with the (mis)use of sociotechnical
systems in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.