* 2124993
* Precipitation and Coalescence Scavenging in Shallow Southern Ocean Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Robert Wood, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 09/30/2024
* USD 533,419.00

Clouds in the marine boundary layer (say the kilometer of the atmosphere just
above the ocean surface) have a global cooling effect as they reflect sunlight
back to space but are too low to effectively trap outgoing infrared radiation.
The climatic effect of these clouds has become an important issue in climate
change research, as warmer temperatures may alter either the reflectivity of the
clouds or their typical lifetimes, the factors which determine the strength of
their cooling effect. The reflectivity of marine boundary layer clouds is
determined in large part by the abundance of cloud condensation nuclei (CCN),
the tiny aerosol particles which absorb moisture from the atmosphere to seed the
growth of cloud droplets. When CCN are more abundant the available cloud water
is spread over a larger number of smaller droplets, leading to a more reflective
cloud than would occur with fewer CCN and hence a smaller number of larger
droplets. Clouds made of smaller droplets also last longer, as the process of
collision and coalescence that combines cloud droplets (perhaps a million or so)
to form a raindrop takes longer when the droplets are smaller and thus more are
needed to make a raindrop, meaning a drop big enough to fall from the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work by the PIs developed a simplified
budget equation for CCN relating changes in CCN abundance to sources, including
the generation of aerosols by biological processes in the surface ocean, and
sinks, including precipitation. Precipitation is quite effective in removing CCN
from liquid clouds as each one of the million or so droplets in a raindrop
contains a CCN. The PIs used their budget analysis to show that CCN removal by
precipitation, referred to as precipitation scavenging or coalescence
scavenging, is the dominant mechanism for CCN removal and accounts for much of
the geographic variability of CCN abundance over the oceans. They also used
their budget to derive a formula for the droplet number concentration (Nd) in
marine boundary layer clouds under the assumption that the CCN sources and sinks
are balanced and all the CCN in a cloud have seeded
droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work performed here applies the budget equation
and the Nd formula to the boundary layer clouds in the storm track over the
Southern Ocean using observations collected during the 2018 Southern Ocean
Clouds, Radiation, Aerosol, Transport Experimental Study (SOCRATES), a field
campaign that used a research aircraft to sample clouds on flights over the
ocean south of Tasmania (see AGS-1660609). The aircraft measured CCN
concentrations in, above, and below the clouds, and used radar and lidar to
observe cloud droplets and raindrops, information which can be combined with
satellite data and meteorological analysis to determine CCN concentrations and
measure CCN sources and sinks. Results of the budget study are compared with
output from a Large Eddy Simulation (LES) model which generates detailed clouds,
CCN, and precipitation simulations based on large-scale meteorological inputs
and measurements of above-cloud CCN concentrations. The project also processes
and analyzes data from the aircraft radar and lidar to examine the precipitation
produced by the SO clouds, looking at the amount of precipitation produced, the
size distribution of raindrops, and the extent to which ice phase precipitation
is also produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as
scientific interest as change in the extent of cooling provided by low clouds is
among the largest uncertainties in estimates of the sensitivity of global
temperature to greenhouse gas increases. The SOCRATES campaign was largely
motivated by concern that the SO clouds are poorly represented in climate models
used to make projections of future climate change. The project also produces
datasets on cloud, precipitation, and CCN properties that can be used by the
worldwide community of climate researchers. In addition, the award provides
support and training for a graduate student, thereby promoting the future
workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.