* 2124270
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Using Multi-Stage Learning to Prioritize Mental Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Carol Espy-Wilson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2025
* USD 842,431.00

According to the World Health Organization and the Global Burden of Disease 2010
studies, mental health issues are a top contributor to global disease and a
leading cause of disability worldwide. It is an enormous personal and societal
toll. Mental illness is a common precursor to suicide, and suicidality is the
second leading cause of death in youth and young adults between 10 and 34 years
of age. In economic terms, mental illness exceeds cardiovascular diseases in the
projected 2011-2030 cost of noncommunicable diseases (USD16.3T worldwide).
Complicating this picture further is the fact that mental healthcare is
desperately resource-limited, and clinicians treating people for mental health
problems operate in a vacuum between visits. This project proposes a fundamental
shift in how machine learning is used to approach the problem of mental health
detection and monitoring, with a technological investigation that brings
together speech analysis, language analysis, and machine learning research,
informed by deep clinical experience and expertise and fueled by ethically
collected data. A tiered multiarmed bandit framework will be used to provide a
highly flexible way to evaluate multiple kinds of evidence in settings where
there can be diverse methods for assessment that vary in cost and the value of
the information they provide. As such, it is an excellent fit for the real-world
problem of mental health assessment in resource-limited settings. Investigations
will include simulations of patient monitoring between clinical visits that will
be informed by realistic, real-world assumptions and team members' clinical
experience treating patients with schizophrenia, depression, and risk of
suicide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of this project's technical approach
is the recognition that the “multi-armed bandit” problem in machine learning is
a good fit for the real-world scenario that mental health providers face when
monitoring a population of patients in treatment: what is the best way to
allocate limited resources among competing choices, given only limited
information? This project develops a tiered multi-armed bandit formulation,
where a succession of stages is applied to a population of patients in order to
best allocate different types of resources, each with different per-patient
impact but also cost. Conceptually, tiered approaches are familiar in current
medical practice. For example, patient contact typically progresses from a
receptionist, to a nurse or intake coordinator, perhaps to a certified nurse
practitioner, to a primary care doctor, ultimately to a specialist---each step
involving corresponding increases in both the cost of the professional involved
and their degree of expertise. The tiered multi-armed bandit model developed by
this award includes concerns of stochastic and adverse selection, where patients
at one tier do not proceed deterministically to the next, even when explicitly
selected. It also incorporates complex (e.g., non-linear such as monotone
submodular) objective functions that better capture within-cohort interactions.
One core strength of the tiered model is that it provides a flexible way to
incorporate multiple kinds of evaluative evidence in settings where there can be
diverse methods for assessment that vary in cost and the value of the
information they provide. Toward that end, this project also includes both text
analysis and speech analysis components that make use of ethically collected
language and speech data and clinically validated assessments of mental
condition. Techniques developed under this award, while directly motivated by
and tested in the mental health setting, will be useful in other settings in
both healthcare as well as other settings where a "prioritization funnel" is in
play, including talent sourcing and customer
acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.