* 2124746
* SBIR Phase I:  Point-of-Care Electrochemical Platform for the Rapid Detection of Drug Toxicity
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Mike Sherman, INFUSENSE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 253,590.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that poisoning by prescription drugs affects
over one million people annually and is the leading cause of injury-related
death in the United States. Other than opioids, prescribed benzodiazepines,
antipsychotics, and antidepressants are the most common causes of accidental
poisoning and attempted suicide. Drug testing plays a central role in the
detection and management of poisoned patients, and the ability to rapidly
identify the cause and institute prompt targeted treatment has the potential to
reduce morbidity and save lives. Currently, screening of blood and other
biological fluids for toxic drug levels requires specimen processing, taking
hours or days to obtain results from commercial laboratories. Immediate,
accurate, low-cost testing for urgent care in the ambulance or emergency room
will improve outcomes for the rapid diagnosis and care of patients after
accidental poisoning and attempted suicide. The biosensor device and drug
testing methods described in this project can be performed for low cost at the
first point of contact and are scalable for rapid commercial and clinical
adoption into a global drug screening market valued at $1.1
billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will test a new solid-state biosensor device reporting real-time
and accurate quantification of toxic drug levels in the blood using inexpensive,
disposable test strips similar to a diabetes glucometer or from saliva like a
sublingual electronic thermometer. Current drug toxicity assays use specialized
laboratory methods that require blood sample processing and can take hours to
days to obtain results. Biosensors are an interface between biology and
electronics that convert specific chemical information into measurable
electronic signals (e.g. a glucometer). The three specific outcomes of this
project will be; 1) a handheld medical device providing accurate and real-time
measurement of blood levels of all classes of antipsychotic, neuroleptic, and
anticonvulsant drugs in clinical use, and other common drugs of abuse, from a
drop of blood or saliva, 2) validation of the accuracy of the biosensor for
target drugs relative to current laboratory analysis methods (e.g., mass
spectroscopy), and 3) demonstration that the biosensor can distinguish between
classes of medications, drugs of abuse, and potential clinical interferents in
blood using specific analytical methods and modifiable biosensor
coatings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.