* 2124355
* NCS-FO:Tracking social behavior and its neural properties in a smart aviary
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kostas Daniilidis, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 993,632.00

Advances in technology, mathematics, computing and engineering are making it
possible to quantify behaviors within complex naturalistic environments and to
relate them to underlying neural mechanisms. For social animals, which have
evolved to perceive and evaluate signals within a community context, the ability
to link neural function with the precise social environment is especially
important and challenging. Little is currently known about how the brain
integrates complex social information and how such information might be encoded.
This stems in part from the experimental challenge of measuring and assessing
the variables that determine a social context and then linking the state of a
social network to precise neural events. This project has assembled an
interdisciplinary team of engineers, neurobiologists and computational
scientists to create a platform to record and evaluate brain dynamics in
individual animals navigating a complex social environment. In addition to the
challenge and opportunity of using sophisticated engineering and computational
approaches to study how brains encode social information, this work will
generate a complex dataset that will offer unique opportunities for developing
novel mathematical methods to quantify and visualize social networks that can be
applied to other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a "smart
aviary" is equipped with arrays of cameras and microphones to create a fully
automated system for tracking moment-to-moment behavioral events for each
individual songbird within a social group. The songbirds are of a highly
gregarious species (brown-headed cowbird, Molothrus ater) that uses vocal
communications to form and maintain a complex social system. As a variable,
social context needs to be mathematically constructed over multiple timescales
from the sequence of all behavioral events. This entails the development of new
mathematical approaches and statistical models for quantifying social network
state so that individual neural events can be linked back to the precise social
contexts. The project will develop new machine learning approaches for automated
capture of social interactions over months-long time periods. In addition, an
articulated mesh model enables visual signals to be captured in unprecedented
detail, allowing the quantification of shape-mediated social
signaling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.