* 2124604
* Engineering principles for sustainable organic electrode materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shiyu Zhang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 437,330.00

Lithium-ion batteries have become one of the leading electrochemical energy
storage systems driving the progress of modern electronic technologies. However,
the production of conventional lithium-ion batteries relies on finite and
unsustainably sourced transition metals, such as lithium and cobalt, which will
inevitably restrict their application in the long term. In this research
project, the investigators seek to develop new organic electrode materials as
alternative energy storage media in batteries. These new battery materials are
made of abundant elements, such as carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur, and can
provide a more economical and sustainable route to renewable energy storage.
These research activities are integrated with the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in addressing scientific challenges at the interface of
electrochemistry, synthetic chemistry, and machine learning. The educational
aims include developing a laboratory exercise for an undergraduate general
chemistry course that will introduce students to connections between
electrochemistry and environmental water quality testing and a mentoring program
for these students which connects them with peer tutors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic electrode materials (OEM) are promising
alternatives to unsustainably sourced transition metals as energy storage media
in lithium-ion batteries. Current OEMs (primarily redox organic polymers),
however, suffer from (a) poor conductivity (&gt;30% carbon loading required),
(b) poor cycling stability (ca. 100 cycles), and (c) sloping/multiple-stage
voltage profiles. The overall goal of the research project is to discover,
elucidate, and apply engineering principles to improve the rechargeability of
OEMs. First, a wide array of novel small-molecule OEMs featuring strong
intermolecular interactions are prepared. In-situ and ex-situ spectroscopic
studies are performed to understand how the intermolecular interactions between
charge storage units change as a function of state-of-charge. These tasks will
explore the hypotheses that complementary hydrogen bonding and pi-pi stacking
improve the stability of quinone-fused aza-phenazine OEM materials. It is
predicted that additional intermolecular disulfide bonds between sulfur-rich
thiazyl charge storage units can improve conductivity and facilitate high-rate
cycling of OEMs. These results and new fundamental understanding will be used to
develop new design principles for optimizing the conductivity, stability,
voltage profile of OEMs through modification of molecular structure. In the
second part of the proposal, the research project seeks to develop machine
learning-based models that can (a) predict the long-term cycling life of OEMs
using data collected from short-term high-throughput tests and (b) recommend new
highly stable OEMs based on physical organic descriptors. This systematic study
will ultimately reveal unintuitive design principles that enable more focused
research efforts in place of extensive trial-and-error
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.