* 2124789
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: PREMED: Privacy-Preserving and Robust Computational Phenotyping using Multisite EHR Data
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Paul Schulz, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 225,000.00

Tensor analysis offers an effective approach to convert massive Electronic
Health Records (EHRs) into meaningful and interpretable clinical concepts, or
phenotypes, such as diseases and disease subtypes. It can cluster patients into
subgroups and capture the interactions between multiple attributes (e.g.,
specific procedures used to treat a disease), enabling precision medicine.
Effective phenotyping needs to be supported by a large number of diverse samples
to avoid potential population bias. A major challenge is how to derive
phenotypes jointly across multiple institutions, while preserving individual
patients' privacy at each site. The goal of this project is to develop a
federated tensor factorization framework for Privacy-preserving, Robust, and
Efficient computational phenotyping using Multisite EHR Data (PREMED). While
many techniques have been developed for federated learning for each of these
goals, their synergy has not been well studied. Communication-efficient
techniques such as compression have an intrinsic benefit to privacy (smaller
disclosure risks) and robustness (smaller adversarial impact) due to the
compressed and obfuscated communication. Further, federated tensor factorization
presents unique challenges due to its multi-factor structure and unsupervised
nature. The project aims to exploit the synergy between efficiency, privacy, and
robustness and address the three interrelated challenges with a holistic
approach, while utilizing the multi-factor structure of tensor factorization.
The research outcome will allow institutions to jointly perform computational
phenotyping using their privacy-protected data effectively and efficiently.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes a set of interrelated objectives
including: (1) developing communication-efficient techniques for federated
tensor factorization such as local Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) to reduce
communication frequency; and multi-level compression methods to reduce per-round
communication leveraging the multi-factor structure of tensor factorization; (2)
developing privacy-preserving federated tensor factorization methods by
exploiting the intrinsic privacy benefit of the communication-efficient
techniques; and privacy-preserving input synthesization methods that offer more
versatility; and (3) developing robust statistical aggregation methods for
handling potential Byzantine failures and malicious sites by utilizing the
intrinsic robustness benefit of the communication-efficient techniques; and
robust learning-based aggregation methods for sparse settings based on truth
inference and adaptive site valuation approaches. The project includes case
studies using real EHR data from Emory and UTHealth for phenotype discovery and
phenotype-based predictive studies in the context of Alzheimer's Disease and
Sepsis. The project also includes a set of synergistic activities including
organization of multi-site computational phenotyping challenges; development of
collaborative sidecar courses; and active involvement of undergraduates, women
and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.