* 2124010
* FMitF: Track I: Robust Enforcement of Customizable Resource Constraints in Heterogeneous Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Neil Dantam, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 749,997.00

Heterogeneous embedded systems are becoming more pervasive and more complex.
These systems often feature resource-constrained architectures consisting of
different types of processing units connected to a variety of sensors and
actuators that interact with the physical world. Here, correctness depends on
the physical requirements associated with performing those computations. For
example, inefficient computations that exhaust the available energy on a
battery-powered done can result in a system-level failure. A major shortcoming
of previous work is that analytical correlations between physical actuators and
computational hardware/software parameters were developed on a per
application/domain basis, which limits generality. This project focuses on
enabling embedded-systems development with respect to customizable constraints
on system-wide resource usage (time, energy, etc.). It will utilize formal
methods to develop a unified approach that addresses issues arising due to the
trade-offs between computation, actuation, and sensing. The framework developed
in this project seeks to improve the embedded-systems design process by
increasing both the level of automation and the level of confidence in system
correctness. The goal of the proposed improvements to reliability, computational
hardware needs, and rapid prototyping is to reduce costs and increase deployment
of embedded systems, particularly in resource-constrained
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core technical contributions are: (I) a
novel analytical modeling approach to characterize resource inter-dependencies
on heterogeneous embedded architectures; (II) formal techniques to analyze
software control programs which violate given resource constraints, and
automatically repair such programs to ensure adherence to the constraints; and
(III) a flexible dynamic approach for dealing with situations where the
environment deviates from the system designer's assumptions. Specific techniques
explored in the work will be (1) a flexible analytical model used to describe
how interactions between computation, actuation, and sensing influence resource
usage in embedded heterogeneous systems; (2) a specification language for
customizable resource constraints, which enables complex reasoning about system
resource usage, along with functionality to generate efficient approximations at
granularities driven by the specification; (3) a program repair engine that uses
syntax-guided synthesis to automatically ensure that the control software keeps
the embedded system within the resource constraints; (4) techniques for coupling
synthesis with task-motion planning to increase the usability of repair; and (5)
a technique for quickly synthesizing and compactly representing alternative
control programs, that will enable fast-failover of the embedded system in cases
where the environment deviates from expectations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.