* 2124188
* Collaborative Research: US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Iron redox cycling in the Amundsen Sea in the water column and shelf sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* James Moffett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 225,462.00

The Amundsen Sea is one of the most rapidly changing areas along the Antarctic
coast, with some of the fastest rates of glacial melting on the continent. There
is great interest in the role of iron in controlling primary production and
carbon and nutrient cycling within the Amundsen Sea, and it is probably an
important source of iron to offshore waters of the Southern Ocean, which are
rich in nutrients but iron limited. The work is part of the US GEOTRACES
GP17-ANT cruise to the Amundsen Sea, a multi-investigator study of trace
elements and isotope cycling. This work will study how iron is mobilized from
sediments at the seafloor of the Amundsen basin. Such mobilization is influenced
by two factors directly linked to climate change. Glacial melting increases ice-
free areas known as polynyas, which experience large blooms of phytoplankton.
Organic matter from these blooms eventually reaches the seafloor, creating low-
oxygen conditions that accelerate iron transport into the overlying waters.
Moreover, accelerated melting of glaciers will increase the transport of this
iron to the surface via the buoyant “meltwater pump” along the glacier/ocean
interface. These processes create feedbacks between climate and biological
productivity that must be understood to develop models with a useful predictive
capability. The broader impacts include partnering with University of Southern
California Joint Educational Project and a PolarTREC teacher to create
curriculum based on GEOTRACES Antarctic Expedition, which will be disseminated
to 15 elementary school in Los Angeles area and develop online data exploration
modules to encourage data-based learning in oceanography classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will investigate iron redox
cycling between sediments and water column of the Amundsen Sea and exchange with
the Southern Ocean by determining iron (II) concentrations and redox kinetics in
the water column as well as fluxes of iron and other elements from the seafloor
to the water column from porewater measurements. A major objective of the US
GEOTRACES GP17-ANT cruise is to study the exchange of iron between the Amundsen
Sea and the Southern Ocean. The proposed work is essential to identifying the
sources of iron and controls on source fluxes as well as internal
transformations that will determine its fate. The data product from the project
will be integrated with the results of other investigators in a synthesis effort
after the cruise, including dissolved and particulate iron and related metals
like manganese, as well as important tracers of sediment sources like radium
isotopes. Iron(II) oxidizes very slowly in these cold waters, and kinetics will
be combined with iron(II) bottom water concentrations and benthic fluxes to
evaluate the importance of the slow oxidation kinetics on iron transport away
from the benthic boundary layer. Benthic-derived iodine (denoted as “excess
iodine”), will be utilized as an important semi-conservative tracer of iron
inputs. Iodine is a useful comparative element because both iron and iodine
accumulate in sediments under oxidizing conditions and are released under
reducing conditions. Iodine is of interest in its own right because Antarctic
Shelf waters are a massive source of reactive iodine species to the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.