* 2124225
* FMitF: Track II: Usability, Scalability, and Deployment Improvement of VerioT
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,983.00

The Internet-of-Things (IoT) access-delegation paradigm is emerging and
supported by mainstream IoT vendors. In this paradigm, companies provide support
to delegate device access to a delegatee cloud/vendor (such as Google Home,
SmartThings, and Apple Home), thus permitting a user to manage multiple devices
from different vendors through a single app of the delegatee. Flawed design and
implementation of IoT delegation protocols incur serious security and safety
consequences, such as unauthorized control of smart door locks and health
devices. This project improves and extends VerioT (built on the Spin model-
checker), the first formal-verification tool for real-world IoT delegation
protocols. The project’s novelties are in new methods to facilitate (1) IoT
security analysis leveraging usability-enhanced verification reporting, (2)
automatic, scalability-enhanced model construction, and (3) integrating
verification techniques to modern IoT software development lifecycle. The
project’s impacts will be to enable IoT stakeholders and developers to find
security flaws earlier --- ideally as soon as the flaws are introduced --- and
to increase assurance in the security of IoT systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes three main tasks. First, to increase the usability of VerioT,
the investigators are improving bug reporting by automatically annotating the
reported counter-examples with IoT contexts and operations in natural language
texts, producing industry-standard security-bug reports. Second, to increase
scalability, the investigators are automating model construction by adopting
novel Natural Language Processing (NLP) based document analysis techniques,
called Dilution, which can precisely construct protocol state machines from
unstructured documentation. Third, the investigators are developing support for
enterprise-level deployment by integrating VerioT into modern Continuous
Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD) pipelines in the software-engineering
and IoT industries. The project is intended to yield an industry-strength IoT
protocol verifier that keeps up with the development of verification technology
and IoT software practices, and helps developers proactively identify new bugs
in IoT protocols and software before they are deployed in
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.