* 2124739
* Project Incubation: Building Capacity for Ethical Communication Between Vulnerable Fenceline Communities, Industry, and Environmental Agencies
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Marie Schaefer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 75,484.00

This Incubation Project is intended to develop new collaborations between
communities, agencies, and industries in Michigan and to build capacity for the
formation of environmental ethics among earth and environmental scientists
working in resource extraction, environmental consulting, and environmental
regulation. In particular, we focus on the intersection of earth and
environmental impacts and communities of color. This focus is undertaken because
environmental harms disproportionately impact low-income and minoritized
communities who live on the “fenceline” adjacent to hazardous areas that impact
the safety and viability of soil, water, and air. To build common understanding
of the need and potential for ethical earth and environmental science, this
project will strengthen existing relationships and build new relationships
between Michigan State University, Little River Band of Ottawa Indians, and the
Hispanic Latino Commission of Michigan. We anticipate gaining deeper
understanding of underlying ethical causes for environmental injustice as well
as potential mechanisms for increasing community power in decision making. We
also anticipate earth and environmental scientists working in resource
extraction, environmental consulting, or environmental regulation will build
deeper understanding of non-anthropocentric environmental ethics. Through this
increased understanding, we anticipate changes in how these scientists engage in
their work and communicate with the general public, including vulnerable
fenceline communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this point, this project will
address three goals: (1) Build an understanding of and respect for divergent
interests within partnerships and communities; (2) Develop mutual trust between
partners; (3) Empower communities to become full participants in research. These
goals and related activities are grounded in community-based participatory
research approaches. All partner organizations will collaborate to ensure trust
building and communication to participants. Activities will include
brainstorming, one-on-one meetings with key stakeholders, Delphi surveys, small
regional meetings, and collaborative meetings. Through these efforts the project
team will develop deep understanding of differing cultural and community norms
for “ethical research”. Ultimately, this work will set the foundation for a
standard grant to allow development, implementation, and evaluation of ethics
training for earth and environmental scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.