* 2124356
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Integrating Native Solutions to Promote and Inform Resilient Engineering (INSPIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Karl Linden, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 12/31/2022
* USD 99,999.00

PI: Karl Linden, University of Colorado Boulder &lt;br/&gt;Co-PIs: Alden
Yellowhorse, Navajo Technical University; Erin Whitney, University of Alaska
Fairbanks; Gwynn R. Johnson, Portland State University; Jose Manuel Cerrato,
University of New Mexico&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Proposal #: EEC - 2124356
&lt;br/&gt;Title: Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Integrating
Native Solutions to Promote and Inform Resilient Engineering (INSPIRE)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstracts&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 1 [non-technical]:
This planning grant will support engagement of stakeholders to create an
inclusive vision for an Engineering Research Center for Integrating Native
Solutions to Promote and Inform Resilient Engineering (INSPIRE). The vision of
the ERC INSPIRE is to create a new engineering approach for designing resilient
systems by partnering with Indigenous peoples to create culturally and socially
informed solutions to engineering challenges. The fundamental issues this ERC
will address focus on systemic problems faced by American Indians and Alaska
Natives (AIAN) who have been underrepresented in the STEM workforce, and have
long experienced low health status, lower life expectancy, and disproportionate
disease burden due to systemic racism and settler colonialism. These issues are
worsened by inadequate community infrastructure and basic services, all in the
face of climate change-induced stresses which will require innovative,
culturally inclusive, and context-relevant solutions. This ERC will ultimately
transform how we discuss, create, test, and implement engineered solutions
through the incorporation of culturally and socially relevant design, with a
goal to be more accessible to broad audiences, while improving equity,
engagement, and inclusion in STEM. It will help transform society by shifting
engineering education and industry practice to systematically integrate
Indigenous knowledge into the engineering curriculum, workforce, and culture,
and will ensure a quality-of-life improvement in AIAN communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2 [Technical]: An ERC planning grant offers a unique
opportunity to work on developing strong relationships with the stakeholder
communities and organizations with whom we expect to work. The planning grant
will enable us to co-design a strong ERC proposal for comprehensive convergence
of research, education, and technology translation that will enable systemic
change in American Indians and Alaska Natives (AIAN) communities and in
engineering practice. Our focus will be on knowledge advancement and discovery
around new technology and integration processes that will renew infrastructure
in AIAN communities. The ERC Planning grant will center around holding 3
workshops in each of the 3 geographical locations we intend to work in: Alaska
Native communities, Pacific Northwest Native American communities, and
Southwest/Four Corners area Native American communities. Each workshop will be
hosted by the local university Co-PI and will engage local community leaders,
organizations, and the 5 university teams. Workshops will consist of team
building activities, plenary talks by key community constituents on local
issues, cultural exchange and understanding activities, and development of
research themes. Each workshop will have an objective of contributing to the
components of a strong ERC proposal and a goal of creating trust between the
university teams, the invited organizations, and the local community
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.