* 2124859
* MCA: Advances in Understanding the Biogeochemical Evolution of Serpentinites (AUBES)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Dawn Cardace, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,644.00

This project is jointly funded by the Division of Earth Sciences' Mid-Career
Advancement (MCA) Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial life has refined the fine-
scale chemistry of minerals for billions of years of Earth history, leaving
complex, durable records of metabolic activity behind. Fracture networks in
rocks preserve a durable mineral record of these ancient processes, often
touching questions related to the origin and early adaptive strategies of rock-
hosted, microbial life on Earth. In this project, iron-rich rocks (also high in
chromium, nickel, and other metals) from Earth’s mantle, collected through
scientific drilling in northern California’s Coast Range Ophiolite, are targeted
for geochemical study. Fracture zones in these ~150-million-year-old rocks were
hotspots of microbial activity under ancient conditions in the subsurface. This
work uses an array of geochemical tools to map the chemistry of materials formed
in fractures and applies a high energy x-ray-based technique (Fe K edge XANES)
to define how oxidized or reduced bound iron in fracture fill minerals may be,
as evidence for biogeochemical cycling of iron (for energy) in the past.
Research involves collaboration with professional beamline scientists at
Brookhaven National Lab and with topic expert Dr. D. Dyar of Mount Holyoke
College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increased understanding of the mineral reactions
in this rock type (an enormous, continuous layer beneath the global seafloor and
also present in extensive blocks at Earth’s surface) brings multiple societal
benefits: the incompletely understood emissions of naturally forming methane (a
greenhouse gas) and hydrogen (a flammable but quickly lost gaseous product) from
these rocks may be better constrained using geochemical models; the release of
iron and associated metals (e.g., health-damaging Cr6+) into percolating water
passing through these rocks may be charted and flagged for public health
attention; and the case for engineered reaction of these kinds of rocks with
carbon dioxide to generate sequestered carbon in solids may be evaluated.
Completion of this research will also ensure that multiple new generation
geoscientists will be trained in cutting edge analytical tools, through
diversity- and equity-minded graduate and undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.