* 2124857
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Advancing Human-Centered Sociotechnical Research for Enabling Independent Mobility in People with Physical Disabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Walter Lasecki, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,422,237.00

This Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) project will advance methods to
improve end-to-end mobility for people with physical disabilities who rely on
wheelchairs in their daily activities and encounter several barriers to their
movement in the built environment. A typical mobility scenario involves
navigation (i.e., finding accessible routes) and maneuvering tasks (i.e.,
parking wheelchair in confined spaces). These scenarios demand substantial
effort and pose safety and anxiety risks for people with physical disabilities
adversely affecting their quality of life. This project engages a broad group of
stakeholders with converging disability perspectives (e.g., veterans with
disabilities), patient care expertise, and experience in public service to
create a user-centered autonomy that will enable people with physical
disabilities to independently control their travel needs. The project scope will
focus on individuals without any significant impairment in upper extremity
function and/or sensory and cognitive domains, opening the door for future
translational research that will extend research outcomes to other groups with
diverse abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative research project
addresses critical knowledge gaps and leverages a participatory design process
to: 1) Discover determinants for successful end-to-end mobility system
performance from the perspective of people with physical disabilities; 2)
Integrate new navigation and maneuvering algorithms to support end-to-end
personal mobility of people with physical disabilities; 3) Investigate
mechanisms to enhance a symbiotic relationship between users and the end-to-end
mobility system; and 4) Explore psychological, social, and economic factors
conductive to promoting widespread adoption in communities. A cohort of people
with physical disabilities embedded within the research team will continually
inform the project activities for its entire duration. In addition, two study
groups recruited in coordination with the project stakeholders will participate
in human factors studies conducted in both laboratory and naturalistic field
environments to test and evaluate the implementation of the end-to-end mobility
system in the Ann Arbor-Ypsilanti area of southeast Michigan. The evaluation
plan includes assessment of economic and social-psychological factors affecting
adoption of the system in the community of people with physical disabilities.
The project outcomes have no limitation in terms of population size or travel
distances and can be applied in mobility scenarios that include transportation
modes such as shuttle bus, rail, on-demand vehicles, or soon, shared driverless
vehicles, as well as scale across a broad range of constructed facilities and
urban communities. Cities aspiring to become smart, connected, and inclusive
urban communities will benefit from the results of this research by informing
the integration of mobility needs of people with physical disabilities into
their master plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.