* 2124971
* Transforming Ethical STEM by Engaging Indigenous Research Methods in Native Environmental Science
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Victoria Walsey, Northwest Indian College
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,935.00

This project examines and documents the impacts of engaging with Indigenous
Research Methods and Pedagogy in the Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) fields. The Native Environmental Science Program (NES) at Northwest
Indian College (NWIC), situated within Lummi Nation's traditional territory with
six extended campuses throughout the Pacific Northwest, is in a unique position
to give voice to ethical research in STEM. While there is some documentation
about the impacts of engaging in Indigenous Research Methodology in the social
sciences, less is known about the impacts of engaging with Indigenous Research
Methods in STEM. NWIC’s NES Program is well positioned to influence the culture
of STEM education, more broadly, because of its commitment to engaging in
methodologies and topics that align with community values and are identified as
community priorities. The diversity of students, themselves, with more than 130
different Indigenous nations represented at NWIC, provides a unique (and under-
reported) lens to view science education and the growth of the STEM field. This
project addresses the need to develop culturally responsive and ethical research
methodologies and practices for conducting relevant and transformational
research in Indigenous communities. This project documents the impacts of
investing in tribal college science programs and developing culturally
responsive and ethical research methodologies. Specifically, this project
investigates the question, “How does engaging with Indigenous Research
Methodology and Pedagogy impact the educational pathways of Indigenous students
in the STEM field?”. Answering this question will help contribute to a greater
understanding of ethical research practices in the STEM field, highlight best
practices to support Indigenous scientists, and lead to greater diversity and
representation in the STEM field. This investment in tribal college science
programming is an investment in increasing the diversity in the STEM fields, in
general, while shaping innovative approaches to solving complex problems.
Engaging in Ethics Research involving Indigenous Science will provide a
significant opportunity to grow and strengthen Indigenous Scientists while
informing both minority-serving and predominately white academic institutions
and STEM practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
longitudinal study of Indigenous students engaging in STEM education over twelve
years and an institutional autoethnography documenting program development. The
project will also conduct focus group conversations with science faculty and
advisors for high schools connected to Northwest Indian College and other tribal
college science programs. The project addresses the need to develop culturally
responsive and ethical research methodologies and practices for conducting
relevant and transformational research in Indigenous communities, and the
research will be the first to comprehensively analyze the impacts of investing
in tribal college science programs. This project will help answer the question,
“How does engaging with Indigenous Research Methodology and Pedagogy impact the
educational pathways of Indigenous students in the STEM field?” with two goals:
1) contribute to a greater understanding of ethical research practices in the
STEM field through engagement with Indigenous Research Methods and Pedagogy and
Highlight Best Practices to Support Indigenous Scientists and 2) greater
diversity and representation in the STEM field. Analyzing the transformations of
Native Environmental Science research and practice in a tribal college setting
will yield much-needed insights into how other research programs may adjust
their research practices to promote inclusivity in research methods and design.
Following Indigenous Research Methodologies prioritize community-identified
research projects, reciprocity to and consistent engagement with community, and
inclusivity of multiple ways of knowing. In addition, this process values
Indigenous Knowledge Holders as experts in the field and meaningful contributors
to research and pedagogy. Through this process, we will contribute to a wider
understanding of the applications of Indigenous Research Methodologies in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.