* 2124126
* SCH: Methods for Clinical Assessment Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Hong Yu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Goli Yamini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,664.00

Electronic health records (EHRs) are rich resources for computer-assisted
clinical decision support systems (CDSS). There are over five decades of
research in CDSS, resulting in methods in knowledge-based and machine-learning
approaches. However, methods have been evaluated by different datasets or in
different clinical applications, it is difficult to compare the performance of
different methods. This study will evaluate state-of-the-art methods for CDSS,
focusing on the important application of clinical assessment generation, which
predicts medical diagnoses and summaries of the key elements that lead to the
medical diagnoses. The CDSS methods will be implemented and evaluated using the
longitudinal EHR data from the US Veterans Health Administration (VHA) across
the entire United States of America. Clinical assessment generation will help
medical education by generating clinically relevant case studies. Clinical
assessment generation will improve patient care by assisting primary care
physicians with clinical diagnoses, especially for patients with rare diseases,
and by identifying medical specialties and subspecialties for their patients.
This work will be transformative in CDSS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providers are
trained to write notes with a problem-oriented subjective, objective,
assessment, and plan (SOAP) structure, where assessments can be inferred from
their subjective and objective sections of the SOAP notes. Clinical assessment
generation can be considered as an application of text-to-text or graph-to-text
generation. State of the art methods includes text-to-text transfer transformer,
generative pre-trained transformer, generation with multihop reasoning flow,
commonsense knowledge aware conversational model, abductive commonsense
reasoning, and automated clinical assessment generation, all of which will be
evaluated for clinical assessment generation using over 8 million VHA patients’
longitudinal EHRs from over 1,200 healthcare facilities in the US. The
evaluation metrics include bilingual evaluation understudy and Recall­Oriented
Understudy for Gisting Evaluation. Clinicians will evaluate the clinical
relevance and interpretability of each method. We will evaluate method
performance by disease categories or subcategories, by different note types, and
by different VHA hospital facilities. We will also evaluate method performance
by race, gender, age, and minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.