* 2124624
* High Efficiency UV-LEDs Based on Hybrid 2D/3D Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Iftikhar Ahmad, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2024
* USD 375,503.00

The material system of aluminum-gallium-indium-nitride makes very efficient
visible light emitters but still inefficient ultraviolet emitters. As a result,
the ever-increasing applications of ultraviolet light emitters in healthcare,
personal hygiene, and homeland security continue to be fulfilled by conventional
sources that are bulky, inefficient, and toxic. This project will take a new
approach; it will combine 3-dimensional (3D) materials based on aluminum-
gallium-indium-nitride with 2-dimensional (2D) materials based on boron-nitride
to create new hybrid materials. These hybrid materials are expected to reduce
internal light emission losses to yield ultraviolet emitters that are more than
three times more efficient than the current state-of-the-art. The proposed
research should make it possible to replace conventional emitters with the more
efficient, smaller, safer, and more economical emitter. The project will also
train graduate students in order to retain US leadership in this technology, it
will seek to encourage minority students to pursue science education, and it
will generate interest in semiconductor research among undergraduate students
and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Ultraviolet light-
emitting diodes (UV-LEDs) emitting in the UV-C range (280nm â€“ 220 nm) are widely
needed but highly inefficient. The scientific objective of the proposed research
is to increase the efficiency of UV-LEDs emitting at 280 nm wavelength by
investigating the integration of new materials into LED structures to create the
next generation of vertically conducting devices. For the last two decades, the
focus of UV-LED research was mainly to improve the material quality with an aim
to increase the external quantum efficiency (EQE). The EQE is the product of
internal quantum efficiency (IQE), injection efficiency (IE), and light
extraction efficiency (LEE). In a typical 280 nm UV-LED, the IQE and IE are
around 80%, whereas the LEE is less than 5% resulting in EQE less than 4%. The
proposed project aims to increase LEE by incorporating hybrids of 2D and 3D
materials into the UV-LED structures so as to reduce internal absorptions and
reflections. Simulations project that the proposed scheme will dramatically
improve the LEE to around 48%. Thus, it should increase the EQE by more than
three times relative to the average EQE (~ 10%) of state-of-the-art 280 nm UVLED
emitters. Success in this project will leap the technology forward. The project
entails epitaxial growth by metal-organic chemical deposition (MOCVD), device
design, processing, and material/device characterizations; it will enhance our
understanding and proficiency in these fields. The graduate and undergraduate
students involved in the project will become experts in these techniques as they
become the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the division of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS),
and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.