* 2124424
* Collaborative Research: CISE-ANR: CNS Core: Small: Modeling Modern Network Traffic: From Data Representation to Automated Machine Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zakir Durumeric, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,998.00

To successfully maintain and secure communications networks, operators need to
monitor their behavior and investigate security, performance, and other problems
as they arise. Recent advances in network protocols and applications present
fundamental challenges for monitoring network traffic. Specifically, Internet
traffic, from web traffic to Domain Name System (DNS) queries and responses, is
becoming ubiquitously encrypted, obfuscating information that might otherwise be
available for these tasks. Additionally, network traffic is increasing in volume
and rate, precluding detailed logging and analyzing individual packets or
streams. Finally, the Internet is becoming more centralized, and many services
have also become cloud-based, making it more difficult to identify applications
or services according to fixed identifiers such as IP addresses and port
numbers. Answering even basic questions about Internet traffic has thus become
increasingly challenging. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
techniques to regain visibility and insights into modern network traffic
considering these trends. We address three research questions towards regaining
visibility into modern network traffic. First, this project will study how to
represent traffic data in ways that are amenable to modeling, and that could
optimize models for both supervised and unsupervised modeling tasks. We will
explore the impact of representations across four dimensions: (1) timeseries
representations; (2) representations across flows; (3) representations at higher
layers; and (4) operations on compressed data. Second, we will build on our work
on traffic data representation to develop a set of tools to automatically
explore model and traffic representations tailored for network traffic problems.
Towards this goal, we will build a large-scale repository of labeled flows
across several different applications and services as well as evaluate data
representations that will be used to build statistical learning models about
network traffic. Finally, we will use the software platforms and algorithms we
build to design new techniques and tools for operators to solve the challenges
that prevent them from transferring developed models from laboratory experiments
to real-world deployments. We will extend automated model selection to account
for systems costs and real-world limitations; address the need to be able to
determine when models become inaccurate and to distinguish model inaccuracies
from problems that are inherent to the network; and improve model robustness by
investigating general approaches for model transfer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;All
software we create in this project will be publicly available and open source.
Additionally, we plan to integrate the software systems into tutorials for the
community, undergraduate and graduate courses, and outreach and education
programs in the community, in collaboration with partners such as the University
of Chicago's Office of Special Programs and Office of Civic
Engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.