* 2124689
* Molecular genetic investigation of land plant gravity signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Edgar Spalding, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 05/31/2024
* USD 907,279.00

As plants colonized land some 400 million years ago, they evolved the ability to
orient the growth of their roots and shoots using the Earth’s gravity vector as
a guide. The underlying gravity sensing and response system is not well
understood, even though modification of it through selective breeding has
importantly shaped today’s crop plants and trees, and future gains in
productivity are expected to attend modifications that result in steeper roots
better able to reach water sources, and shoots with angles that intercept light
better when plants are crowded in high-density production scenarios. This
project aims to identify the proteins, which are encoded by genes, that make up
the gravity sensing mechanism in the Arabidopsis thaliana plant, which is a
model for plants in general. The project builds off of research indicating that
a small number of LAZY genes, found only in land plants, encode key components
of the gravity signaling system that orients roots and shoots. The project will
use experimental methods from the fields of genetics and biochemistry to find
genes and their proteins that function with LAZY proteins to create a pathway
within cells that translates the gravity vector into a physiological change that
steers growth. A clearer view of this pathway’s structure and function will show
how plants solved a challenge to living on land, and it will generate
opportunities to improve crop plant architecture. Outreach activities will
introduce young members of the public to plant responses to
gravity.&lt;br/&gt;The experimental plan consists of three sections. The first
is based on mutations that suppress the severely agravitropic growth of a lazy
quadruple mutant. One of the suppressor of lazy quadruple (slq) mutants has been
identified, one more is being genetically mapped. SLQ1 negatively regulates LAZY
function. SLQ1 expression pattern, subcellular localization, and mechanism of
action will be studied, Other SLQs will be similarly studied after they are
identified. Another section is based on a functionally-relevant interaction
between LAZY1 and a protein called BRXL4 discovered in a yeast two-hybrid (Y2H)
screen. The Y2H method will be used to find additional interactors. A proteomic
screen will independently identify LAZY1 interactors. Separate approaches used
throughout the project are designed to increase the probability of obtaining
convergent results. For example, genes identified in a screen for slq mutations
may encode proteins that interact physically with LAZY1. The genetic, cellular,
and biochemical results will be combined to create a gravity signaling
framework. A third section will test mechanistic elements of the framework. The
project is expected to establish an unprecedented level of molecular detail
about how plants use the gravity vector to guide
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.