* 2124398
* CCI Phase 1: NSF Center for Quantum Electrodynamics for Selective Transformations (QuEST)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Quantum Electrodynamics for Selective Transformations (QuEST)
is supported by the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program of the
Division of Chemistry. QuEST is directed by Todd Krauss at the University of
Rochester, with a team that includes Pengfei Huo, William Jones and Nick
Vamivakas all from the University of Rochester, Jillian Dempsey at the
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, Nicolas Large and Zachary Tonzetich
from the University of Texas-San Antonio, Teri Odom from Northwestern University
and Daniel Weix from the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The development of
better drugs to treat diseases, new materials that are both affordable and
sustainable, and new ways to harness renewable energy all depend upon the
synthesis of new molecules. When making new molecules, chemists are generally
bound by a well-established set of “rules” for how a given molecule will and
will not react. A limited number of tools exist to tune the result of a chemical
synthesis, such as by varying the temperature, shining light on the reaction, or
using a metal catalyst. However, the outcomes of a chemical reaction are largely
pre-determined by the fundamental nature of the reacting molecules themselves.
The goal of QuEST is to discover a new tool that will allow the development of
new chemical reactions that are not currently possible. QuEST will do this by
performing chemical reactions inside an optical cavity. In an optical cavity,
light is best described as consisting of discrete quanta called photons. When
such quantum-light from inside the cavity strongly interacts with the reactant
molecules in a chemical reaction, the molecules are fundamentally altered in a
manner that should unlock new types of chemical reactions. The ability to direct
the outcomes of chemical reactions by simply changing properties of light
delivered to the system represents a completely new way to tune a particular
chemical synthesis, which, in turn, has the potential to transform approaches to
chemical synthesis and have broad benefits to society. QuEST will also train
future leaders in the field, ensuring that they are well-prepared to communicate
the excitement of quantum science applied to chemistry to a broad audience, and
striving to build a cohort of developing quantum chemistry researchers that is
truly diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCI Phase I NSF Center for Quantum
Electrodynamics for Selective Transformations aims to discover uniquely
selective chemical functionalizations that are enabled by the strong interaction
of matter and the quantum light of an optical cavity. QuEST is exploring a
fundamentally new tool for the development of selective organic chemistry by
utilizing optical cavity polaritons, hybrid light-matter quasiparticles, in a
manner similar to chemical catalysts. QuEST brings together methods and
approaches from across organic, inorganic, materials, theoretical, and physical
chemistry as well as quantum optics. QuEST aims to establish a clear
understanding of how polaritons influence properties of molecules relevant for
chemistry--such as potential energy surfaces--and develop effective methods to
create polaritons for a broad array of molecules in solution. Model chemical
reactions in Phase I have been chosen to test the fundamental mechanism and
basic principles of polariton chemistry. In addition to rigorous scientific
training, QuEST will instruct students in best practices for bringing quantum-
chemical science to a broad audience. Efforts will be directed toward increasing
diversity in the scientific pipeline through science experiences for
underrepresented undergraduate students, as well as translating QuEST science
into high-school laboratory activities, social media dialogues, and portable
museum exhibits appropriate for all ages. This CCI presents a bold vision for
facilitating the growth of an entirely new and emerging field: using quantum
electrodynamics principles to enable selective
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.