* 2124239
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Precision Meteorology (ERC-PM)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Suzanne Smith, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,946.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
many people know from experience, weather forecasting is an imprecise science
that relies on averaging results from many different predictions. Thus,
forecasts are often inaccurate in the degree of prediction and miss the mark in
important details of timing, location, or severity. Not uncommonly, the forecast
is just plain wrong with sometimes disastrous consequences. While weather
forecasts at the large scale have improved over the last few decades, accurate
weather prediction at local scales is within our reach, but not possible without
paradigm changes that will transform the weather enterprise and unlock solutions
to many of our food, energy, transportation, and climate-triggered weather
challenges. If successful, this initiative will have a broad range of benefits
to the general public. Consider the following scenarios: Imagine if airports had
reliable predictions of when icing will end, if a grower was assured that the
wind-born fungus at a nearby farm would not drift into their fields, and if
first responders knew of localized wind shifts governing wildfire spread or
heavy rain in locations likely to be impacted by flooding. Consider annual gains
from accurate local prediction for optimized wind farm production and solar
energy output. Picture an aviation warning network for invisible wind shear and
clear air turbulence at low altitudes. Imagine highly reliable autonomous air
taxi and delivery networks enabled by microscale weather prediction in urban and
rural settings. Consider the relief of advance warning for migraine sufferers
and others with weather-induced health issues. Think of the possibility to
alleviate disparities in severe weather warnings and associated emergency
response using a mobile, flexible atmospheric observing system. These and other
opportunities yet to be imagined will be possible with Precision Meteorology.
Therefore, this team proposes a planning grant to evaluate a proposed
Engineering Research Center for Precision
Meteorology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly accurate, timely, local-scale weather
prediction - Precision Meteorology - will enable solutions to issues that impact
a broad array of problems impacting society, including food, energy, and climate
related challenges. The key to improving accuracy of microscale meteorological
models, and thus local prediction, is to couple increased in situ observations
within the lower atmosphere, including the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL),
with high-resolution numerical weather prediction (NWP) optimized to utilize
these observations. A key enabling technology for increasing ABL observations
includes Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS); emerging with proven value for sensing
in the ABL and beyond, initiating a significant shift in the scientific
foundations of meteorological observations. Optimizing the coupling between
these measurements and numerical weather prediction to maximize impact requires
convergent research among engineering, atmospheric science, data science, and
social science. If successful, this center will achieve economic and societal
impacts through data-enabled localized weather prediction offering significant
lead-time, accuracy, and resolution improvements over current meteorological
predictions. Through a comprehensive approach, we believe a Center for Precision
Meteorology (CPM) will achieve this vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.