* 2124088
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Electrosymbiotic Engineering, Design, and Technology (CEED-TECH)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Haluk Beyenal, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Center for Electrosymbiotic Engineering, Design, and Technology (CEED-Tech)
will investigate the design rules of recognition, organization, and performance
that allow electrochemically active microorganisms to interact with inert
electronic materials through a process called electrosymbiotics. The Center
seeks to harness bioprocesses through technologies designed to address pressing
issues in water security, renewable energy, and green manufacturing. Currently,
there are knowledge, training, and technical gaps that limit our ability to
diversify and scale up these technologies for industrial applications. Without
multidisciplinary efforts, the field has lagged in the workforce training and
diversification that is critical for building productive partnerships,
collaborative infrastructure, and large-scale networks between academia and
industry that are needed for technology development. This Engineering Research
Center (ERC) Planning Grant will bring together a diverse team of scientists,
engineers, and relevant stakeholders (academia, industry, and policymakers) and
prioritize efforts through in-person and remote planning meetings to develop a
full ERC proposal. Specifically, we will (1) identify key stakeholders for
pressing sustainability issues in electrosymbiotic engineering, (2) reach
consensus on the significant bottlenecks in advancing electrosymbiotic
technologies, (3) refine proposed solutions for developing large-scale
electrosymbiotic technologies, (4) build technical and administrative teams, and
(5) develop a shared vision across all Center Participants with a commitment to
diversity, equity, and inclusion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrosymbiotic
engineering is a new field of science that integrates many STEM disciplines in
engineering and life sciences to actualize technologies critical for economic
integration and growth. Advancing technology transfer in the field requires a
convergent and innovative research and education plan across all science and
engineering areas influencing electrosymbiotics and between academia and
industry. The Center will leverage the diversity required by this field to
create engineering platform designs for market-ready technologies modeled as
integrated systems for stable performance and scalability. Overcoming the
scalability bottleneck will bring transformative electrosymbiotic platforms to
the testbed stage. The testbeds will provide integrated environments for
problem-solving and new product development. The planned research efforts will
be sustained by the targeted and inclusive training program that is needed to
develop a workforce with the core competencies, intellectual versatility, and
industry knowledge required for long-term professional success and technology
implementation. This dynamic and integrated approach will diversify the economic
technology portfolio, promoting growth in 1) sustainable manufacturing, 2)
greenhouse gas sequestration, 3) cost-effective wastewater treatment, 4)
reclamation of strategically important metals, 5) sensors innovation, and 6)
enhanced methods for contaminant removal. Industries built on this new Center-
created knowledge will contribute to our shared economic prosperity and
security. This planning grant will allow us to bring together a team of
scientists, engineers, and stakeholders to strategically integrate center-driven
activities for sustained growth and innovation within the emerging field of
electrosymbiotic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.