* 2124722
* CAREER: Dynamics of surface rupturing thrust earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Marine Denolle, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2023
* USD 274,605.00

Surface rupturing thrust earthquakes are particularly troublesome: any person or
structure unfortunate enough to be in the vicinity of the upthrust side of the
fault will experience stronger than usual ground motion. Making matters worse,
if the fault happens to be submarine then it may also create a tsunami.
Understanding the dynamics of these events is critical to mitigate seismic and
tsunami risk. Current observational approaches, however, are hindered by several
major limitations: they lack sensitivity to the dynamically important shallowest
portion of the fault and they may ignore important geometrical effects including
that of the free surface or material property contrasts. This project will
advance our fundamental understanding of surface rupturing thrust earthquakes,
tsunamigenesis, earthquake source physics, and ground motion more generally. It
involves developing innovative observational methodologies and generating
improved mechanical descriptions of earthquake processes. The proposed research
bridges mechanical and observational perspectives on earthquake processes to
validate physical models and make predictions of future damaging earthquakes.
The exposure to tsunami and shaking hazard for large, surface rupturing thrust
inevitably increases with global population growth. The proposed research will
provide key information on earthquake processes that are relevant to populated
areas including Japan (Nankai), India (Main Himalayan Thrust), and the United
States (Cascadia) that are expecting shallow megathrust earthquakes. The project
includes the supervising of two graduate students, one or more undergraduate
students, the course development of a sophomore-level class and the improvement
of a graduate level class. It also involves the promotion of earthquake sciences
at the Harvard Museum of Natural History through the development of an
interactive exhibit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physics-based approaches, such as
dynamic simulations, are restricting in that they do not yet systematically
provide adequate metrics to be validated against data. This project addresses
these limitations in the context of surface rupturing thrust earthquakes,
including subduction zone megathrust earthquakes. The project will address all
three issues by i) improving the observational methodologies toward analysis of
full waveforms through time and frequency domains, and ii) testing model
hypothesis and observational methodologies through dynamic simulations and
seismic observations from global thrust earthquakes. The work will also include
the creation of a global database of earthquake moment-rate functions, static
and dynamic source parameters, and energy partitioning estimates. Finally,
through validation of the physical models against observations from past
megathrust earthquakes, the project will build scenario sources for well-imaged
subduction zones that are expecting large surface ruptures. The scenarios will
have societal impact for the earthquake and tsunami mitigation effort in the
Pacific Northwest of the United States and globally around the Pacific
coastlines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.