* 2124735
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Latent Energy Exchanger for Effective Recovery of Industrial Wet Exhausts
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Helen Skop, SMART HEAT CORP
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2023
* USD 275,642.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to save water and energy across a wide spectrum of
industrial and commercial applications (i.e. boilers, baking ovens, furnaces,
proofers, HVAC systems) that emit wet exhaust into the environment. For example,
the U.S. bread baking market segment alone may save over 50 million therms of
energy and over 400 million gallons of water annually with the proposed
technology. The proposed project will create a new class of high-efficient and
cost-effective equipment for energy recovery and energy efficiency
improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project develops a unique
energy transfer concept for high-efficient and cost-effective phase-change
energy conversion. State-of-the-art heat exchange processes use linear heat
transfer mechanisms. In contrast, the proposed approach accounts for the non-
linear heat distribution during the condensation process. As a result, the mass
of partially condensed mixture changes along the flow channel, and thus causes a
corresponding change in local dew point. This approach defines a design
configuration for efficient capture and maximal recovery of latent energy from
the wet gas flow. The proposed concept successfully exploits the thermo-fluid
advantages of spiral channels and thermosiphons. The project will resolve key
technological gaps and address issues including condensation sustainability at
variable channel geometry and changing flow parameters, and the thermosiphonâ€™s
optimal performance at unconventional conditions. The non-linear phase-change
heat transfer mechanisms will be defined and simulated, followed by a
sensitivity analysis and design optimization of the channel geometry and
thermosiphons array for subsequent prototype design and performance
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.