* 2124872
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving Fertility Patient-Provider Communication with a Personalized Natural Language Processing Platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Thomas Scherr, PRAGMADX, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,910.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop natural language processing
software that will streamline communication between fertility clinic patients
and their providers. Fertility clinics are specialized medical facilities that
offer clinical diagnoses and treatments to assist with the conception of a
child. Their patients undergo intense anxiety and large out-of-pocket expenses
throughout their journey to conceive, and up to two-thirds of patients at
fertility clinics will discontinue their treatment regimen with emotional stress
being cited as the primary reason. Patient satisfaction, which is more complex
than just achieving desired outcomes, is correlated with how effectively care
teams can navigate the large information disparity and bridge the communication
gap. This project advances technologies to facilitate this communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will address major technical hurdles associated with natural language
processing in healthcare, specifically fertility care. These challenges include
that a conversational agent must understand the vocabulary particular to
fertility-related questions, the natural language platform must overcome the
difficulty in maintaining contextual-awareness throughout a continuous multi-
person dialogue as well as understand ambiguous questions within a broader
conversational context, and that the algorithm must reply with clinically
accurate responses personalized to a specific patient. To meet these objectives,
a fertility-specific corpus, or dictionary, will be developed from fertility
stakeholders (patients, providers, and clinic staff) feedback, and a machine-
learning algorithm will be developed that analyzes patient messages for intent
and provides personalized responses drawing from the developed corpus in
addition to external sources. Finally, a usability study will be performed to
refine the platformâ€™s user-interface, tone, and informational content. The
anticipated result of the proposed research is a platform that improves both the
quality and efficiency of patient-care team
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.