* 2124400
* Modularization and minimization of the yeast transcription factor repertoire
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Ian Ehrenreich, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,599,992.00

Transcription factors are proteins that control when a gene gets turned on or
off and are essential for controlling the various functions of cells. Here,
transcription factors will be organized into modules that turn on particular
types of genes and therefore allow researchers to program cells or reprogram
cells with the desired functions or applications. Indeed, the ability to program
or reprogram cells on demand has long been a goal of synthetic biology and
bioengineering, as this ability would dramatically impact medicine and the
development of biotechnology. Training of diverse early career scientists will
play a central role in the proposed project, providing post-doctoral
researchers, Ph.D. students and undergraduates with valuable expertise in an
area of rapidly growing importance to the bioeconomy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A S.
cerevisiae transcription factor module will be built as a neochromosome
containing ~200 validated and putative DNA-binding, RNA polymerase II-associated
transcription factors. Transcription factor-free versions of the 16 native yeast
chromosomes will be constructed through the cloning and reassembly of
transcription factor-free chromosomal segments. This clone-and-reassemble
strategy solves a persistent challenge in genetics and genomics, namely the
precise and simultaneous deletion of large numbers of genes. This part of the
project will produce a unique and powerful platform in which all transcription
factor activity arises from the neochromosome. Taking advantage of this novel
platform, the transcription factor module will be reduced to a minimal set
sufficient for robust yeast viability. This minimization will be done using an
experimental strategy for introducing large numbers of random transposon
insertions into targeted specific regions of the genome. This research will
empirically answer questions about the numbers and identities of the minimal
sets of TFs that can maintain yeast viability both generally and in specific
conditions. This part of the project will culminate in the synthesis of a
transcription factor module containing only a minimal set of transcription
factors. This project will be integrated into a capstone course for
undergraduates interested in biotechnology. The courseâ€™s curriculum will include
a combination of lectures and hands-on activities. Students will be exposed to
both the computational and wet lab components of synthetic genomics. The
students will learn to design synthetic DNA, assemble gene-sized molecules into
larger constructs comprised of multiple genes, verify these assemblies by
sequencing, analyze the data, and combine these larger constructs into
chromosome-sized molecules in yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.