* 2124464
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Global Change Impact on Vulnerable Carbon Reservoirs: Carbon Sequestration and emissions in soils and waters from the Arctic to the Equator
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Robert Spencer, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,805.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on understanding the long-term
response of the Earth’s Critical Zone to environmental, societal and economic
drivers. The Critical Zone is the heterogeneous, near surface environment where
complex interactions involving rock, soil, water, air, and living organisms
regulate the natural habitat and determine the availability of life-sustaining
resources. This project will focus on the tropical socio-ecosystems of Western
Central Africa, and the Arctic and sub-arctic zones of the Western Siberian
Lowlands. These regions are now increasingly impacted by accelerated global
changes with the predictable degradation of soil and groundwater systems, which
could potentially lead to huge emissions of greenhouse gases and to vast carbon
and nutrient exports from land to oceans. The project will create an operational
research and innovation framework on climate change, land use/cover, carbon
cycle and soils, surface water, and groundwater sustainability, to improve soil,
surface and groundwater knowledge, management, and policy from the local to
regional scale. The research team will work with relevant stakeholders to
develop and implement the results of the project to raise awareness of soil,
water, climate change, carbon cycle and sustainability of Critical Zone and
river and lake groundwater, and threats related to their
degradation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.