* 2124888
* Standard Research: Developing Ethical STEM Research Competency and Self-Efficacy in High School and College Engineering Courses
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Glen Miller, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 599,587.00

This project aims to develop instructional materials that support ethical
practices in STEM at the high school and undergraduate levels to improve student
outcomes and self-efficacy related to ethical STEM research. Through the design
and implementation of STEM research ethics modules in an undergraduate
engineering curriculum, the project generates data related to the ethical
knowledge, reasoning skills, attitudes, and practices of several thousand
engineering undergraduate students. This snapshot in turn informs the
development of a three-week enrichment opportunity for high school STEM
teachers. Working with university faculty and graduate students, high school
teachers are supported in developing learning modules on ethical issues and
implementing them in the high school context. Project data also guides the
creation of targeted interventions that will be used in second, third, and
fourth year engineering courses. A second data snapshot is then taken by testing
and surveying engineering students in their capstone courses to provide a broad
overview of the competence and self-confidence that engineering students have in
dealing with ethical STEM issues, to determine the efficacy of various
interventions, and to improve future interventions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
data-driven project uses a mixed-methods approach to generate a better
understanding of the impact of ethics interventions at various points in a
student's academic development by developing and using a set of instruments to
measure cognitive, affective, and behavioral aspects of ethical competency and
self-efficacy. Utilizing repeated measures and possessing a longitudinal
dimension, the project generates data about the development of ethical
competency, ethical self-efficacy, and the relationships between competency,
self-efficacy, and the instructional interventions. The interventions designed
for secondary and tertiary classrooms build on best practices for micro-
insertion of ethics content that are practical and help students understand how
technical competencies fit within broader social, economic, and environmental
contexts. The capstone data collection also provides a measure of the impact of
other experiences (e.g., undergraduate research, internships, Engineers Without
Borders) and courses (e.g., humanities, social science, and business courses) on
ethical development. The project has a secondary benefit of improving the
allocation of class time and other educational resources to inform the ways in
which STEM ethics education can be integrated into STEM
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also supported by the NSF HSI
and DRK-12 programs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.