* 2124894
* New Frameworks for Ethical Research Amidst Emerging Digital Technologies, Algorithms, and Privacy Norms
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Sangeeta Panicker, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 45,450.00

Researchers across fields--including biomedical, behavioral, cognitive,
educational, computer, information, and social sciences--use digital
technologies recruit human participants, develop interventions, collect and
analyze data, and disseminate findings. The technologies include mobile phones,
wearable computing, body sensors, tracking apps, and social networking
platforms. Artificial intelligence and other algorithms are embedded in the
technologies. Algorithms and models grow, along with personal information that
people provide, bringing personalized experiences to daily activities, such as
shopping, reading news articles, and watching movies. People’s perceptions about
the privacy of their personal information likewise evolve. The growth of such
technologies gives researchers access to more research participants and expanded
opportunities to study complex human behaviors unobtrusively, in real-time.
However, using these digital technologies to conduct research requires new core
concepts of research ethics, such as informed consent, autonomy, and
confidentiality. This project will investigate new ethical frameworks for
protecting human research participants in response to the digital age and
develop resources for the scientific community and the public. Outcomes will be
broadly disseminated to faculty researchers, research staff, students and the
community through informational videos, webinars, informational brochures, and
guidelines for training platforms. Content will be served through the American
Psychological Association’s website, podcasts, blogs, and social media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support working group activities and a
public conference for stimulating computing ethics research addressing: (1) How
do current ethical, legal/regulatory, or social issues, either in degree or
kind, address (or not address) the use of digital technologies in human
research? (2) How have people’s perceptions on sharing personal information
changed with the ubiquitous use of digital technologies, and how will this
affect the use of digital technology in human research? (3) How has the
ubiquitous use of algorithms, including AI, in everyday digital technologies,
impacted ethical dimensions of human research? (4) What ethical frameworks can
address emerging uses of digital technologies when conducting research with
human participants with a variety of technology literacy characteristics and
privacy perceptions? The project is expected to generate the following outcomes:
(1) white papers outlining ethical, legal, and social issues related to the use
of electronic and mobile technologies in research; (2) a set of training
guidelines for students and researchers on the conduct of research using such
technologies, to be disseminated to regulatory organizations, professional
societies and universities; (3) design requirements of training and educational
tools; and (4) research plan for a follow-up proposal to evaluate, improve, and
support the training agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.