* 2124252
* Collaborative Research: NCS: FO: Enhancing Episodic Memory through Real-world Integration of Brain Recording and Stimulation with Semantic Alignment of Human and IoT Perception
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Cory Inman, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to build and evaluate a system for exploring how the
human brain processes information in everyday real-world environments. The
investigators will directly record from the brain while participants navigate
the real world, while synchronously recording information about the
participant's first-person experience from a set of sensors including cameras,
microphones, eye-tracking, and physiological recordings. Neurosurgical
participants with a clinically implanted neural recording and stimulation system
volunteer for these experiments, providing rare direct human brain recordings as
they move around a real-world environment. The rich sensor data captured from
the participant's first-person experience will be analyzed in relation to the
neural data to infer how changes in patterns of neural activity over time relate
to changes in experience. In addition, stimulation will be applied, at safe
levels and timed according to "event boundaries" of the participant's
experience, to determine whether memories of specific events can be enhanced.
The proposed platform that allows for neural recording, direct brain
stimulation, and synchronization with external, wearable devices will open an
entirely new area of research at the intersection of computer science,
engineering, cognition, and clinical neuroscience. These studies will launch and
accelerate an emerging and pivotal area of research that will provide
therapeutic interventions, proven in the real-world, for participants afflicted
with debilitating cognitive disorders. This project will also make substantial
contributions to education and outreach, including the development of K-12
classroom modules, interdisciplinary graduate training, outreach to industry
partners in the neuromodulation field, and workshops at local Salt Lake City
memory care communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of this neural and
first-person experience recording system will entail three collaborative
research tasks: i) Synchronizing the Human Experience Relative to Neuronal
Events: This module will develop a robust framework to record and synchronize
neuronal activity along with internet of things (IoT) sensor data representing a
broad subset of human sensory channels. The design will be portable such that
the human experience can be reasoned about outside of a simulated lab
environment. ii) Real-time Semantic Alignment between Human and IoT Perception:
Reasoning about the complex relationships between neural biomarkers and the
human experience captured by IoT sensing requires more than sensor
synchronization. Neural-symbolic approaches that integrate the perception
capabilities of deep learning with human logic will be leveraged to reason about
the high-level complex spatiotemporal dependencies across a heterogeneous set of
sensors. iii) Enhancing Episodic Memories of Real-world Experiences with DBS:
Given a proper characterization of neural oscillations associated with event
boundaries, the investigators will work to enhance episodic memories of real-
world experiences with wireless deep brain stimulation (DBS) devices by directly
stimulating the human brain. Under medical supervision, stimulation will be
applied to the human amygdala at and between event boundaries in subjects with
implanted stimulation devices as they encounter novel, 3D augmented reality
objects while navigating a large-scale, real-world environment. Memory will be
subsequently tested in laboratory and real-world settings. These three research
areas will develop a situational understanding of neuronal activity in the
context of human experience. They will further lay the foundation for future
research directions in safe and effective stimulation of the brain in response
to human experience in the wild.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.