* 2124368
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Lignin Engineering, Analysis, and Research for Sustainable Technology (CLEAReST)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Bert Lynn, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 04/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this planning grant is to move towards a NSF-sponsored Center for
Lignin Engineering, Analysis, and Research for Sustainable Technology
(CLEAReST), which will serve as a focal point for the scientific advancements
required to develop lignin-first processes for biomass conversion. Formation of
CLEAReST is inspired by the global need to find renewable replacements for
aromatic petrochemicals to sustainably address energy, climate, and food
security needs. These aromatic compounds are found in everyday products
including fuels, plastics, personal care products, and pharmaceuticals. Lignin,
a biopolymer found in all plants, is the only renewable source of aromatic
chemicals, but is difficult to effectively utilize because of its complex,
heterogeneous structure. Worldwide, there is growing recognition that utilizing
lignin is an essential technological part of reducing the environmental and
climate impact of human industrial activity. By making scientific advances in
its core scientific and engineering missions, CLEAReST will lower technological
barriers to realizing this goal. This will be accelerated by cooperating with
global lignin science partners and industrial leaders to address the most
relevant problems in lignin processing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Breakthroughs in
science and engineering of lignin will be cultivated by pursuing five parallel,
intertwined missions. First, the fundamental rules of life governing lignin
biosynthesis will be uncovered and engineered to create plant feedstocks able to
be deconstructed into valuable building blocks without loss of food value.
Second, dedicated analytical tools will be assembled to provide comprehensive
characterization of lignin all the way from plant cell to final product. Third,
the science of lignin deconstruction will be advanced to provide efficient ways
to convert a given lignin source to the most suitable set of intermediate
chemicals. Fourth, discovery-based applications of lignin-derived products will
be advanced by developing structure-property relationships for well-defined
lignin molecules. Finally, the systems thinking and convergence research-driven
advances in lignin science of CLEAReST will be used as a platform for recruiting
a diverse cohort of students and providing education, outreach, and knowledge
transfer to an interdisciplinary scientific workforce. The Center integrates the
first four missions to seek scientific breakthroughs that advance integrated
lignin science from its initial biosynthesis in plants to structure-property
relationships in upgraded products. This planning grant will define high-impact
engineering science targets within the missions of CLEAReST by bringing together
potential collaborators and stakeholders for a series of workshops. To move
towards the goal of broadening the impact and participation of scientists from
all backgrounds in the lignin utilization challenge, the planning grant includes
activities to strengthen ties with social science researchers to better
understand the economic, educational, and social implications of expanding the
biorefining concept in rural communities, thus moving towards decentralized
processing of lignin as a renewable source of aromatic chemicals, pharmaceutical
precursors, and advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.