* 2124306
* Collaborative Research: Toward lifelike synthetic cells via engineered control of DNA replication
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Chappell, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 373,174.00

The ability of cells to reliably replicate and maintain genomic information is a
key facet of life. Recapitulating these mechanisms is a critical step towards
the development of autonomous synthetic cells that exhibit self-replication and
stable propagation of their genetic information. To that end, this project
creates a new synthetic mechanism for DNA replication control in synthetic cells
that will open the door for new applications in biomedicine and biotechnology.
This project carries out an integrated social science investigation into the
current regulatory framework surrounding engineered synthetic cell technologies.
This project also provides educational and technical training aimed at
increasing the number and diversity of undergraduates and graduates pursuing
careers in synthetic cell research. Public outreach is carried out in
conjunction with local partners to increase public awareness of synthetic cell
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural cells have evolved sophisticated
mechanisms to control DNA replication, to prevent the loss of critical genes
while simultaneously preventing runaway replication. Analogous replication
control mechanisms will be required for synthetic cells. While natural genome
replication control systems are complex, plasmids provide a simple yet powerful
and modular system for building synthetic replication control systems and
modular genomes for synthetic cells. This project addresses the broad challenge
of engineering DNA replication control mechanisms for synthetic cell systems.
RNA engineering techniques are used to create modular and programmable synthetic
plasmid replication control systems that function in both cells and cell-like
systems. This project also studies how DNA replication can be utilized for novel
biosensing applications. Biocontainment applications are investigated through an
integrated social science investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.