* 2124781
* I-Corps: Polysaccharides functionalized with metal chelators to treat low level lead poisoning
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Stefanie Sydlik, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a therapeutic to treat lead poisoning by reducing the levels of
lead from the blood. Lead poisoning remains a major public health issue,
especially in children, where the long-term cognitive and physiological
consequences are long-lasting and significant. Recent research has indicated
that even levels of &lt; 5 mcg/dL have negative health effects in children,
resulting in decreased academic achievement, lower IQ scores, attention-related
behavior problems, antisocial behaviors, and possibly delayed puberty and
decreased kidney function for children older than 12 years. The administration
of chelators, which are molecules that bind with metals to aid in their
elimination, can reduce blood lead levels. However, chelation therapy is only
indicated for very high blood lead levels (&gt; 44 mcg/dL). For lower-level lead
poisoning (â‰¤ 44 mcg/dL), the benefits of traditional chelation therapy do not
outweigh the risks of the side effects of the chelators themselves. The proposed
technology uses natural biomolecules to bind lead, which is biologically
compatible and safer. In addition, the proposed safer heavy metal binders may
have expanded use clinically to remove other toxic metals from the body, as well
as environmentally to remove heavy metal environmental
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a chemical therapeutic to bind and remove toxic metals such as
lead from the blood. The proposed technology is a chemical combination of heavy
metal binders (chelators) and large sugar molecules (polysaccharides). The
proposed technology is designed to retain the metal binding efficacy of the
chelator, while imparting compatibility to the chelator through the
polysaccharide backbone. Initial lab results confirm that the proposed binders
have substantial metal-binding capacity. In addition, cell culture and
preliminary animal studies suggest that the proposed technology is both
biocompatible and able to more rapidly clear toxic metals from the body as
compared with unmodified chelators. Commercialization of the proposed technology
may improve health outcomes and reduce healthcare
expenditures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.