* 2124044
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track I: Synthetic Compilation for Embedded Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* James Bornholt, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2025
* USD 375,000.00

Embedded systems play an increasingly critical role in modern computing
applications. These systems fit intensive workloads like machine learning and
cryptography into small power envelopes by developing custom hardware with
domain-specific accelerated instructions. Such customized processors are only
useful when accompanied by custom compilers that can harness their novel
functionality. Today, these compilers must be developed anew for each customized
embedded system, but compiler development is error-prone and risks correctness
issues or poor performance of the generated code. This project will develop a
new framework for rapidly developing custom embedded-system compilers that are
verified to be correct and generate high-performance code. The framework will
develop and extend techniques that use program synthesis to facilitate
compilation for flexible hardware targets. It will develop new approaches to
improve scalability to large compilation problems and to automate the process of
inferring rules for a given compilation setting. The resulting framework will
benefit embedded system designers by accelerating their development cycle and
increasing confidence in the correctness of widely distributed embedded
applications. This project's results will be shared through open-source software
and publications and will be used to expand undergraduate systems classes to
cover synthesis-based techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach
will involve developing Ember, a toolkit for quickly producing verified, high-
performance compilers. Ember will address three research challenges: (1) a new
specification language for custom embedded processor ISAs that captures enough
detail to guide synthesis-based compilers while still making the specification
effort tractable; (2) expanding the scope of synthesis-aided compilation by
using decomposition both of the input program and of the synthesis engine
itself; and (3) advancing the use of equality saturation for discovering
efficient data movement patterns by automatically inferring and verifying a
suitable rewrite system from a processor's ISA specification. The Ember toolkit
will use applications in computer vision and augmented reality as driving
examples to demonstrate flexibility and end-to-end
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.