* 2124996
* SCC-VO: Community First: A Smart and Connected Communities Virtual Organization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Payman Arabshahi, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 765,999.00

NSFâ€™s flagship Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) program was launched
in 2016 to support research advances in technological and social dimensions with
meaningful community engagement and collaboration. The S&amp;CC program has now
reached a point where a virtual organization (VO) is essential to further
catalyze the rapid evolution of this new cross-disciplinary field. The central
goal of this project is to accelerate convergence of diverse disciplines in the
smart and connected communities domain through the creation of a new S&amp;CC-
VO. The S&amp;CC-VO will (i) facilitate and foster interaction and exchanges
among S&amp;CC principal investigators and their teams, including community
partners; (ii) enable sharing of artifacts and knowledge generated by S&amp;CC
projects with the broader scientific and non-academic communities such as local
community stakeholders; and (iii) facilitate and foster collaboration and
information exchange between S&amp;CC researchers, community stakeholders, and
others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The S&amp;CC-VO will advance knowledge and
learning in the S&amp;CC field through partnerships spanning academia,
government, industry, and especially, community organizations. The project will
create and maintain a web-based repository and collaborative platform to
facilitate the exploration and open exchange of research results, tools,
datasets and educational materials among S&amp;CC researchers, stakeholders, and
the broader community. To increase access to discoveries, the virtual
organization will allow curating content with shared taxonomies so critical
data, tools, and discoveries can be found from traditionally separated domains.
Active resources will allow easy access to explore datasets, toolchains, and
research artifacts for experts and non-experts alike. Actionable information
will be made accessible by building out features in a configurable, as-needed
basis, by moderating content, and by ultimately keeping the VO as an impactful
community driven organization subject to community evaluation, feedback, and
review. Outreach activities for academic, government, industry, non-profits, and
other stakeholders will be facilitated within the S&amp;CC-VO and through
community engagement sessions. The S&amp;CC Community Forum at the annual
S&amp;CC PI Meeting, and CPS-IoT Week further create opportunities for
matchmaking and mechanisms for engagement along both technological and social
dimensions. The S&amp;CC-VO will become a highly effective tool for broadening
participation of diverse and vulnerable communities, grass-roots organizations,
and volunteer groups in research programs. Opening up and enabling access to
research topics, teaming opportunities, datasets, toolchains, and other research
artifacts eliminates the high threshold to entering the research field, improves
equity by open access, and enables the formation of competitive projects in
areas that need S&amp;CC results the most.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.