* 2124532
* GOALI: Exploring In Situ Nanoparticle Synthesis and Redistribution during Solidification of Metal Matrix Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Stephen Udvardy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

Automotive and aerospace industries require lightweight, high strength materials
to reduce the weight of the machines that move people and goods while
maintaining their integrity. Aluminum alloys meet this need because of their
high strength-to-weight ratio. The incorporation of nanosized particles in
aluminum makes it stronger and more stable at elevated temperatures. These
improvements can only be achieved if the nanoparticles do not agglomerate and
are uniformly distributed in the aluminum matrix. This Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award aims to provide the fundamental
knowledge needed to control the redistribution of particles without
agglomeration. By watching the solidification process as it unfolds in real-
time, quantifying the motion of the nanoparticles, and developing predictive
models, the researchers plan to achieve new understanding on the processing
conditions that favor a uniform particle distribution. The research results
enable industry to scale-up metal matrix nanocomposite processing to commercial
size castings. In addition, stronger and lighter materials enable greater fuel
economy. These factors benefit U.S. economy and society. Students gain from
collaboration with industry partners on the team. Outreach activities engage
female and under-represented minority students in materials research, processing
and manufacturing. Industry collaborator North American Die Casting Association
disseminates the results to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal matrix
nanocomposites (MMNCs) offer light-weighting, improved strength, wear
resistance, and high temperature stability compared to microcomposites and
monolithic alloys. However, only with a homogeneous distribution of
nanoparticles can the enhanced mechanical properties of MMNCs be fully realized.
During solidification of MMNCs, the particles near the freezing front may be
pushed or engulfed, thus impacting the final distribution of nanoparticles in
the as-solidified microstructure. This project develops a comprehensive
understanding of the redistribution of particles during solidification,
specifically the interrelationships between particle size, fluid flow, and
solidification front velocity and morphology. For this purpose, the team bridges
emergent research in melt processing, real-time metrology, and phase field
simulation to study in situ nanoparticle synthesis from polymer precursors and
their redistribution during solidification of metal matrix nanocomposites. The
team studies MMNC samples with a range of particle sizes and shapes provided by
industry collaborator Eck Industries; visualizes the interactions between the
nanoparticles and the solidification front in these samples via real-time X-ray
imaging experiments; and conducts phase field simulations using the experimental
data as input to yield detailed insights on the particle pushing-engulfment
transition. This integrated effort helps to establish a morphological phase
diagram, ultimately enabling precise control of the as solidified microstructure
of MMNCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.