* 2124295
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Resilient AI Network (RAIN) for next-generation manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* James Watkins, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 07/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

There is an increasing digital divide making it difficult for small and medium
manufacturers to be globally competitive. Although they are the lifeblood of
well-paying jobs in rural communities, many small and medium manufacturers
throughout the U.S. do not have access to the large datasets needed to train
classical artificial intelligence / machine learning (AI/ML) algorithms.
Progress in the U.S. is currently hampered by this digital-divide as well as a
fragmented ecosystem that obviates rapid scale-up. Unfortunately, the rigidity
of this system provides little safety net, as shown during the COVID-19 pandemic
and the massive electricity blackout in Texas. This planning grant will help
develop a nationwide engineering center that is trusted and empowered by
industry partners of all sizes. The vision of the proposed Resilient AI Network
(RAIN) for next-generation manufacturing ERC is to empower U.S. manufacturers to
increase resiliency and international competitiveness by successfully adopting
privacy-preserving, scalable, certify-as-you-build AI/ML practices to erase the
digital-divide and accrue the benefit of economy-of-scale without
centralization. This new manufacturing framework/paradigm based on the
fundamental reimagination of AI/ML techniques will empower U.S. manufacturers of
all sizes to lead among global competitors. The planning grant will help foster
the partnership with community leaders, K-12 and colleges to develop a plan to
attract a new diverse engineering workforce gaining insights from AI and data
analytic tools and equipped to bring new products to the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RAIN will enable distributed edge-AI tools
integrating inline imaging, sound, vibration, and multi-sensor analytics. This
can significantly improve manufacturing quality control, and machine-up time in
many industries. AI-commons optimizing privacy-utility tradeoffs for industry
cooperatives will be studied. Human-centered design is essential for resilient
and agile manufacturing as new products or changes in supply-chain introduce new
conditions requiring human input. The RAIN team brings together experts from AI
and computer systems, human-centered design, policy, privacy, and engineering
education as well as those with extensive experience in manufacturing scale up,
testbeds, and life-cycle environmental and economic analysis. A key focus of
this planning grant will be bolstering RAIN’s partnerships, resources, and
support among our broad range of stakeholders. A central goal will be enhancing
RAIN’s industry partnerships, which require a trusting relationship since our
vision is high risk but with a high reward. With this planning grant, RAIN will
expand our number of trusted industry partnerships through three key methods:
(1) sharing capacity-building and value creation responsibilities among all our
university partners by expanding existing industry-university relationships
through networking that brings together stakeholders; (2) cultivating new
relationships with small and medium manufacturers; and (3) hosting workshops
with appropriate stakeholders to gain buy-in from manufacturers to issues of
intellectual properties (IP), secure a common platform, and promote workforce
development opportunities. RAIN will broaden its activities by developing plans
for recruiting and accessing an educated, diverse workforce, as well as
promoting training opportunities for current employees within our manufacturing
demonstration facilities. RAIN will be implementing a comprehensive plan for
promoting a diverse and inclusive team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.