* 2124858
* SCC-PG: SmartCurb: Building Smart Urban Curb Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Shigang Chen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,999.00

U.S. cities are witnessing an era of transformative innovations in electric
vehicles (EVs), autonomous vehicles, on-vehicle electronics, Global Position
System, mobile devices, digital maps, and numerous apps that assist driving and
parking. However, the advance in curb environments where vehicles operate has
not kept pace. Curb environments serve as a unique nexus that connects on-road
traffic and pedestrian sidewalks across urban communities, but are burdened in
urban cores due to space competition for pick-ups and drop-offs, freight
loading, EVs charging, bicycle, and scooter parking. This NSF Smart &amp;
Connected Community planning grant studies curbside environments at the downtown
and University of Florida (UF) campus communities in the City of Gainesville,
Florida. It focuses on how to integrate vehicles, people, mobile devices,
physical and cyber infrastructures to coordinate curb space uses. Collectively,
these innovations will maximize equitable and convenient access while minimizing
greenhouse gas emissions for healthy and sustainable communities, relieving
congestion at curb spaces, and boosting livability for community residents. The
project explores important, emerging challenges faced by cities across America.
The knowledge learned will be shared with local communities, who will benefit in
the long term, to prepare city curbs for future burgeoning technology and
mobility innovations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to understand curb
space uses of urban communities and to develop strategic management to adapt
increasingly diverse and conflicting curb space uses in response to emerging
vehicular technologies and mobility innovations. Several key interdisciplinary
research questions are addressed, including (i) how sensor data from curb
environments, vehicles, and human mobile devices can be collected, curated, and
correlated jointly by separate transportation and parking management entities?
(ii) how to design, plan, and manage curb environments to address congestion,
safety, and accessibility issues collectively across cyberinfrastructure in the
urban communities? (iii) how to precisely predict the evolvement of curb uses
across time and space in the future? (iv) how to creatively coordinate various
curb uses in real time? (v) what are the potential privacy issues to vehicles
and people at curb environments when surveillance, sensing, and data analyses
are performed, and how to design innovative technologies to mitigate privacy
threats? The project team will form novel research problems from socio-technical
perspectives in the context of campus-downtown settings, develop academic and
community partnerships with the necessary knowledge to address the problems, and
prepare testbed “Smart Curb” environments to be included in a future SCC-IRG
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.