* 2124984
* Collaborative Research: Responsible Engineering across Cultures: Investigating the Effects of Culture and Education on Ethical Reasoning and Dispositions of Engineering Students
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Qin Zhu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2026
* USD 404,205.00

Responsible Engineering Across Cultures: Investigating the Effects of Culture
and Education on Ethical Reasoning and Dispositions of Engineering
Students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering is more cross-cultural and
international than ever before, resulting in potential disagreements about
(in)appropriate courses of action, which can impede engineering work. Despite
high rates of international enrollment and an increased focus on global
dimensions of engineering in US programs, ethical issues arising from global
engineering have been insufficiently addressed. To address these issues, this
project will assess the impact of culture and education on ethics among
engineering students in North America, Europe, and Asia. Understanding if and
how diverse cultural backgrounds and educational experiences affect professional
decision-making and collaborations requires empirical investigation, to develop
training that addresses the kinds of challenges engineering students,
practitioners, programs, and organizations will increasingly encounter in the
globalized world. This project will be beneficial for training the next
generation of engineers who are competent in working professionally and
ethically in the global context and are responsive to the value of diversity in
quality and sustainable engineering work. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to identify educational interventions with the greatest effects
on ethical reasoning and dispositions of engineering students, whether these
effects differ among cultural and national groups, and if/how to modify these
interventions to respond effectively to cultural and national differences. To do
so, researchers from Colorado School of Mines, University of Pittsburgh, Delft
University of Technology, and Shanghai Jiao Tong University will implement
mixed-method, quasi-experimental, longitudinal, and cross-sectional research to:
(1) determine the effects of culture and foreign language on the ethical
perspectives of first-year engineering students; (2) assess the relative effects
of culture and education on these perspectives over four years; (3) use
engineering ethics assessment tools across cultures and countries to examine
their cross-cultural validity. Findings from this project will be essential to
develop educational interventions that effectively respond to the globalized
environments of contemporary engineering practice. They will also contribute to
the development of more inclusive engineering education, by identifying
perspectives potentially marginalized in the reigning paradigms. Finally, this
project has implications for the development of responsible research education
at the graduate level. Despite the fact graduate student bodies in STEM fields
have become increasingly international, limited work has focused on developing
culturally responsive ethics curricula for graduate students from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.