* 2124790
* Collaborative Research: Hominoid origins in a unique paleocommunity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Patricia Princehouse, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,384.00

This project advances knowledge about a crucial time in primate evolution when
the ancestors of apes and humans are thought to have first diverged from other
primate lines. A team of experts in paleoanthropology, paleontology and geology
are conducting excavations and analyzing fossils and paleoenvironmental data
from a fossil-bearing site in order to better understand the environmental
context for primate adaptations and ecological diversity. The project offers
invaluable research and training opportunities to scientists and students,
including individuals from groups underrepresented in STEM, and provides
opportunities for science outreach about human origins and climate change with
local communities and the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extraordinary
new fossil primate site provides an opportunity to obtain new data related to
the origins of the hominoids during the Oligocene. The primary objective of the
project is to characterize the species diversity and paleoenvironmental context
for the site. The central hypothesis is that the earliest stem hominoids arose
within unique ecological communities that were very unlike those of the later
Miocene hominoid radiations. The team of paleoanthropologists, geologists, and
paleontologists carry out this work through additional fieldwork and analysis of
the hundreds of fossils and geological samples already obtained. The goals are
three-fold: (1) characterize the paleobiological disparity between hominoids and
cercopithecoids in the mid-Oligocene by analyzing functional disparity; (2)
build out a robust geologic framework that integrates current and future fossil
localities into a well constrained chronology; and (3) characterize the
mammalian community diversity by contextualizing its taxonomic, functional, and
phylogenetic composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.