* 2124002
* SCH: Enhanced detection of impending problem behavior in people with intellectual and developmental disabilities through multimodal sensing and machine learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Nilanjan Sarkar, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,103,997.00

Children with Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities (IDD) are at increased
risk of showing “problem behavior” that place them at risk of getting hurt,
removed from the classroom, or hospitalized. Approximately 1 in 6 children and
adolescents in the United States are diagnosed with IDD and half of them
experience some form of problem behavior. Therapists trained in Applied Behavior
Analysis, or ABA, can help determine why problem behavior happens and how to
prevent it. These therapists watch children, try to evoke problem behaviors by
changing a child’s environment, then try things that might change behavior, and
see if the behavioral data changes. Because problem behavior can be triggered
during this process, this strategy sometimes put them or their patient at risk.
It also takes a lot of time. Wearable technology and advanced computational
strategies could help increase the safety and helpfulness of strategies to
prevent problem behavior. Specifically, small sensors worn in clothing or on the
wrist could provide data about a child’s body, or “physiological responses,”
like heart rate or sweat. Machine learning can then be used to determine what
combination of body signals imply a problem behavior is about to happen. This
project has two stages. In the first stage, the team will design new sensors
that detect biological signals such as sweating, motion, and heart rate. The
team will then measure how well these sensors work. This includes asking people
with IDD what they think about the sensors. Based on that input, the team will
change the sensors and then use them in a larger study. The goal is to test
whether the system can predict problem behavior, how well it works when used in
the real-world with real therapists, and what users think about the system.
Results of this study will help researchers and practitioners understand if this
kind of wearable technology is helpful and acceptable as part of supporting
people with problem behavior and IDD. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes to integrate transdisciplinary expertise in cutting-edge
wearable sensing, affective computing, machine learning, and behavioral and
clinical science to enhance and transform existing models of behavioral
intervention for problem behaviors in children and adolescents with IDD. Problem
behaviors, including self-injury, aggression, property destruction, and
wandering not only can cause serious injury or death, but also interfere with
the ability to participate in school, home, and other community settings. In the
context of problem behavior and IDD, this project will fundamentally advance the
scientific and the technological methodologies of multimodal wearable sensing-
based design of predictive machine learning models. The two research thrusts
are: (1) Design of multimodal sensor framework; and 2) Real-time precursor
prediction. Across these thrusts, the project will make fundamental scientific
and technological advancements in: (i) A low-power, open-access, user-centric
wearable sensor framework that can sense physiological responses and gestures to
be used for affective computing; and (ii) A set of novel, clinically grounded,
semi-supervised machine learning models to predict problem behavior that can be
used by behavioral interventionists in real-time. An important novelty of this
research that separates it from existing work in the field is that the team
proposes to address the detection of problem behavior through its precursors,
rather than the behaviors themselves, with the goal of increasing the safety and
efficiency of sessions. These scientific and technological advancements will be
created within a state-of-the-art clinical and behavioral science framework. The
proposed work will foster interdisciplinary research in engineering and health
sciences. The team proposes a number of outreach and educational activities that
will have broader impact in STEM education: i) involve individuals with ASD
directly in the research through the Frist Center for Autism &amp; Innovation’s
Neurodiversity Corps; ii) provide interdisciplinary training opportunities for
early stage clinical scientists; iii) provide research opportunity to high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students; iv) provide research opportunity
to high school teachers; v) bring research into the classroom; and vi)
disseminate the research through seminars, presentation, and publication.
Emphasis will be placed on recruiting candidates from minority and
underrepresented groups to improve diversity in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.