* 2124687
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: International Type II: Assessing the Role of Social Innovation for Resilience in Global Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Eric Welch, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2024
* USD 131,961.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;A paramount scientific challenge is to learn from the COVID-19
pandemic crisis given the uncertainty of the timing and permanent effects on
international research. Even in the unlikely event of pandemic eradication, new
work patterns may replace pre-pandemic norms and practices of international
collaboration. While technological solutions matter for facilitating adaptation
to the pandemic, social innovations at the individual and team levels are
equally or more important for generating resilience within scientific teams
during the protracted crisis. The future of international collaborative work can
benefit from an understanding of how scientists have shown team resilience
during this time, strengthening teams, and meaningfully transferring knowledge.
In an increasingly globalized scientific landscape the grand policy question is
how to internationalize scientific teams while, at the same time, responding to
local demands. Our goal is to characterize different forms of social innovation
in international collaborative work during the pandemic, while taking into
account local contexts, opportunities, and institutional
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the topic
of global social innovation in science capacity in the face of the COVID-19
pandemic by examining three intertwining features of the social dynamics of
international collaborative teams: Social innovation, Adaptation and Resilience,
and Learning and Transferability. Social innovation refers to new and different
ways of modifying individual and group behavior within the context of team
science. The research design builds on interdisciplinary knowledge about
individual conduct and group dynamics within the context of teams. The project
involves a series of case studies focused around distinct internationally
collaborative teams across four countries: Austria, Latvia, Spain and the United
States. Data are drawn from bibliometric data sources, semi-structured
interviews, focus groups, and a survey of researchers. Teams include new
emergent collaborations that establish norms for interaction during the
pandemic, or adaptive collaborations that adjust to the barriers and constraints
of the pandemic. A novel methodological approach to identifying teams for case
study is employed by implementing advanced computing techniques in a new and
robust bibliometric dataset, complemented by other snowball sampling techniques.
The project will conclude with an international workshop to share and
disseminate findings that further international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.