* 2124525
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Tangram: Scaling into the Exascale Era with Reconfigurable Aggregated "Virtual Chips"
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Bayaner Arigong, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 108,000.00

The design of general-purpose processors is reaching a performance bottleneck
due to the limitations in technology scaling. Chiplet-based systems offer a
promising solution by integrating small dies (chiplets) inside one package.
Chiplets also enable heterogeneous integration of discrete chip architectures,
such as CPUs, GPUs, DSPs, and FPGAs. However, the design of high-performance
chiplet-based systems faces serious challenges: inter-chiplet communication is a
critical bottleneck; resource needs to be efficiently shared among the chiplets
to improve the performance-cost ratio; power and thermal management need to be
optimized for better in-package integration. Consequently, such designs need to
take a more holistic approach, and investigations are needed on the cross-
cutting issues across the processing nodes, storage and interconnection fabric.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes to build "virtual chips" from
heterogeneous aggregated chiplets, so that the system can not only reap the
performance benefit of a monolithic super chip but also break the scalability
bottleneck. A major outcome of the project will be a set of optimization methods
that enable the design of a reconfigurable architecture, leveraging a hybrid
wireless interconnection to seamlessly connect the computing and memory
components. To this end, the research goals include: (1) design of
reconfigurable architectures to break the chiplet boundaries for efficient
resource sharing; (2) development of models to quantify interactions between the
applications and hardware resources for fast design-space exploration; (3)
design of a hybrid wireless interconnection network to seamlessly bridge the
physical gaps between chiplets and enable reconfigurable architectures through
the flexibility of wireless networks; and (4) design of novel wireless antennas
to improve energy and thermal efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research bridges the gap between multiple layers of the design stack: hardware
architectures, networks and devices. Due to its cross-cutting nature, the
proposed research has the potential to transform the design of high-performance,
energy-efficient and cost-effective systems that are able to meet the demand of
emerging applications with growing bandwidth and performance needs. The
educational contributions of this research include integrating research with
teaching and training, design of tutorials and workshops focusing on the
training of future engineers, and interaction with industry to accelerate
technology transfer. Through the outreach activities as part of the proposed
project, more undergraduate and minority students will be attracted to this
field of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.