* 2124822
* Workshop: Funding, Financing and Emerging Technologies in Infrastructure; New York, New York, December 2021; and London, England, Summer 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Rick Geddes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 10/31/2022
* USD 99,892.00

This award supports a series of workshops that will assemble experts from
infrastructureâ€™s economic, financial, social, technology and engineering
dimensions to explore how a multi-disciplinary approach can address serious
financial and policy challenges endemic to infrastructure delivery. The
Workshops will review innovative approaches to the funding and financing of
infrastructure based on lessons from both domestic and international case
studies. To this end, participants will strive to advance and integrate
scientific understanding in three main subareas: (i) mechanisms and evaluation
metrics toward the funding and financing of infrastructure; (ii) the social
equity aspects of those funding and financing mechanisms; (iii) emerging
technologies that facilitate and support public-private partnerships in
infrastructure development, construction, operation and maintenance. The
workshops will facilitate collaboration and continuing interaction between the
US and UK, and also create a forum for students to participate and establish
contacts with participants having strong national and international reputations,
building a pipeline of next-generation experts in infrastructure planning and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will be organized by research teams
from the UK and US. On the US side, the Cornell University Program in
Infrastructure Policy (CPIP) will be the focal point of workshop organization.
CPIP will partner with the Urban Tech Hub at the Jacobs Technion-Cornell
Institute, on the Cornell Tech campus in New York City. On the UK side, the
workshop is organized by the Centre for Smart Infrastructure and Construction
(CSIC) based at the University of Cambridge. The workshop participants will
generate a research agenda with the vision and expertise to transform
infrastructure. It will establish an intellectual basis for public and private
investments as well as the adoption of new and proven technologies to improve
infrastructure delivery. Example of the key questions to be discussed at the
workshop are (1) How are financial risks shared in public-private partnerships
and what types of funding mechanisms are more resilient in that shared-risk
context? (2) What are key factors driving widespread participation in public-
private partnerships, and how can funding mechanisms be designed to ensure that
disadvantaged communities are not left out? (3) How can alternative delivery
models and approaches, such as public-private partnerships, value capture, and
asset recycling, be wisely designed while considering the increased attention on
ensuring universal access, resilience, and emerging transformational
infrastructure technologies? The result will be to guide and sustain impactful
research for years to come, setting the stage for greater cross-country, cross-
disciplinary, and cross-sectoral research and infrastructure
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.