* 2124830
* Developing Institutional Responsible Conduct of Research Training Plans that Reflect Best Practices
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Dena Plemmons, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 07/31/2022
* USD 46,807.00

The workshop is designed to identify and share best practices in the
implementation of robust educational programming for responsible and ethical
conduct of research [RECR]. The workshop will focus on the achievements of peer
model institutions and identify best practices for successful implementation at
other institutions. By directly addressing common hurdles that institutions face
and building on what has been successful, this workshop will produce a roadmap
of resources and guidelines which can be widely distributed and adopted, as
appropriate, across a diversity of other institutions. The outcomes will
directly contribute to enriching RECR programming and program implementation to
support the progress of science by fostering responsible and ethical research.
Educators, university administrators, industry and scientific communities will
be interested the outcomes of this workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
will focus on 1) examining the elements that need to be addressed in an
institutional RECR plan, 2) identifying the key challenges and barriers to the
creation and implementation of such programming, and 3) exploring strategies for
how those challenges might be met. This goal of this workshop is to create a
framework of best practices for implementing robust RECR programs based on peer
models of excellence. Representatives from institutions will share opportunities
and challenges in the implementation of RECR programming on their campuses to
find common ground for further exploration of best practices. The workshop will
collect and disseminate practical advice for RECR implementation that is not
otherwise currently addressed/available. The outcomes will directly contribute
to knowledge of RECR implementation by providing institutions with key factors
and considerations for improving their RECR programs based on peer examples of
success, something that has not been previously collected or
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.