* 2124866
* A Digital Nudge: Assessing the Impact of an Immutable Records Data Management Platform on Student Researcher Ethics
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Ryan Watkins, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 12/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Many research projects involve scientists working in multiple research groups at
several laboratories or universities. Quite often, project participants do not
have access to the complete chain of data and information for a given project.
As a result, mistakes and improper research conduct cannot be discovered and
corrected by the project participants. Even if access to the data in the chain
of events is provided, there may be lingering doubts about the veracity of the
data, i.e., fears regarding the possibility that data was fabricated, improperly
altered or that important information about data acquisition and processing
steps were omitted. The consequence is that poor or misleading scientific
studies can result in erroneous conclusions. Several recommendations have been
promulgated to address the credibility of government-funded scientific studies,
such as the report regarding reproducibility and replicability issued by the
National Economic Council. The need to improve the credibility and replicability
of scientific studies is closely related to the need for improving compliance
with ethics and responsible research standards in academic and other research
institutions. The objective of this project is to study and evaluate the
potential of a Data Management Platform (DMP) for immutable research records to
improve the ethics surrounding scientific research cultures and norms in
university laboratory settings. Understanding how the management of immutable
research records impacts the performance of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) student researchers is a crucial determinant to the success
of the innovation challenge. An intermediate goal of this examination is to
determine the extent to which the knowledge of a DMP enhances research
standards. The overarching hypothesis is that a DMP will not only improve
compliance with ethical and responsible conduct of research, it will also
enhance the behaviors of student researchers toward the importance of data
ethics as well as supplement ethics training they might receive through their
institution. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a prototype for
maintaining the transparency of research data through two mechanisms: (a)
embedding technology into the scientific workflow (a ‘digital nudge’) in order
to create cultures of ethically responsible research, and (b) evaluating the
importance of mandatory compliance with research integrity standards. Evaluating
the efficacy of the intervening DMP will be in the context of research-active
environments such that STEM student researchers will be able to manage project
originality and advances with time stamps on project data, ideas and
discoveries. This evaluation will contribute to the theory of how motivation and
social cognition influence behaviors toward research conduct. The dynamic
updating of research progress with immutable recording in real-time will be with
encrypted access and validation. In a comparative approach, surveys will be
deployed to collect data from student researchers prior to and after the use of
the DMP. The research design will employ a novel repeated analysis of variance
(ANOVA) approach on the treatment group before and after the DMP intervention
over two or more different time periods. The transformative agenda is the design
to evaluate the extent to which immutable research records influence research
innovation with pathways to new frontiers on ethics and responsible conduct of
research. A key impact of this project will be ethics infused with equity
because the absence of identity distinctions at the human-technology interface
offers an avenue to not only accommodate student and faculty STEM researchers,
but also proffers an inclusive ecosystem for equitable research responsibility
and progress. Thus, this project will recruit underrepresented minorities and
woman-identifying students in the study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.