* 2124141
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Symbiotic Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Wenzhen Yuan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,481.00

This Planning Grant will support efforts to create a new NSF Engineering
Research Center on Symbiotic Systems. Symbiotic Systems are machines and robotic
systems that assist humans with daily tasks in a harmonious manner that does not
create unnecessary physical impediments, constraints, or distractions. The
purpose of these systems is to improve productivity, mobility, health, and
quality of life through the aid of assistive robotics and wearable technologies.
An important scientific challenge in developing these technologies is to
introduce new types of soft material motors, sensors, and electronics that mimic
the properties of natural muscle, skin, and nervous tissue. Another challenge is
to introduce integrated material architectures, models, and data-driven
algorithms that allow these robotic systems to provide active support and motor
assistance only when intended by the human user. Beyond its potential impact on
human well-being, the intelligent symbiotic systems developed by this center
also represent opportunities for interdisciplinary scientific education and
workforce training as well as broadened inclusion. Such opportunities leverage
the rich diversity of stakeholders, societal endeavors, and technical
disciplines that relate to human-centered wearable
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ERC will establish a scientific
and technological framework for creating assistive robotic technologies that
will be personalized, dynamically responsive and reconfigurable, and compatible
with daily human activity outside of a laboratory or clinical setting. Such
systems will be “symbiotic,” engaging in intimate physical interaction with the
body and assisting in rehabilitation, neuromuscular function, disease screening
and diagnostics, and therapy without impairing natural bodily function. This
will be achieved through the use of soft material architectures that allow for
selective mechanical impedance and actuation along with shape reconfigurability
and reversible stiffness tuning. Achieving these goals requires the convergence
of several disciplines, including materials science and engineering, robotics,
medicine, biomechanics, mechanical engineering, human-computer interaction,
electrical and computer engineering, human psychology, and artificial
intelligence. During the planning phase of this effort, we will pursue the
following objectives: (i) Identify and engage with stakeholders in research,
healthcare, industry, and society to refine the ERC vision; (ii) Establish
partnerships to create a diverse, interdisciplinary team of experts to tackle
the various facets of scientific challenges and discovery, technology
translation, and societal impact; and (iii) Create a framework for workforce
training, entrepreneurial activity, and educational outreach to ensure
comprehensive and sustainable impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.