* 2124633
* U.S. Culture Collection Network 2.0:  The Next Generation Research Coordination Network for Ex Situ Microbial Germplasm Collections.
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kellye Eversole, INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE FOR PHYTOBIOMES RESEARCH, INC.
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2027
* USD 140,580.00

Biological collections play an essential role in life science research. They
support fundamental scientific studies at the molecular, cellular, organismal
and community level, as well as applied research to improve health, food
security, and energy production. The United States Culture Collection Network
(USCCN) was established in 2012, engaging the culture collection community to
facilitate the safe and responsible utilization of microbial resources through
meetings and webinars, publications and position papers, and site visits to
learn about collection practices. This award will establish the USCCN 2.0, a new
Research Coordination Network (RCN) that will expand the scope and reach of the
USCCN. The USCCN 2.0 will increase the reach of scientists across multiple
disciplines to work toward addressing challenges and needs shared by all
microbial collection managers and users. USCCN 2.0 will expand the network and
identify additional collections through an online registry accessible by the
broader scientific community. These data will increase the breadth and utility
of living plant microbial collections for multi-disciplinary scientific
projects. USCCN 2.0 will encourage participation of underrepresented communities
and will promote a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce, increase
partnerships between industry, academia, and other entities, and enhance
infrastructure for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of USCCN 2.0 are to increase participation in the network; enhance links
with other collection registries and repositories; and to cultivate the long-
term sustainability of participating collections and the USCCN. The work on each
of these aims will be underpinned by complementing and synergizing activities
with other projects, networks, organizations, and societies globally. A top
priority of the RCN is a collection registry to provide the necessary foundation
to accomplish the network’s activities, and to ensure inclusivity of small
research collections. Through a professionally administered process, a more
extensive and diverse community of U.S. collections will be identified and
brought into the network. Additional priorities include increasing participation
and coordination among U.S. and international biological collections
organizations; establishing linkages between current and future collection
registries, repositories, and other forms of collected data; and building direct
ties to stakeholders – those who develop or utilize microbes, microbial
collections, and other microbial resources for research or industrial purposes –
to build a network of networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.