* 2124179
* NCS-FO: Empowering Data-Driven Hypothesis Generation for Scalable Connectomics Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hanspeter Pfister, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The ﬁeld of connectomics aims to reconstruct the wiring diagram of neurons and
synapses at nanometer resolution to enable new insights into the workings of the
brain. Recent advances in image acquisition and machine learning methods have
yielded complete reconstructions of neural connectivity of large tissue samples.
The investigators have one such dataset from a human brain tissue consisting of
two petabytes of raw image data from electron microscopy. In collaboration with
Google, they have spent the past two years reconstructing the complete 3D shape
of about 50,000 cells, including 18,000 neurons, and identifying about 133
million synapses. This data will enable them to examine the prototypes of
various neuron shapes, the correlations between these neuron types and their
internal structures, and how they are connected to each other. This will be done
in a dataset that is orders of magnitude larger than previous brain samples.
These dense brain reconstruction results come with complex spatial and network
structures, posing new challenges for scientists who wish to explore and analyze
such data. The proposed program will develop a scalable visual analytics system
that allows researchers to generate novel data-driven hypotheses from the
petabyte-scale connectomics data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project
aims to build novel visual analytics tools and efﬁcient deep learning methods to
advance the ﬁeld of connectomics. Project deliverables will empower
neuroscientists to analyze large brain networks in a one cubic millimeter volume
containing tens of thousands of neurons and hundreds of millions of synaptic
connections. The project aims to analyze the brain at the neuron level and
network level. It will investigate scalable visual analytics methods for the
comparison of morphological features and analysis of spatial distributions and
proximity of cell organelles. The network-level analysis will be supported, from
local synaptic network motifs to larger-scale connectivity patterns of different
cortical layers. A tightly integrated targeted proofreading/analysis loop will
be developed, using techniques from machine learning for automatic error
suggestion and guidance of the proofreading process to obtain high-quality data
with minimal user interaction. To support intuitive hypothesis generation based
on the data-driven visual analysis, an intuitive domain-speciﬁc query framework
and investigate methods for automatic user guidance and hypothesis suggestion
will be designed. Ultimately, this project will provide data and analysis tools
to develop new theories of how the brain works.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by the
Directorates for Biology (BIO), Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social,
Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.