* 2124376
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Agricultural and Rural Connectivity (ARC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Eylem Ekici, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eighty percent of the 24 million Americans
without high-speed Internet live in rural areas. This lack of broadband access
severely limits the quality of life for rural residents and is a major source
for potential global conflict over agricultural resources in the face of climate
change and a growing population. The urban-rural digital divide is generally
attributed to a lack of economic incentives resulting from low population
density. As the population density in rural communities decreases, the density
of connected devices in agricultural fields steadily increases. As a result, we
are likely witnessing the evolution of a new digital gap between farm fields and
rural towns exacerbated by outdated policy that prevents the realization of
novel network architectures. As such, existing agricultural practices are
limited (and therefore defined) by previous connectivity technologies, which
were not designed for the unique characteristics of agricultural fields. The
Engineering Research Center for Agricultural and Rural Connectivity (ARC) will
unite engineers, computer scientists, agronomists and animal scientists, social
scientists, education/outreach specialists, industry, municipalities, government
agencies, and community stakeholders to bridge the urban/rural digital divide.
ARC will engineer novel rural connectivity architectures and solutions, enhance
rural communities' digital literacy to expand and utilize connectivity
solutions, broaden participation of underserved and underrepresented rural
communities in engineering research and development, and leverage a blossoming
Silicon Prairie ecosystem to connect research solutions with commercial
enterprises. ARC will advance fundamental research, provide workforce training,
and foster the innovation ecosystem required to answer the connectivity
challenges of rural communities. Its diverse team will identify economic drivers
and policy constraints for rural connectivity (society), associated rural use
cases (scientific community), and corresponding connectivity requirements
(engineering community) â€“ all toward solving critical real-world problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ARC recognizes that no single existing wireless technology
can solve rural broadband connectivity issues. Therefore, this planning grant
brings together diverse expertise in agricultural Internet of Things, vehicular
networking, UAV communications, agricultural robotics, and precision livestock
management to focus on five primary convergent research directions:&lt;br/&gt;1)
Farm as an Anchor Institution architectures that combine expertise in wireless
technologies, economics, telecom law, and agricultural sciences to enable
breakthroughs in rural agriculture, health, education, and infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;2) Agile technology transfer for continuous integration of new
communication solutions in parallel with research and development. &lt;br/&gt;3)
Agricultural robotics to replace high-horse-power tractors and boost
productivity while reducing negative impacts on the environment. &lt;br/&gt;4)
Mobile connectivity architectures for extensive high-speed coverage.
&lt;br/&gt;5) Precision animal management to aid animal caretaking with the
timing of animal marketing and improve detection of animal health and well-being
concerns. &lt;br/&gt;By bridging the digital divide, these convergent research
directions will stimulate rural prosperity and improve food security by
connecting rural towns, schools, hospitals, farm fields, ranches, roads, and
bridges. The ARC team will use the ERC planning grant to complete a series of
activities designed to enhance partnerships with native-serving institutions and
rural community colleges (DCI), develop a comprehensive engineering workforce
development program (EWD), maintain and expand the existing stakeholder
community toward a diverse and inclusive vision (DCI/IE/EWD), crystallize
convergent research directions (CR), and enhance the ARC leadership and core
team (CR/DCI/EWD/IE). To this end, a series of retreats will bring together a
diverse stakeholder community from public, private, and academic sectors, along
with an engineering student body, all of whom will be integrated into the
center's activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.