* 2124180
* Understanding microbial control of dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) in the ocean: New amino acid tracers for bacterial source and cycling of refractory DON
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew McCarthy, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 849,702.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most mysterious
components of the global nitrogen cycle is the vast amount of dissolved
nitrogen-containing organic molecules (dissolved organic nitrogen, or “DON”)
which exist in the ocean. The identities of these molecules are mostly unknown,
but they are important in the ocean’s biological and geochemical cycles, because
they persist for many thousands of years and in many cases these molecules are
too complex for simple organisms at the base of the food web to use. This
project will develop new chemical tools to understand this material, including
stable isotopes, radioisotopes, and the chirality of amino acids. Together, this
new set of tracers will focus on the roles of marine bacteria as sources and
creators of persistent dissolved organic nitrogen. The project will begin in the
laboratory, where the team will first grow large cultures of ocean algae.
Natural ocean bacteria will then be added, and investigators will measure the
proposed new tracers in dissolved nitrogen materials created. These data will
reveal how the proposed tracers work: how and when they are produced, if they
map to bacterial sources, and how bacterial degradation may affect them. The
investigators will then conduct a series of field expeditions at contrasting
sites on the California coast and in the central Pacific Ocean, isolating large
amounts of natural dissolved organic nitrogen. The team will apply what has been
learned in the lab together with the first ever radiocarbon measurements on
individual tracer molecules. Together these activities will open a new window
into sources and cycling of the critical marine dissolved organic nitrogen
material. The project will support the education, training, and career
development of a graduate student, a postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups, who will be recruited to receive real
hands-on laboratory and field experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop three new amino acid–based proxies for bacterial source and
alteration of dissolved organic nitrogen: 1) compound-specific stable carbon
isotope fingerprinting of essential amino acids, 2) a recently discovered suite
of new D-amino acids found to be concentrated in radiocarbon-old, low molecular
weight DON material, and 3) individual amino acid radiocarbon values for key
hypothesized tracer amino acids. The investigators hypothesize that refractory
ocean DON is essentially completely microbial, however that it is also far more
diverse than has previously been understood in terms of its sources, molecular
composition, and especially cycling rates. In particular, the project will test
the idea of completely different DON origin, molecular composition, and cycling
rates in high vs. low molecular weight DON fractions throughout the water
column. Autotrophic and heterotrophic bacterial growth / degradation experiments
will test assumptions about the sources and degradation- related changes to D/L
and stable carbon isotope signatures. Synoptically making these measurements
together with individual amino acid radiocarbon values in high productivity
coastal vs. oligotrophic Pacific gyre DON in both surface and deep ocean will
allow understanding the diversity of DON bacterial sources, degradation impacts,
and N-specific cycling rates for the first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.