* 2124939
* Collaborative Research: Paleoenvironmental and paleoecological responses to climate change in the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Judy Diamond, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 337,950.00

Scientific evidence shows that Earth’s climate is rapidly changing.
Understanding how ecosystems respond to climate change will provide critical
information to help human populations adjust to these changes. This study will
examine how ancient mammal communities responded to an episode of global warming
about fifty-three million years ago. Data about diet, locomotor activity, and
body size will be gathered from fossils in U.S. museums to reconstruct the
ecosystems in which these mammals lived. Chemical signatures from fossil teeth
will be used to interpret ancient environments. Assessing how these communities
responded to habitat change through this interval of warming climate will
provide useful data for understanding how modern ecosystems may respond to
future warming. This project will include collaboration with communities that
have been historically underrepresented in the sciences by providing sets of
books about climate change and the fossil record to libraries in Native American
and rural communities. The project also includes development of a year-long
course for underserved high school students and professional development for New
York City public school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus
on warming at the onset of the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum when average
temperatures increased by about 5°C over an interval of 200,000 to 300,000
years. Paleoenvironments will be reconstructed by developing a model using
stable carbon isotopes in mammal teeth. Paleoecological interpretations will be
made with morphometric analyses based in part on digitized scans of bones and
teeth. Fossils will be sourced from two Wyoming basins (Wind River and Bighorn)
to test for geographic differences in paleoecology and paleoenvironments.
Changes in paleoecology and mammalian community structure will be analyzed with
quantitative methods, and compared to ecological changes during an earlier
interval of warming climate at the Paleocene-Eocene boundary. This will provide
a test of whether mammalian response to climate occurred in a consistent,
repeatable fashion. Project outreach includes collaborations with libraries in
Tribal and rural communities, providing books and materials on climate change.
It also includes a course for urban high school students and professional
development for science teachers. All outreach components are based on research
on effective practices, and incorporate formative evaluative
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.