* 2124704
* III: Small: Temporal Relational Triples, or TR2: A Novel Data and Knowledge System for Temporal and Streaming Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tingjian Ge, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 09/30/2024
* USD 471,340.00

This project extends a multiple-data-stream system with the state-of-the-art
relational machine learning, and achieves a holistic data and knowledge system
for comprehensive querying, interpretation, inference, event monitoring, and
actions. In a real application scenario, temporal and streaming data typically
come from multiple sources including mobile, IoT devices and sensors, system
logs, Internet data, high-volume feeds from social networks, among others.
Different data sources may have data in different formats, structures, and
schema, and a significant challenge in integrating such diverse sources of data
streams is the interoperability. This project will devise an approach called
temporal relational triples (TR2), which extends triple stores that have unique
strengths in data integration and interoperability with coding storage and
knowledge components. TR2 is a pioneering attempt to bridge the gap between
neural embedding based modern AI that has proven to be effective and
comprehensive and interpretable analytics of temporal and streaming data. The
results will impact domains that make use of temporal and streaming data, such
as healthcare, banking and finance, cybersecurity, social network analysis,
mobile and pervasive computing, and sensor monitoring for various
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TR2 aims to advance the frontier of data stream
and temporal data management systems by leveraging modern relational machine
learning and representation learning. It is also a generalization and extension
of previous work in triple stores, functional dependency, active databases,
complex event processing, predictive queries, and rule/knowledge systems, in a
novel holistic data system, all tightly woven through the threads of coding and
relational machine learning. TR2 incorporates the following four key new ideas:
(1) flexible integration of streams from multiple sources as temporal relational
triples, (2) introducing coding using relational machine learning as a major
component of TR2, and extending data with predicted counterparts for
comprehensive queries, (3) learning higher-level rules and knowledge with
coding, which are useful for interpretation and probabilistic inference, and (4)
extracting higher-level states and patterns for continuously monitoring the
imminence of critical events and for choosing actions. The project ingrains
neural network embedding into a universal treatment of entity-relationship view
of data and information model central to data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.