* 2124202
* Structural adaptation of vertebrate endonuclease G for 5-hydroxymethylcytosine recognition and function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* John Gravdahl, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 07/31/2024
* USD 709,607.00

The information encoded in DNA bases and various chemical modifications of the
bases define different types of living organisms. The primary goal of this
project is to determine how a DNA modification specific to vertebrate animals is
used by a protein also found specifically in vertebrates, including humans, to
help repair damaged DNA. The knowledge gained from this study will improve
understanding of how seemingly small changes in the amino acid sequence of a
protein through evolution can affect its structure and result in dramatic
differences in how vertebrate versus invertebrate animals read and utilize
modifications in their DNAs. In addition, this project will bring together
biochemistry and art faculty to develop a new course on “Visual Communication in
Science.” This course will engage science and art students in a collaborative
environment to learn how to present scientific concepts and data in ways that
are visually impactful and scientifically accurate and informative for a variety
of audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5-Hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) is an
epigenetic modification that serves multiple functions in vertebrates but has no
known function in invertebrates. The project aims to determine how mouse
endonuclease G (mEndoG) cleaves DNA at 5hmC sites in the context of four-
stranded Holliday junctions to promote site-specific recombination. The roles of
specific amino acids will be studied by swapping sequences between mEndoG and a
worm homolog that does not cleave 5hmC-modified DNA. The resulting enzymes will
be structurally characterized by X-ray crystallography and their functions
examined by DNA binding and cleavage assays to test whether the sequence swaps
result in corresponding changes in structures and functions between the
vertebrate and invertebrate homologs. Finally, junction recognition by mEndoG
will be studied to determine whether this enzyme is a 5hmC-specific junction
resolvase or whether junctions mimic another substrate, such as the cross-over
structures of DNA entering and exiting a nucleosome particle in chromatin
fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.