* 2124312
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for the Next-generation Enterprise to Engineer Diagnostics at Low-cost for the home-Ecosystem (NEEDLE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kimani Toussaint, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The health-care supply chain is fragile, as illustrated by the breakdowns in
care delivery experienced during COVID-19. While advances in digital health have
the potential to improve the health-services supply chain, the range of
available state-of-the-art health-sensor technologies for at-home patient use is
minimal and severely limited in accuracy. Moreover, these sensors are limited to
a common group of measures such as body temperature, blood pressure, weight,
oxygen saturation, and glucose monitoring. Therefore, the technology does not
exist to provide health practitioners with sufficient, remote patient diagnostic
information that reasonably approximates data obtained from traditional in-
person medical visits. This grant seeks to map out a vision for an Engineering
Research Center (ERC) that will produce the next generation of home-health
diagnostic technologies to effectively bring the medical lab and physician to
the home. Thus, the project will launch specialized workshops to explore the
feasibility of an NSF ERC for the Next-generation Enterprise to Engineer
Diagnostics at Low-cost for the home-Ecosystem (NEEDLE). Outcomes from the
workshops will be broadly disseminated via publications and conference
presentations. Finally, the involvement of a postdoctoral researcher to help
coordinate activities, as well as a seed competition for student teams
collaborating across three universities, provides an opportunity to train the
next generation of innovators in technology development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
NEEDLE ERC could spawn the development of technologies that could significantly
strengthen the health-services supply chain by directly connecting every home to
the digital-health ecosystem. This ERC will focus on creating a diagnostic
toolkit that will provide every home with the medical equivalent of the physical
exam (e.g., inspection, palpation, and percussion) and standard lab tests (e.g.,
complete blood count, basic metabolic, and viral load) found at a medical
facility, along with an AI-enabled data infrastructure for personalized health
monitoring. The highly integrated and complex nature of the problem requires a
convergence of community stakeholders, and experts in areas such as biomaterial
sensors, non-invasive biological imaging, micro/nanofabrication, spectroscopy,
data science, micro/nanoelectronics, and advanced signal processing. The
proposed planning-grant will introduce workshops aimed at bringing these
communities together to produce a needs-assessment report and a 10-year roadmap
of the scientific and technological breakthroughs needed to develop home
diagnostics. These activities will enable the formulation of a deployment
strategy to mitigate any barriers to accessibility for developed technologies,
including cost and general usability, especially for populations experiencing
potential age-related cognitive decline, populations without “digital native”
experience with technology, or those living in zones with inadequate Wi-Fi
accessibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the ERC
Program/EEC Division of the Engineering Directorate and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.