* 2124495
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: High-Impact Multiscale Physicochemical Advancements for the Prediction of Transient Dermal Absorption
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Gerald Kasting, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 294,692.00

This GOALI project will advance the science of skin penetration and, in
particular, the prediction of transient dermal absorption for human exposure to
chemical agents, whether they are beneficial or hazardous. The former case
includes topical drugs and cosmetic benefit agents; the latter includes
aerosolized pesticides encountered by farm workers, airborne pollutants
encountered by residents in city environments, and trace chemicals encountered
by workers in settings such as concrete and metal working. Modeling and
simulation has recently become a component of the US FDAâ€™s approval process for
generic drug products, which reduces cost and accelerates approval of these
products. Global regulatory agencies including US NIOSH have increasingly
included modeling as part of their dermal risk assessment process. This project
will address two vexing issues plaguing predictions of transient skin
absorption: (1) slowly reversible binding of chemicals to skin proteins
(especially keratin) complicates the uptake and release profiles of many
commonly-encountered chemicals including topical steroids; and (2) gradual
dissolution of solid particles deposited on the skin surface or within hair
follicles affects absorption of drugs from gels and ointments and dermal
absorption of heavy metals leached from airborne pollutants. Results from the
project will be incorporated into a publicly available, spreadsheet-based skin
penetration program and also a state-of-the-art simulation code for dermal
absorption maintained by the GOALI industrial partner, Procter &amp; Gamble.
Parts of the research will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate
training in the cosmetic science area at the University of Cincinnati. The
educational plan also specifically targets undergraduate research experiences
for undergraduate women and underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails: (1) experimental
measurement and broad parameterization of rate constants for keratin binding in
the outer skin barrier cells (corneocytes) supported by a rigorous theoretical
framework; and (2) development and implementation of interfacial mass transport
relationships capable of representing absorption of precipitated solids on the
skin. Intellectual merit lies in the identification and resolution of important
strategic gaps in the current understanding of dermal absorption, which block
progress in these two areas involving multiphase and multiscale transport. A
central element of the project is multiscale modeling based on two stages of
rigorous coarse graining - from ultrastructural (intracellular) to microscopic
(intercellular) to macroscopic (tissue) scales - in resolving slow reversible
binding of permeating molecules to stratum corneum keratin, which dramatically
affects transport rates. The project will define the reservoir capacity of the
skin barrier in theoretically rigorous and pragmatically useful terms, which
will open the way to a broad-spectrum ability to accurately predict transient
dermal absorption outcomes. The detailed treatment of dissolution-limited
absorption will finally resolve dramatically different absorption rates observed
for ostensibly similar molecules that have long baffled pharmaceutical and
consumer product development efforts and risk assessments related to chemical
exposures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.