* 2124014
* Collaborative Research: Particle scavenging controls on trace element distributions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jefferson Moore, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 735,683.00

Nearly all of the photosynthesis in the oceans is carried out by microscopic,
single-cell “plants” called phytoplankton. The photosynthesis by phytoplankton
forms the base of the food chain, supporting almost all life in the oceans. One
of the key nutrients that phytoplankton need to grow is iron, which is often in
short supply in ocean surface waters and can limit the phytoplankton growth and
photosynthesis rates. This project seeks to better understand the cycling of
iron in the oceans, focusing on the removal of iron from the oceans by particle
scavenging. Particle scavenging refers to dissolved iron sticking to large,
sinking particles, which ultimately remove iron to the sediments. This modeling
study will simulate iron cycling in the oceans, along with the cycling of
several different metal isotopes, that are also subject to removal by particles
scavenging, but do not act as nutrients for phytoplankton. This will help
separate the biological influences on iron distributions, from the impacts of
particle scavenging and other physical processes. The external sources of iron
to the oceans coming from dust deposition, ocean sediments, river runoff, and
the seafloor hydrothermal vents will also be evaluated. This work is important
for understanding how climate change and human activities will modify the iron
cycle and impact biogeochemistry in the future. This project will also support
two graduate students and an undergraduate student researcher.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The model simulations will be evaluated and constrained with
extensive comparisons to field measurements of iron and the other key variables.
The GEOTRACES program has recently produced a global set of ship measurement
surveys, with full depth measures of numerous isotopes and trace elements,
including iron, that are ideal for evaluating the prognostic ocean model
(Community Earth System Model (CESM) ocean component). The GEOTRACES datasets
are also ideal for incorporation into our offline, inverse model (OCIM,
CYCLOCIM) which can interpret the still sparse observations in the context of 3D
circulation and biogeochemistry. The simulations of 230Th, 232Th, 231Pa, and Fe
cycling will improve mechanistic understanding of particle scavenging and place
stronger observational constraints on the patterns and magnitude of external
lithogenic sources of trace elements to the oceans. Results and products from
this study, with the ocean model component of the Community Earth System Model
(CESM), will be incorporated into future versions of CESM, to improve the
current ability to predict how ocean biogeochemistry and marine ecosystems will
respond to climate change along a range of potential future climate
trajectories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.