* 2124105
* Chemoenzymatic construction of a programmable synthetic endoplasmic reticulum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2026
* Michael Burkart, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

A fundamental goal in synthetic biology is to build artificial cells that have
many of the basic functions of natural cells, as well as specific functions that
are useful in medicine and biotechnology. This project focuses on building a
synthetic subcellular compartment or organelle known as the endoplasmic
reticulum, since this organelle would provide artificial cells with essential
functions such as the ability to synthesize proteins, process proteins and
synthesize lipids. Broader outcomes of this proposal include graduate student
training and educating the public about designer cell organelles and their
importance through outreach lectures to high school students and the general
public. Bioethical consequences related to generating a synthetic organelle will
also be considered.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To generate a synthetic ER de novo,
the chemoenzymatic synthesis of non-canonical phospholipids will be combined
with recombinant proteins that influence membrane curvature and fusion. The
proposed program to generate and study a synthetic ER will follow these three
closely coupled objectives: (1) chemical and enzymatic steps will be developed
to generate a library of non-canonical phospholipid membranes similar to the
lipid membranes of living cells. (2) the minimal lipid composition requirements
necessary for generating an ER-like reticulated membrane architecture will be
explored. The interactions of these lipids with membrane-bound proteins that
play a critical role in membrane curvature stabilization and fusion respectively
in yeast, will be monitored. Furthermore, different combinations of non-
canonical lipids will be tested to explore how biomimetic phospholipids affect
membrane properties; and (3) the differences in properties between natural and
synthetic spherical, tubular, and reticular membrane geometries will be
investigated. In particular, the kinetics of internalized reactions,
reversibility of the steady-state morphology, mixing of lipids in reticular
membranes, diffusion through the lumen of the synthetic ER, and network
connectivity will be characterized. To equip the synthetic ER with
functionality, a simple post-translational network by localizing two
fluorescently labeled glycosyltransferases will be developed within a synthetic
reticular network for post-translational modification of a protein substrate.
The proposed studies will establish the groundwork for developing artificial
reticulated organelles that mimic the ER and facilitate future programmable
functions such as post-translational modification, biomolecular trafficking,
sensing, and protein turnover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.