* 2124455
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Wildfire Hazard Resilience and Risk Engineering (WiRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Susan Cutter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 05/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Wildfires keep scorching the physical, social, economic, and health fabric of
our communities, leaving us overwhelmed with the devastating scale and
consequences of this perennial hazard. The recent wildfire events have been a
clarion call for advancing, developing, and implementing science-based
technological solutions to enhance wildfire resilience. Unfortunately, the
present research and educational efforts in relevant fields are currently
siloed—both in terms of organizational and scientific domain focus—, demanding
the integration of the presently disconnected efforts into a unified whole.
Inspired by decades of experience in natural hazard engineering, the proposed
ERC on Wildfire hazard Resilience and risk Engineering (WiRE) aims to advance
and converge the scientific domains to develop a paradigm-shifting risk- and
resilience-based research infrastructure for wildfire hazard engineering.
Through engaging stakeholder communities, problem owners, and industry partners,
we envision the transformation of integrated scientific research into practical
engineering-based technology solutions for wildfire hazard prediction,
mitigation, response, and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ERC vision requires
a convergence of thinking modalities from risk engineering and resilience, fire
science, climate science, natural science, computation and data science, sensors
and robotics, system engineering, social science, environmental science,
economics and finance, and public health and policy disciplines. Primary
deliverables of the ERC will be (i) a convergent engineering solution framework
for wildfire risk management and resilience, (ii) new scientific knowledge in
domain-specific focus areas towards the convergent whole, (iii) an integrated
open-source computational platform for multi-scale probabilistic wild- and WUI-
fire risk management, and (iv) development of new wildfire engineering
curriculum and educational plans to cross-train the future workforce. The first
step towards this vision is to delineate the coupled attributes of the wildfire
hazard domain and orchestrate the multi-disciplinary thinking modalities towards
a convergent solution, which the present ERC planning grant will
address.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant will engage a broad network of
academics and stakeholders to advance our understanding of the multi-dimensional
problem domain of wildfire hazards. The convergence of multi-disciplinary domain
knowledge will illuminate the roadmap for scientific research advancement,
technology development, user-centric implementation, and educational plan, which
will be executed through the WiRE ERC. The objectives of this planning grant are
to (i) identify pain points, research gaps, and solution needs, (ii) develop a
collaborative and convergent scientific research and technology development
plan, (iii) recruit domain leaders and form subdomain research squads, and (iv)
outreach and onboard broader stakeholder community. The planning grant execution
starts with a series of joint research-stakeholder virtual coffee calls to
identify the problem domain. The outcome of the virtual calls will be a draft of
research and technology development plans. We will then organize a workshop with
breakout sessions to converge and refine the research and technology development
plans and identify key domain leaders and stakeholder liaisons. The workshop
will be followed by a series of joint domain-leader virtual coffee-hour calls to
craft the ERC scope and action plan. Finally, the ERC proposal will be created
through several write-shops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.