* 2124877
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Identifying the Dielectric Properties of Liquid-Metal Polymer Composites to Ensure the Dielectric Integrity of Deformable Electronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Amanda Koh, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 198,324.00

Nontechnical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Bioelectronics and soft robotics require
electronic materials that function while being stretched or compressed.
Composites of soft polymers with metals that are liquid at, or near, room
temperature, have recently gained extensive attention from the scientific
community for such applications. They have shown impressive performance as
stretchable electronic components and for physiological sensors. Prior research
has focused on expanding the promise of these composite materials, but
relatively little has been done to understand their electrical aging and failure
mechanisms. The lack of knowledge could lead to premature failure and may put
future technologies utilizing liquid metal polymer composites at risk. This
project combines experimental analysis and numerical modeling to identify the
key characteristics that lead to the unique electrical performance and breakdown
of liquid metal polymer composites. With the understanding established through
this project, future soft electronic technologies can be developed with
application-specific performance and long-term durability in mind. The novel
findings of this project will be utilized to promote underrepresented minority
student intertest in STEM. Building on the existing relationship with the Girl
Scouts and by taking advantage of the world-class high-voltage lab, a series of
polymer, capacitor, and high voltage-related experiments will be designed for
young women and K-12 students. Furthermore, short courses on high-voltage
engineering and dielectrics with use cases on deformable dielectrics will be
delivered at community colleges to promote university recruitment in Alabama and
Mississippi. This project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic
Materials (EPM) program of the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Metals
and Metallic Nanostructures (MMN) program of DMR.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Liquid metal polymer composites (LMPCs)
have shown impressive performance by simultaneously providing high dielectric
permittivity and low modulus. While previous research has demonstrated that the
composite formulation can be tuned to address the specific needs of soft
capacitor and tensile or pressure sensors, little work has focused on the long-
term effects of using LMPCs as dielectrics. Specifically, the dielectric aging
and failure mechanisms of LMPCs that vary by application-specific electrical
stresses are currently unknown. The goal of this project is taking an integrated
experimental and modeling approach to develop a first principles understanding
of the key parameters governing the dielectric performance and aging mechanism
of LMPCs. The team will investigate the effects of droplet shape, size, loading,
composition, mechanical loading, and voltage stress type on the permittivity,
dissipation factor, partial discharge inception voltage, and dielectric strength
of LMPCs. A finite element analysis simulation environment will be used to model
trends in permittivity and variation of the dielectric strength. The outcomes of
this project will enable future deformable technologies that take advantage of
LMPCs to not only tailor formulations to a specific application, but also
maximize device lifetime and dielectric integrity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.