* 2124827
* I-Corps: A Simulation Tool to Teach Cybersecurity and Digital Fluency
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Kambiz Ghazinour, SUNY CANTON
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software platform for K-12 that helps to educate young and
vulnerable students about cyber threats. In addition, the proposed platform is
designed to assist K-12 teachers to effectively communicate safe practices with
students where the teachers do not have previous professional training in this
area. This proposed tool for cyber security education also may provide value to
a wide range of institutions within academia, industry, and government.
Providing knowledge and training in a secure environment may increase the
effectiveness of cybersecurity and digital fluency practices. By empowering and
educating the next generation workforce, it may be possible to mitigate
potential threats to businesses and institutions that are at risk of security
breaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an education software platform that teaches cyber security awareness and
protects against cyber threats aimed at K-12 students. One of the most prevalent
of threats is identity theft, which affects millions of individuals annually,
costing billions of dollars and emotional distress to the victims. Given the
proliferation of social media, privacy education is essential to address the
potential dangers facing the billions of people using these platforms. Because
social media users span a wide range of demographics, there has been a lack of
effective education methods and standards for increasing user awareness. The
proposed technology uses a simple, cost-effective tool to teach cybersecurity
and digital fluency practices regardless of user age and background. The
technology is designed to provide value to all individuals with a social media
presence, where account hacking or identity theft could have financial and/or
social ramifications. The proposed initial target - the primary education system
- may provide the greatest value to society as children are just entering the
social media environment and are thought to be the most vulnerable and in need
of privacy education. Early privacy awareness education may provide a solid
foundation to successfully navigate current and future cybersecurity
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.