* 2124100
* Collaborative Research: FMitF: Track-1: Correctness at Both Ends: Rigorous ML Meets Efficient Sparse Implementations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aditya Bhaskara, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 09/30/2024
* USD 482,000.00

This project called CBE (correctness at both ends) addresses the growing concern
that on one hand systems based on deep neural networks (DNNs) are playing an
increasing role in critical applications, but on the other hand these systems
can do significant damage if they harbor software defects. These defects go
beyond the familiar logic bugs, including also semantic bugs such as
misclassifying medical images. Traditionally, attempts to make DNNs more
efficient by sparsifying them have often resulted in increased levels of
semantic bugs. The project's novelties are its integrated approach to sparsify
networks while preserving semantic correctness as well as helping eliminate
logic bugs. The project's impacts are in making DNNs energy-efficient,
permitting their deployment in edge devices, while also helping eliminate their
defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CBE employs a knowledge-distillation paradigm
wherein a sparsified network is trained by imitating the parent network's
classification behavior. Sparsification steps that meet higher level semantic
objectives may unfortunately lead to an inefficient sparse implementation --
especially in newly introduced GPUs for which hand-tuned sparse libraries are
unavailable. The CBE project supports the developers of such libraries by also
providing low-level implementation verification tools. The investigators are
domain experts in DNN semantics and optimization, and also in
software&lt;br/&gt;verification. Their three-year collaborative research project
is taking case studies of DNNs from critical areas such as medical imaging, and
showing how DNNs can be sparsifed to ensure correctness at both ends. The main
impact of this project is to develop prototype software tools that can help spur
further research and technology development. Another major impact is the
training of students who will fill critical roles in the fast-growing area of
deployable machine-learning systems where talent shortage can cripple the
nation's economy and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.