* 2124922
* MIM: Using Machine Learning and a Model Watershed to Understand how Microbes Govern Food Web Architecture and Efficiency
* BIO,EF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Anthony Amend, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,499,432.00

Rules that govern food web dynamics, which describe how energy is transferred
among different living organisms, are among the most universal laws of nature.
Consumption up a food-chain is an inherently inefficient process that leads to
significant and predictable losses through waste and respiration. This rule of
life can be leveraged to model how biological diversity will respond to
phenomena such as sudden changes in the environment or species extinctions, and
is an important constraint in food production. Until now, food web research has
largely focused on the interactions among plants and animals, however, microbes
living in and on larger organisms play essential roles in their health, rates of
reproduction, and ability to digest food. This project will examine how
symbiotic microbes govern the efficiency of food webs, and how aspects of food
webs, in turn, determine the composition of symbiotic microbes. The predictive
insight gained from this research may make it possible to manipulate the
composition of microbes to create more efficient food webs that can potentially
guide restoration of degraded habitats, capture carbon, and increase yield in
agriculture, aquaculture and biofuels systems. In addition, workforce
development and outreach to under-represented groups including native Hawaiians
and Pacific Islanders, will be performed. Postdoctoral researchers, graduate
students and undergraduates will be trained in microbiome science through
research experiences and class modules. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
addresses the hypothesis that canonical laws governing the transfer of energy
among trophic levels of food webs both constrain, and are constrained by the
composition and function of microbiomes. Leveraging a model Hawaiian watershed
system, this project aims to understand how host-associated microbiomes govern
food chain efficiency and how, in turn, trophic position within a food web
affects the microbiome. The project will develop transfer learning approaches
based on machine-learning tools trained on higher-feature datasets (such as the
Earth Microbiome Project) to enable robust predictions of the interaction
between food chain length, trophic position and microbiome diversity. Two
tractable experimental systems will be used to explore these predictions. The
first is a simple four-tiered bromeliad food web mesocosm where the number and
of trophic levels is controlled. The second consists of a three-tiered mosquito
microcosm in which all microbial symbionts are isolated and manipulated.
Associated genomic data will enable a mechanistic understanding of how
microbiomes influence food web efficiency and function by altering metabolic
capacity of hosts. In summary, this project will employ food web theory to
explain and predict the interactions between the microbiome, the host, and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Understanding Rules of Life: Microbiome Interactions and Mechanisms Program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.