* 2124313
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Multi-task, Multi-Scale Point Processes for Modeling Infectious Disease Threats
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2023
* George Mohler, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 04/30/2023
* USD 149,992.00

This project develops new point-process based algorithms for modeling and
forecasting event-level infectious disease data, such as when an epidemic is
emerging, near elimination, or for contact tracing. The methods developed
through the project have applications to source detection of super-spreader
events, identification of case importation trends, and providing better risk
assessments of emerging epidemics and future pandemics. The methods developed
through the project also have applications beyond epidemiology where point
processes are used, including social media, seismology, and criminology. The
project will train two PhD students in statistics and computer science. This
project will support one graduate student per year at each university for each
of the three years of the grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new
point-process based algorithms for solving four important tasks that arise in
modeling infectious disease threats over a range of temporal and spatial scales:
1) incorporating realistic transmission and reporting mechanisms, 2) link
prediction in the transmission graph connecting separate geographic regions
under surveillance, 3) source detection of the spatial-temporal and network
locations of super-spreader events, and 4) modeling emerging disease epidemics
over timescales of decades and spatial scales of the globe. Expectation
maximization algorithms are derived to infer a probabilistic branching structure
that can be used for contact tracing and source detection. Multivariate Hawkes
processes are formulated to infer cross-transmission across separate geographic
regions, where new theory and methods are needed to handle reproduction above
the critical threshold of 1. Point process analogs to compartmental models are
developed through the project that can incorporate realistic transmission and
under-reporting mechanisms (e.g. exposure period, asymptomatic cases) to improve
forecasts and prevalence estimation. Finally, this project develops models of
emerging epidemic events for determining the separability of disease parameters
vs. space and time and assessing the risk that an outbreak will become a
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.