* 2124650
* Experimental investigation of deep fluids of the lower crust and subduction zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Craig Manning, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2025
* USD 445,482.00

Among the greatest geologic hazards we face as a society are the large
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions associated with subduction zones, where two
tectonic plates collide. Both hazard types are strongly influenced by the
presence and movement of water-rich fluids at great depth. In the case of
subduction-zone earthquakes, such fluids are liberated as rocks descend into the
mantle, and they substantially modify the rates and style of the deformation
that give rise to earthquakes. In the case of volcanic eruptions, the same
fluids operate in the overriding plate to trigger melting, and ultimately to
power massive, explosive eruptions at the surface. Yet the chemical properties
of these fluids and the melts they produce remains very poorly understood,
chiefly because the conditions at which they must be studied are quite
challenging to generate in the laboratory. This project will exploit methods
developed at UCLA for characterizing these deep fluids and melts, and how they
dissolve and transport matter. The data and new models will provide
unprecedented insights into the chemistry and properties of these deep fluids
that figure so prominently in the hazards posed by subduction systems. Two
graduate students will be mentored as part of this project, and the experimental
laboratory at UCLA will host hands-on demonstrations during large UCLA science
outreach events. All results of this work will be available to the rest of the
geoscience community via incorporation in the Library for Experimental Phase
Relations. The data and models produced will serve an international community of
scientists investigating the role of fluids in high pressure geologic and
geophysical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will involve three
experimental investigations aimed at improving understanding of deep fluid-rock
interaction. The first will be built around the system NaAlSi3O8-H2O, with and
without NaCl. This chemical system is a useful model for silicate-rich fluids at
depth. Experiments will focus on phase relations and thermodynamic data,
allowing characterization of the stability of these fluids, their coexisting
minerals, and what triggers their unmixing into separate fluids. The aim of the
second project is to provide experimental constraints on the individual
dissolved species found in deep fluids. We will use a new experimental design to
investigate a wide compositional range of mineral saturation surfaces. The
project will focus on dissolved Mg and Ca, which are most relevant to fluid-
mantle interactions in subduction zones. The third project will combine
experiments with new modeling to investigate aqueous silica in salty deep
fluids. A modified model of quartz solubility based the densities of H2O-NaCl
solutions will be extended to additional salt-H2O systems. New experiments on
quartz solubility will be conducted along H2O-salt binaries, and in the
H2O-NaCl-CO2 ternary. The data offers robust constraints on solution density,
and can be used to constrain equations of state of salt-bearing deep fluids
ranging from simple binaries with H2O, to more complex multicomponent systems
expected in the deep crust and upper mantle. The end result of these
investigations will be new data and models available to the broader geoscience
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.