* 2124224
* Collaborative Research: SCH: Using Multi-Stage Learning to Prioritize Mental Health Risk Using Evidence from Speech and Text
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Deanna Kelly, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2025
* USD 315,565.00

According to the World Health Organization and the Global Burden of Disease 2010
studies, mental&lt;br/&gt;health issues are a top contributor to global disease
and a leading cause of disability worldwide. It is an&lt;br/&gt;enormous
personal and societal toll. Mental illness is a common precursor to suicide, and
suicidality is&lt;br/&gt;the second leading cause of death in youth and young
adults between 10 and 34 years of age. In&lt;br/&gt;economic terms, mental
illness exceeds cardiovascular diseases in the projected 2011-2030 cost
of&lt;br/&gt;noncommunicable diseases (USD16.3T worldwide). Complicating this
picture further is the fact that&lt;br/&gt;mental healthcare is desperately
resource-limited, and clinicians treating people for mental
health&lt;br/&gt;problems operate in a vacuum between visits. This project
proposes a fundamental shift in how machine&lt;br/&gt;learning is used to
approach the problem of mental health detection and monitoring, with a
technological&lt;br/&gt;investigation that brings together speech analysis,
language analysis, and machine learning research,&lt;br/&gt;informed by deep
clinical experience and expertise and fueled by ethically collected data. A
tiered multiarmed&lt;br/&gt;bandit framework will be used to provide a highly
flexible way to evaluate multiple kinds of&lt;br/&gt;evidence in settings where
there can be diverse methods for assessment that vary in cost and the value
of&lt;br/&gt;the information they provide. As such, it is an excellent fit for
the real-world problem of mental health&lt;br/&gt;assessment in resource-limited
settings. Investigations will include simulations of patient
monitoring&lt;br/&gt;between clinical visits that will be informed by realistic,
real-world assumptions and team members'&lt;br/&gt;clinical experience treating
patients with schizophrenia, depression, and risk of
suicide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the core of this project's technical approach
is the recognition that the “multi-armed bandit” problem in&lt;br/&gt;machine
learning is a good fit for the real-world scenario that mental health providers
face when&lt;br/&gt;monitoring a population of patients in treatment: what is
the best way to allocate limited resources among&lt;br/&gt;competing choices,
given only limited information? This project develops a tiered multi-armed
bandit&lt;br/&gt;formulation, where a succession of stages is applied to a
population of patients in order to best allocate&lt;br/&gt;different types of
resources, each with different per-patient impact but also cost. Conceptually,
tiered&lt;br/&gt;approaches are familiar in current medical practice. For
example, patient contact typically progresses&lt;br/&gt;from a receptionist, to
a nurse or intake coordinator, perhaps to a certified nurse practitioner, to a
primary&lt;br/&gt;care doctor, ultimately to a specialist---each step involving
corresponding increases in both the cost of the&lt;br/&gt;professional involved
and their degree of expertise. The tiered multi-armed bandit model developed
by&lt;br/&gt;this award includes concerns of stochastic and adverse selection,
where patients at one tier do not proceed&lt;br/&gt;deterministically to the
next, even when explicitly selected. It also incorporates complex (e.g., non-
linear&lt;br/&gt;such as monotone submodular) objective functions that better
capture within-cohort interactions. One&lt;br/&gt;core strength of the tiered
model is that it provides a flexible way to incorporate multiple kinds
of&lt;br/&gt;evaluative evidence in settings where there can be diverse methods
for assessment that vary in cost and&lt;br/&gt;the value of the information they
provide. Toward that end, this project also includes both text
analysis&lt;br/&gt;and speech analysis components that make use of ethically
collected language and speech data and&lt;br/&gt;clinically validated
assessments of mental condition. Techniques developed under this award,
while&lt;br/&gt;directly motivated by and tested in the mental health setting,
will be useful in other settings in both&lt;br/&gt;healthcare as well as other
settings where a "prioritization funnel" is in play, including talent sourcing
and&lt;br/&gt;customer acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.