* 2124777
* Neural basis of olfactory behaviors in a unique mosquito-flower association
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Jeffrey Riffell, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

For all animals, the ability to process biologically important odors – often
mixtures of tens to hundreds of volatile chemicals – has a fundamental
consequence for essential behaviors. This is especially true for mosquitoes,
which decide upon whom to bite, and thereby transmit pathogens of disease, based
on subtle differences in a person’s scent. Despite the acceptance of the
importance of odor mixtures for mosquito behavior, we know remarkably little
about how this information is processed in the brain (e.g., in the antennal lobe
[AL] of insects). This project will use an interdisciplinary approach that
combines novel chemical analytical and electrophysiological techniques with
simultaneous imaging of brain responses from behaving animals (Aedes aegypti
mosquitoes) to understand how complex odors are processed to mediate feeding
behavior. Furthermore, the project will also introduce students to
interdisciplinary research, as well as broadly communicate the importance of
insect neurobiology to high school students. High School students in the Upward
Bound Program will be involved in the project through summer seminars and lab
experiences. Finally, the project includes the training of undergraduates,
graduate students and postdoctoral associates and helps prepare them for
independent scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Olfactory cues play
fundamental roles in mediating mosquito behavior. This project will: (1)
characterize the scent composition of diverse flower species visited by
mosquitoes and identify key odorants in the scents that activate conserved
odorant receptors; (2) determine the coding mechanism(s) by which the scents
from these diverse flowers activate the same glomerular circuit(s) to elicit
behavior; and (3) use simultaneous calcium imaging in the AL of transgenic
mosquitoes while the mosquito flies in place. The project will thus advance
understanding of olfactory control of behavior of insect vectors of human
disease, like mosquitoes, that impact more than a billion people per year with
disease pathogens. Furthermore, the project has extensive educational and
training activities for students from high school to postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.