* 2124564
* A Multifaceted Examination of the Development and Application of Antidiscrimination Laws
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jean Rahier, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 379,500.00

This study aims to develop research models to comparatively analyze the
effectiveness of anti-discrimination laws, with a specific focus on the justice
and legal educational systems within which those laws are developed. The project
advances sociolegal, sociological, and legal anthropological understandings of
the impact of protective legal frameworks on society. The project provides
funding for the training of one graduate student in methods of empirical,
scientific data collection and analysis, and broadens the participation of
underrepresented groups in scientific research. Project data and findings would
be disseminated to improve the public's understanding of science and the
scientific method, which would include the creation of a workshop for K-12
teachers, and the development of specific course modules for university and law
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers plan to explore how anti-
discrimination laws have been developed and applied and understood within the
justice and legal educational systems. The project examine the application of
two categories of legal instruments: articles of constitutions and special laws
that recognize and protect identity-based collective rights over resources and
cultural practices; and constitutional articles and special laws that have for
objective to protect against discrimination. The research takes place in a
juridical context where these laws are institutionalized, and incorporated into
legal curricula. The project asks how laws are designed and adopted; how they
are applied in the practice of the justice system; what obstacles prevent their
successful application; and more generally whether these laws have been
effective. The project combines sociolegal archival, ethnographic observational
research methods in law schools, and interviews with plaintiffs, lawyers,
prosecutors, defense attorneys and judges. This project will assess
qualitatively and quantitatively the level of knowledge the justice system
operators have about such laws; compile a detailed list of all relevant
litigations; collect the cases' archives; and interview the social actors and
justice system operators involved. The project makes critical contributions to
legal anthropology and sociolegal studies through an analysis of how knowledge
about longstanding legal protections designed to mitigate the impacts of
discrimination are produced and circulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.