* 2125183
* SCC-PG:MAPPING INSTABILITY: Building an Intelligent Community Agent Platform for Understanding the Impact of Large Scale Crisis on Small Town Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Narges Mahyar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 07/31/2023
* USD 146,941.00

The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact the built environment and communities’
lives in perceptible and imperceptible manners. Unlike big cities, where
dwelling, working, and mobility rely on large infrastructures, life in smaller
communities relies heavily on individual resources and self-sustained
structures. A vital step in responding to major crises is the timely collection
of rich data to understand the community’s issues, struggles, and needs.
However, traditional data collection methods such as public meetings are
ineffective and poorly attended by those who may have childcare or work
conflicts. Online data collection methods such as surveys broaden the outreach
and inclusivity by eliminating the need for physical presence, but they do not
always support a conversational exchange that encourages people to provide
deeper insights into their issues and needs. This project will improve civic
data collection by designing, building, and evaluating a conversational agent to
collect data about the pandemic’s impact on residents of Amherst, Holyoke, and
Pittsfield in Western Massachusett. While these communities are in close
geographic proximity, they have different demographics, economic prosperity, and
access to public services. This research facilitates identifying vulnerable,
under-served, and under-represented groups for allocation and prioritization of
resources and materials and serves as a proof of concept for addressing similar
issues for small towns across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project enables local officials to gain a rich understanding of those small
towns’ challenges in the face of the current pandemic. By using human-centered
methods, this project will build an AI-based conversational agent to collect
data about diverse aspects of communities' lives such as Dwelling,
Transportation, Work, Education, and Healthcare. This research will transform
modes of action and operation in both Computer Science and Architecture fields
in five ways: (1) Advancing the status quo of public data collection by
designing and building a community-centered conversational agent platform, (2)
Empirically addressing how various demographics interact with conversational
agents, (3) Contributing to recognition of conversational agents’ role in
gathering meaningful input from citizens, (4) Providing a rich understanding of
the impacts of the current pandemic on small-town residents’ lives that will
inform the architecture field about the effects of social, economic, and
cultural forces on the built environment and (5) Making architectural analysis
more synchronous and responsive to forces that affect
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.