* 2125234
* SCC-PG: Implementing an integrated, wireless monitoring network to enhance decision making in communities impacted by environmental and industrial change
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Yonghe Liu, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Texas coastal communities have historically been exposed to environmental
threats from natural and industrial sources. In Ingleside on the Bay (IOB), a
small, rural community situated along the shoreline of Corpus Christi Bay,
tropical storms and high rates of relative sea-level rise cause extreme and
nuisance flooding, while industrial expansion is placing stress on the
community’s way of life and the natural resources upon which it relies. Such
communities lack the comprehensive data needed to advocate for and make informed
decisions about risk reduction strategies to mitigate the impacts of industrial
growth and climate change. This proposal engages with the nonprofit Ingleside on
the Bay Coastal Watch Association (IOBCWA), community members, and governmental
representatives to assess the role of distributed, real-time sensor technology
in improving IOB’s capacity to respond to dynamic environmental conditions that
affect the quality of its air, water, and land resources. It also examines how
emerging community-based nonprofits like IOBCWA engage with diverse
organizations in response to new threats and how they can utilize environmental
sensing data in planning and advocacy efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will leverage interdisciplinary, sociotechnical methods to (1) assess the
current structure of communication and information-sharing networks related to
environmental threats and mitigation planning in IOB; (2) activate academic-
civic partnerships to deploy environmental monitoring sensors to generate a
pilot smart grid for comprehensive and timely data collection; (3) develop a
preliminary online data visualization dashboard that makes sensor data available
in real-time to the community; and (4) assess how the data and dashboard can be
utilized by residents and nonprofit organizations to inform sustainable planning
and development strategies that address industrial permitting challenges and
safeguard community and environmental well-being. To achieve the technical
objectives, this project will develop and deploy a pilot sensing network for
real-time environmental monitoring, design an online dashboard and data analysis
framework to display the collected data in real-time, and beta test the
dashboard among a diverse group of residents, community leaders, and local
stakeholders. To achieve the social science objectives, this project will apply
grounded theory to characterize the evolving role of community-based nonprofits
in networking, civic engagement, and policymaking efforts in IOB and identify
data needs that can be addressed by leveraging sensor technology to provide a
scientific basis for decision-making. Community workshops will provide
opportunities to refine the study needs and objectives, obtain feedback on the
sensor network and dashboard, and co-develop a vision for future integrative
research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.