* 2125787
* BCSER: IID: Experiences of Students with Visual Impairments with Tactile Graphics in STEM Courses: Critical Interpretative Synthesis
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Zerrin Ondin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 104,236.00

The importance of removing barriers to accessing STEM instructional materials is
paramount to broadening the representation of students with visual impairments
in STEM careers. Tactile graphics are important STEM instructional aids, but
they are often difficult to understand or have limited content compared to the
original. This project aims to conduct a synthesis of the existing body of
knowledge of student experiences with tactile graphics to develop a set of best
practices and establish baselines for future research in this field. The project
will build capacity for conducting education research through trainings in
systematic review of published literature and STEM pedagogy involving students
with visual impairments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a
base of evidence incorporating empirical data on experiences of students with
visual impairments with tactile graphics in STEM courses to inform practice and
further research. Using critical interpretive synthesis, the scope of this
project is to conduct a systematic review of literature published since 2000
that focuses on students with visual impairments at any education level,
discipline, and classroom setting. The dissemination plan aims to include peer-
reviewed journals, conference presentations, reports for practitioners, and a
project website. The project is supported through the EHR Core Research:
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is
designed to build individualsâ€™ capacity to carry out high quality fundamental
STEM education research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.