* 2125600
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Serving Households in AReas with food Insecurity with a Network for Good: SHARING
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Munindar Singh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,018,000.00

This project seeks to address hunger relief in the US by maximizing equitable
access to safe food, while considering the food preferences of food-insecure
households, and simultaneously addressing redistribution of usable food that
would otherwise be wasted. In the US, 10.5% of the households were food insecure
in 2019, and that number increased by 29% in 2020 with the spread of COVID-19,
according to the Feeding America Covid-19 impact assessment. Yet, it is
estimated that 30–40% of food supply is wasted in the US. Working with two food
banks in North Carolina and one in Alabama, each serving a range of
counties—together with their associated networks of food-insecure households,
food-secure households, other nonprofit organizations, and local businesses such
as growers, supermarkets, restaurants, and other businesses in the service
regions—the project team of academic and community partners will co-develop a
community-based socially intelligent nonprofit food rescue and distribution
infrastructure and platform to use community resources to equitably serve food-
insecure households.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project unites three aims to
develop a socially intelligent nonprofit food rescue and distribution
infrastructure to equitably serve food-insecure households by continually
learning their preferences with feedback to upstream stages of the supply chain.
Aim 1, Smart Sociotechnical Information Capturer and Predictor: Understand the
behavior of donors, beneficiaries, and volunteers by creating a socially
intelligent infrastructure that records data in real-time and learns evolving
stakeholders’ and end users’ needs, preferences, and utilization over time. Aim
2, Tactical Supply Chain Planner: Design and optimize the community food sharing
network in response to stakeholder behaviors by constructing a technology and
data-driven supply chain framework that adapts to evolving stakeholder behaviors
to best serve the hunger needs of food-insecure households within the community.
Aim 3, Real-Time, Logistics Operations Optimizer: Satisfy beneficiary needs
through communal self-renewal by connecting food-insecure households to
community-based supply options in real-time, and optimizing real-time pickup and
delivery logistics while adhering to food safety time windows. The proposed
infrastructure will facilitate more effective food distribution aimed at
reducing hunger while simultaneously enhancing
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.