* 2125350
* SCC-PG: Equitable new mobility: Community-driven mechanisms for designing and evaluating personal delivery device deployments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Patrick Carrington, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This NSF S&amp;CC planning grant contributes to the design and development of
new mobility technologies that serve city residents. New mobility technologies
are on the rise in cities across the US, with micromobility platforms and
autonomous delivery robots occupying the sidewalks of many cities. Amid the
enthusiasm around what these devices could mean for the future of transportation
and the circulation of essential goods, are concerns about who stands to benefit
from these technologies. This research focuses on producing a robust
understanding of the unintended harms these devices may introduce and, in
collaboration with community members, offer a set of potential opportunities to
support resident safety and ensure broad community
benefit&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pennsylvania recently passed state-wide legislation
classifying personal delivery devices (PDDs) as "pedestrians," bestowing them
the same legal rights as human residents. In response, Pittsburgh government
officials and residents have come together as a coalition with the aim of
developing municipal standards on current delivery devices to ensure continued
accessibility of public space, and strategies for planning proactively for
future new mobility deployments in the area. Researchers in this project have
partnered with the City of Pittsburghâ€™s Department of Mobility and
Infrastructure (DOMI) and established connections with local advocacy
organizations to develop community-driven approaches to the deployment and
governance of new mobility technologies. Extending methods of impact analysis
and equity measures, they draw insights from the actions and perspectives of
government officials and residents who are negotiating the changing shape of the
city and seeking to define community-driven technology deployments. This
planning grant lays the groundwork for a longer-term research with their
Pittsburgh partners and other cities, by developing methods and technologies for
supporting democratic processes around public PDD
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.