* 2125484
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Connecting Farming Communities for Sustainable Crop Production and Environment Using Smart Agricultural Drainage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Xiaobo Tan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,750,000.00

In the US, agricultural drainage infrastructure benefits &gt;22.6 Mha of
cropland and is valued at ~$100B. As a proportion of total croplands, drained
croplands produce a disproportionately large amount of grain but also release a
disproportionately large amount of eutrophying nutrients to aquatic ecosystems.
Drainage systems include individually-owned field drains that depend on the
function of community-owned main drains. Climate change and agricultural
intensification are causing farmers to increase the extent and intensity of
drainage leading to a pressing need to balance productivity, profitability, and
environmental quality when making drainage decisions. Further, because drainage
systems include individually-owned and community-owned drains, decision-making
involves complex techno-economic social issues together with understanding
biophysical processes and requires balancing the needs of individual farmers,
drainage communities, and surrounding regions. This project will develop an
integrated decision-making platform to facilitate community decision making for
precise prediction and management of drainage effects on water flow, crop
production, farm net returns, and nutrient loss. The platform data will be made
possible by new agricultural sensors and robots, innovations in behavioral
economics and analytics tools. Development of the drainage decision-making
platform will be guided by farmer stakeholders—including, the Iowa and Illinois
Drainage Districts Associations, a national-level agricultural drainage
management coalition, and directly with farmers—forming a continuous learning
environment across scientists and farmers that fosters adoption of new
technologies and transfer of the research process to the next generation of
scientists, engineers, and agricultural professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will build upon a suite of biophysical and social science advances in
multiple areas, including bioinspired robotic snake sensors, in-situ soil
nutrient sensors, computational modeling, and socioeconomics. The snake sensors
will navigate through agricultural drainage networks to generate a high spatial
resolution data stream about flow rates and nitrate concentrations throughout
the belowground network. The soil sensors will enable continuous monitoring of
nitrate dynamics. Process-based ecohydrological models, subsurface water
transport models, and multiple spatiotemporal sensor outputs will be integrated
to obtain high-resolution information about distributions of water and nitrate.
Biophysical scenario analyses will assist decision-making for different
agricultural management scenarios to balance resource use efficiency,
profitability, and environmental performance. Socioeconomic science innovations
will be integrated by learning how current systems are managed in the context of
various heterogeneities across individuals and drainage districts, such as
demographics, farm size, and presence of wetlands, and how new information
provided by the proposed infrastructure interacts with human incentives and
choices and consequent policy making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.