* 2125618
* Documentation of morphophonological interactions in phrasal domains: Grammatical tone, vowel harmony, and phonological agreement
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Hannah Sande, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 10/31/2022
* USD 103,211.00

Linguists estimate that over half the world's 7,000 languages are tonal, with
many of these endangered and not being acquired by children due to urbanization
and an emphasis on formal education. This project will answer some of the many
questions remaining about tone by focusing on a language displaying a rich tonal
inventory, and a typologically unexpected system of consonant patterns and vowel
harmony. These features interact in complex and poorly understood ways in
phrases and sentences. This project will describe and analyze these phenomena in
detail with a specific emphasis on word building (morphology) and sound patterns
(phonology). The project will provide new insights into many questions remaining
about tone and its scalar properties in this language, and on the behavior of
complex tonal and vowel harmony systems in morphology and syntax. The results
will be disseminated via journal articles on the descriptive and theoretical
findings, a reference grammar and archived, annotated language data. In addition
to its documentary goals, this project will support underrepresented students in
international fieldwork and language documentation training. It will enhance the
global competitiveness of the STEM workforce by fostering collaborative
international relationships as sites of student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate Guébie, an understudied endangered Kru
(Niger-Congo) language spoken in southwestern Côte d'Ivoire, as part of a
collaborative effort by by linguists at Georgetown University, linguists at
Félix Houphouët-Boigny University in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, and the Guébie
community. Kru languages in general are underdocumented, though extant work
shows that languages within the Kru family show typologically rare linguistic
properties. These include: 1) complex tonal systems with four tone heights,
where tone distinguishes both lexical and grammatical contrasts; 2) unexpected
patterning of implosive consonants with liquid consonants like rather than
stops; 3) large vowel inventories with multiple types of vowel harmony, often
conditioned by morphosyntactic environment; and 4) phonologically determined
noun class agreement within noun phrases. Investigating these four properties
and others will increase the scientific knowledge that depends critically on
these linguistic features that are not found in languages like English, Spanish
or their Indo-European relatives. These patterns include such typologically rare
phenomena as scalar tone alternations as the sole markers of case and aspect
distinctions. Due to the atypical nature of the phonological inventory and
morphological properties of Guébie, a complete understanding of the
morphophonological system of the language has much to contribute to our
collective understanding of the possible linguistic features of a natural
language, and the theoretical tools most appropriate for modeling
morphophonological phenomena. Prosodic and phonological features, like those
exhibited by Guébie, are highly vulnerable as languages become more endangered,
which is happening in the Guébie community. This project also fosters strong
connections between Ivoirians and Americans at globally focused academic
institutions, which serves the national interest by helping to strengthen
democracy and governance in Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.