* 2125872
* NRT-HDR: Bridges in Digital Health
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Proposal ID: 2125872&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NRT-HDR: Bridges in Digital
Health&lt;br/&gt;PI: Donald Adjeroh &lt;br/&gt;Institution: West Virginia
University &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The rapidly
increasing cost of healthcare represents one of the most pressing problems
facing the United States and most other countries around the world. At the same
time, increased life expectancy has resulted in a significant expansion of the
nation’s elderly population. The combination of rising health care costs and
increased life spans poses tough challenges for many families. The widespread
disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have exacerbated these national
challenges and health disparities, particularly in rural communities with poor
health rankings. These problems could be addressed by new advances in digital
health (DH) and how we train the next generation of scientists, engineers, and
healthcare professionals to develop and deploy such advances. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to West Virginia University (WVU)
will address these challenges by developing a new graduate education and
traineeship model to prepare professionals who can work in collaborative
transdisciplinary teams to develop and apply data science and artificial
intelligence (AI) techniques in addressing difficult problems in DH, including
in rural areas. The project anticipates training twenty-four (24) funded and
forty (40) unfunded MS and PhD students from different backgrounds, including
engineering, computer science, medicine, health sciences, physical sciences, and
economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science and AI techniques have been
successfully applied to address a diverse range of health problems. The
traineeship will address how to scale and build on DH successes by developing:
1) effective and transferable frameworks for training a larger and more diverse
workforce with the foundations underlying these advances while inculcating soft
skills beyond traditional coursework and ensuring rural communities are served;
and 2) new ways to address other problems in DH related to the nature of DH
data, the significant data analysis gap, and computational problems. A key
element in the traineeship is its specific attention to the “bridges” required
for effective and scalable traineeship and workforce development in DH. These
bridges will connect: (a) different fields within health sciences, and across
other areas, including barriers posed by the distinct terminologies used by
different fields; (b) different scales of study in biomedicine (from micro to
macro) via integration of different data types; and (c) underrepresented groups
and innovative research in DH to ensure diversity in the traineeship. This
diversity will be achieved by: 1) recruiting and supporting success for
participants from Historically Black Colleges and Universities, those who are
rural, those from the first generation in their families to go to college,
and/or those from other groups underserved in STEM, and 2) by bridging Primarily
Undergraduate Institutions and large research institutions. Trainees will
develop novel approaches to tackle some of the core problems in AI (e.g., trust
and safe decision making, scalable data structures, and attention-based
information integration). Trainees will apply these approaches to specific
problems in health, such as myocardial fingerprinting from echocardiograms and
large-scale functional annotation in genomics. The project uses an innovative
sequence of components to interweave the research theme, important professional
skills (e.g., communication, ethics, leadership, collaboration), and coursework
into the traineeship model without extending time-to-degree. Upon completion,
trainees will be awarded a Certificate in DH. The traineeship will also form a
basis for a new, transdisciplinary PhD program in DH at WVU.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs. This project is jointly funded by the NRT program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.