* 2125064
* Primary and Secondary Aerosol Formation in Low-Temperature Combustion of Alcohol Biofuels
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Brandon Rotavera, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 429,434.00

A desire for environmentally cleaner automobiles has led to the idea of using
biologically derived fuels in engines that operate at lower temperatures. Such
systems would minimize exhaust emissions that contribute to photochemical smog.
Next-generation passenger vehicles equipped with low-temperature combustion
engines are expected to appear in larger numbers soon. However, the
environmental impacts associated with these vehicles have not yet been
completely assessed. This research project combines techniques from atmospheric
and combustion sciences to determine the air-quality and climate impacts of
pollutants emitted from the low-temperature combustion of advanced biofuels.
Results from this research will be valuable for designing efficient emission-
control strategies for these vehicles in advance of their deployment in the
market. The project will afford education-through-research opportunities for
undergraduates and high-school summer interns, and the research team will
develop lesson plans on biofuels, renewable energy, and air quality to be
implemented in high-school STEM curricula. By working with schools in Athens
Clarke County that have high enrollments of minorities and economically
disadvantaged students, these educational programs will increase the inclusion
of such groups in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Low-temperature
combustion reduces the production of two key pollutants compared to conventional
diesel combustion: Nitrogen oxides (NOx) and black carbon. However, it is not
clear how low-temperature combustion, especially when utilizing alcohol
biofuels, affects the formation of primary and secondary organic aerosol â€“ both
important pollutants in terms of their effect on air quality and the climate
system. This research will utilize controlled combustion experiments that will
elucidate the connections between the molecular structure of biofuels and the
gas-phase reactions leading to aerosol formation within the ranges of
temperatures, pressures, and equivalence ratios encountered in low-temperature
combustion engines. To isolate the effects of fuel structure on aerosol
formation and properties, the investigation will involve three alcohol biofuels
and their hydrocarbon analogues: 1-butanol and n-butane, iso-pentanol and iso-
pentane, and cyclopentanol and cyclopentane. The aerosol emissions will be
characterized for their properties that dictate their air-quality and climate
impacts, including chemical composition as well as microphysical and optical
properties. Furthermore, the emissions will be sent through an oxidation flow
reactor that simulates atmospheric oxidation, and the secondary organic aerosol
formed will be characterized. In parallel, the gaseous emissions will be
speciated to identify intermediates implicated in primary organic aerosol
formation as well as prominent secondary organic aerosol precursors, which will
shed light on the connections between gas-phase combustion chemistry and aerosol
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.