* 2125503
* SCC-PG: Preparing the Next-Generation Rural Workforce Through Inclusive and Place-Based Smart and Connected STEM Educational Delivery Models
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Contrary to trends in most rural communities, which are shrinking and aging,
many rural Midwestern communities have experienced rapid population growth since
the 1980s, as migrants and refugees have been moving there to meet growing labor
demand in the agroindustrial sector such as meat and poultry processing. The
school-aged residents of these growing Midwestern communities, who are primarily
the U.S.-born children of low-skilled workers, represent a significant untapped
population of future STEM workers and entrepreneurs who are growing up in, and
want to stay in, rural America. There is a lack of research on workforce
development in rural communities with large migrant and refugee populations.
Thus, there is a critical need to study strategies to both train, and also keep,
this skilled workforce local to rural communities where expanded employment
opportunities (e.g., industries building state-of-the-art factories) can limit
out-migration of technical and entrepreneurial talent. The goal of this planning
grant is to pilot new Extended Reality (XR)-enabled STEM educational delivery
models developed in collaboration with youth and adults in rural communities
with large numbers of low-skilled workers. XR-enabled solutions can support
active and experiential learning by enhancing hands-on activities, creating
simulations of objects and experiences that may not be accessible in the
physical world, and promoting learners' engagement with complex real-life
problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The planning research consists of three main
activities: 1) identify stakeholder needs and aspirations for new place-based
educational curricula in STEM fields and entrepreneurship in partnership with
the Storm Lake community via workshops, interviews, and focus groups; 2) use
workshops to co-design (designing with as opposed to designing for) innovative
XR-enabled technology delivery models to meet these needs; and 3) assess the
outcomes of the pilot project via surveys. These activities will help address
two research questions: 1) How can inclusive and place-based educational
delivery models for rural workforce development benefit communities with large
numbers of low-skilled workers? 2) Which XR-enabled smart and connected
technology solutions will improve inclusive and place-based STEM educational
delivery models in a rural community with a large number of low-skilled workers?
This project is a partnership between Iowa State University, Iowa 4-H Youth
Development, and the Storm Lake Community School District. The City of Storm
Lake (pop. 10,600) was chosen as the site for these pilot activities because it
is a rural Iowa community with a large low-skilled workforce employed in the
agroindustrial sector and a K-12 student population that is 64% English Language
Learners and 85% students of color. The results of the planning grant will yield
new insights into the educational needs of rural communities, and the
opportunities and barriers that place-based technologies can offer for
supporting those educational needs, which is an underexplored area in the
literature. Thus, this work is aligned with the Smart and Connected Communities
program, which endeavors to integrate community stakeholders into smart and
connected community projects to co-create and pilot solutions that are directly
informed by the needs, challenges, and opportunities of present and future
communities. This project is also being funded via the NSF Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program, which seeks to support projects that have
high potential for broader societal impacts, including improved diversity of
students and instructors participating in STEM education, professional
development for instructors to ensure adoption of new and effective pedagogical
techniques that meet the changing needs of students, and projects that promote
institutional partnerships for collaborative research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.