* 2125447
* SCC-PG: Empathy and AI: Towards Equitable Microtransit
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Munindar Singh, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Publicly owned microtransit has recently emerged as a promising solution for
connecting suburban and rural transportation disadvantaged populations to
employment and other important destinations. As a public transportation service,
microtransit typically provides low, fixed trip rates, and does not rely on
pricing mechanisms such as dynamic pricing to balance supply and demand.
Although avoiding high rates and dynamic pricing is particularly appropriate for
low-income, vulnerable population groups, it can lead to significant delays
during the morning and afternoon peak with important consequences on the users,
such as missed medical appointments and wages. Work and medical trips have time
constraints, but other trips may be more flexible and could happen in off-peak
periods to reduce service delays and missed critical trips. Fulfilling a Smart
&amp; Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) vision, this planning grant focuses on
technologically enabled and community-supported solutions for distributing
travel demand over time for on-demand public transportation services in an
equitable manner, without the exclusive or even primary use of traditional
pricing incentives. An interdisciplinary team of faculty members and researchers
will engage with communities in North Carolina that have piloted microtransit
systems to advance this research and gain a better understanding of the
community needs, preferences, and capacities. This grant has the potential to
lead to an enhanced public microtransit paradigm, with fewer missed or delayed
critical trips and quality-of-life improvements for the transportation
disadvantaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will advance our
understanding of the feasibility of, and tradeoffs involved in enabling and
incentivizing prosocial behavior in public microtransit, including volunteering
to shift oneâ€™s trip time to accommodate others, share a ride, cooperate with
other users to improve outcomes for the user community, and prioritize a
transportation disadvantaged user or a critical trip. It will investigate how
artificial intelligence can be applied in facilitating prosocial behavior in a
trip scheduling environment by reducing the cognitive burden placed on users.
During the planning grant period, the team will organize a workshop to gather
knowledge from various stakeholders, including planning and transportation
agencies and community-based organizations. Focus groups with community members
will be assembled to conduct semi-structured interviews and collect information
on willingness to share rides and information with other users, flexibility of
schedule throughout the day, and the type of information about other users that
would evoke empathy and prosocial behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.