* 2125191
* Collaborative Research: MIM: Defining the rules governing microbiome interactions critical for providing key ecosystem functions using a model diazotroph community
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Eric Webb, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,859,227.00

Single-celled microbes are the unseen engines that drive most ecosystems on
planet Earth. While there is growing appreciation that non-random microbial
associations can provide a collective advantage to individual cells, our
understanding of the origins, function and maintenance of these interactions is
limited. To address this knowledge gap, the project team proposes to use the
environmentally important, colony-forming cyanobacterium Trichodesmium and its
associated microbiome as a model system to define the rules that allow this
microbial association to exist consistently and thrive throughout the global
oceans. The research team will quantify the interactions governing the
microbiome by integrating state-of-the-art techniques from multiple disciplines.
This work will develop a pipeline for identifying microbial interactions and
exchanges that are critical for microbiome stability and function that can be
applied to other systems in the biological and geological sciences. As
Trichodesmium is a keystone source of nitrogen to the ocean, data from this
project will be essential for predicting oceanic primary production and
providing a lab-tested framework for investigating the rules that govern
microbiome interactions more generally. In addition to these discipline-level
broader impacts, this work will train multiple Ph.D. and undergraduate students
at both institutions and develop a new course designed to increase
underrepresented group involvement in microbiome research. The new undergraduate
course, METAgenomic Global Environmental Microbiology (META-GEM), will integrate
data from the project and include microbiology training, bioinformatics
workshops, mentoring from all project faculty and a student-centric, three-day
weekend symposium at the Wrigley Marine Sciences Center on Catalina Island.
Involved students will gain firsthand research experience and will make lasting
connections with developing and seasoned scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to translate ocean wide Trichodesmium and specific bacterial taxa
co-occurrence data into defined facultative microbial interactions in this
globally important community. Because there is evidence that Trichodesmium
selects its microbiome by excreting specific metabolites, the goal of defining
relationships is tractable, timely, and transformative for general understanding
of microbial interactions in natural communities. Recent metagenomic work on
trans-Atlantic Trichodesmium colonies has shown that the Trichodesmium
microbiome consists of a non-random, distinct group of mostly
Alphaproteobacteria and Bacteroidia with a biologically novel clade of the
former consistently co-occurring. Herein the research team will apply holistic
‘omic approaches, machine learning algorithms, high-throughput culturing
techniques, and numerical models to natural microbiomes and to USC Trichodesmium
Culture Collection strains in axenic and mixed laboratory experiments to test
three hypotheses. Specifically, the team hypothesizes that biotic interactions
influence Trichodesmium by: (i) increasing fitness through the coevolution of a
non-random, partially dissociable epibiotic community that allows ‘division of
labor’; (ii) enhancing nitrogen and carbon recycling within the community and
thus altering nitrogen and carbon fluxes to the broader ecosystem; and (iii)
stabilizing the community such that niche-overlapping opportunists are kept ‘in
check’ - however, this stabilizing effect can be disrupted upon environmental
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.