* 2125606
* NRT: Research Training in Sustainable Packaging and Biodegradable Polymer Composites for the Next Generation of STEM Graduates
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Shaik Jeelani, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current generation packaging
materials are made of polymer composites that are derived from petroleum
sources. These materials are not degradable and either end up in landfills or
are incinerated, releasing toxic gases. Factors such as greater environmental
awareness, societal concerns, and the depletion of petrochemical resources
collectively drive a desire to develop new materials and products based on plant
fibers and degradable biopolymers. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to Tuskegee University will establish a
multidisciplinary traineeship in Sustainable Nanobiomaterials. The program is a
partnership between three doctoral programs to collaboratively develop
innovative sustainable biomaterials for biodegradable packaging systems,
including biomedical and food packaging. The project anticipates training 40
students (30 Ph.D. and 10 Masters), including 30 funded trainees, from Materials
Science and Engineering, Integrative Biosciences, and Integrative Pathobiology.
The Tuskegee NRT effort will produce a large number of minority graduates,
including a significant number of women with Ph.D. degrees in STEM. An area of
focus for the traineeship includes support and training of faculty to mentor the
trainees and provide trainees with training and opportunities to mentor as well.
These graduates will become excellent role models for many young students and
help bring much-needed diversity to the nationâ€™s advanced technological
workforce in Sustainable Nanobiomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
multidisciplinary project team will train emerging scientists, engineers,
entrepreneurs, and managers to develop the next generation of sustainable,
biodegradable food and medical packaging applications. The trainees will carry
out research in: (a) Synthesis of calcium and silica-based nanoparticles from
waste resources such as bone ash, fish scales, egg and seashells, (b)
Antimicrobial functionalization of nanoparticles and short plant fibers using
green synthesis methods, (c) Structural, morphological, and spectral
characterization of as-prepared nanoparticles, (d) Fabrication of antimicrobial
polymer packaging films using polymer blow films, 3D printing, and solution
casting, (e) Nanomechanical, structural, morphological, and thermal
characterization of as-prepared polymer composite films, and (f) Antimicrobial
inhibition, product design, prototyping, biodegradability, and commercial
feasibility studies. The knowledge and training gained by the trainees will
eventually result in new design and manufacturing methodologies. The program
emphasizes mentoring at three levels. Students will be co-advised and mentored
by a minimum of two faculty members. Faculty and trainees will be involved in
outreach to and mentoring of high school students. Moreover, an annual mentoring
workshop will be conducted to provide both faculty and trainees with strategies
for effective mentoring. Other professional development activities are also in
place to ensure students receive formal and informal preparation in proposal
development and technical writing, teamwork, and ethics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new, potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.