* 2125941
* Significant improvements in the development and application of olivine-melt thermometry and hygrometry: new experiments and analytical approaches
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Rebecca Lange, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 272,432.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basaltic volcanism throughout Earth history has
profoundly shaped the evolution of Earth’s crust and atmosphere, as well as the
evolutionary path of life itself. In this study, erupted basalts are used as
windows into the underlying mantle from which they were formed. The goal is to
develop a new thermometer/hygrometer that enables both the temperature and water
content of basalts to be readily and accurately obtained. Its ease of use will
help generate large data sets, which will allow questions to be addressed about
global differences in basalts erupted from diverse tectonic settings and
throughout Earth history. The new thermometer/hygrometer will be made available
to all interested users as a downloadable excel file. Two UM graduate students
from diverse, under-represented backgrounds will work on this project. They will
gain a broad range of skills, from expertise in conducting high-temperature and
high-pressure experiments, performing thermodynamic calculations, and applying
their results to better constrain mantle conditions that lead to partial
melting. In addition, undergraduates from the M-STEM program at the University
of Michigan (UM) will be recruited to work on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to continue
the experimental calibration a new olivine-melt thermometer that is based on the
partitioning of Ni between olivine and basaltic liquids (DNiol/liq), and to
further test whether it is independent of dissolved water at both crustal and
mantle depths. Currently, the most widely used olivine-melt thermometers (based
on DMgol/liq) are strongly dependent on water, and their application to hydrous
basalts requires that melt H2O concentrations already be known, which is not
always the case. With an H2O-independent thermometer in hand, based on
DNiol/liq, it can be applied to olivine phenocrysts in hydrous basalts to obtain
accurate temperatures, without prior knowledge of melt water contents. These
temperatures can then be combined with Mg-based olivine-melt thermometers to
obtain anhydrous temperatures and thus the magnitude of ∆T, the depression of
the olivine liquidus due to dissolved water. Experiments will be performed to
evaluate whether this depression of the olivine liquidus due to water is
linearly and inversely correlated with the partitioning of Ca between olivine
and melt (DCaol/liq), as indicated in preliminary work. To extend the
calibration of this new olivine-melt thermometer/hygrometer, experiments will be
performed on a variety of basaltic compositions over a range of water contents,
temperatures, pressures (crustal and mantle) and fO2 conditions. Additionally,
it is proposed to apply the new thermometer/hygrometer to a large number of
natural basalts from a variety of tectonic settings. The results will shed light
on the thermal/hydrous conditions in the mantle during partial melting across a
variety of tectonic settings, from subduction zones to mantle plumes to
continental rifts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.