* 2125703
* NRT- HDR: Computing and Data Science Training for Materials Innovation, Discovery, Analytics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Cathy Wu, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,011.00

Polymers are used in everyday products (e.g., food packaging, paints, pipes) and
advanced technologies (e.g., microelectronics, drug delivery). Requirements for
polymer properties are ever-changing, driven by socio-economic, environmental,
and functional issues. Industry and academia need to find new ways to accelerate
the design of polymers with optimal properties that address these issues. As a
result, there is a demand for a professional workforce with advanced
interdisciplinary training in chemistry, materials science, engineering,
computer science, and data science. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Delaware (UD) will provide such a
training platform at UD and a local minority-serving institution, Delaware State
University (DSU). This platform will impart the necessary professional training
and cross-disciplinary technical knowledge in high-performance computing (HPC),
data science, materials science, and engineering. The project anticipates
training 50-60 Ph.D. students at UD and DSU, including 23 funded-trainees, from
the core disciplines of materials science, chemical engineering, chemistry,
computer science/engineering, and data science. Successful training of the next
generation of a diverse workforce across these disciplines will support the
increasing shift in research and development from traditional trial-and-error
materials experimentation to computing and data-driven fast materials
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NRT trainees will build their disciplinary
strengths through their degree program-based core courses and receive
interdisciplinary training in the secondary disciplines through newly developed
courses. The progression of training elements is designed to increasingly infuse
interdisciplinary technical knowledge and professional skills into the trainees’
doctoral research projects. Trainees will be co-advised by academic mentors with
different disciplinary expertise and have regular interactions with mentors from
industry and national laboratories. Further, trainees aiming at industry and
national lab careers will participate in summer internships with committed
industry/national lab partners. Trainees pursuing academic careers will
participate in a two-part teaching certificate program (summer workshop followed
by a semester-long teaching fellowship). Every training element is designed to
blend technical with professional skills development in ethics, inclusion,
collaboration, team science, adaptive communication, and interpersonal
negotiation. This approach will ensure trainees from across disciplines overcome
barriers involving discipline-specific communication and cultural differences.
By the end of their NRT training, these trainees will serve as cross-functional
connections between HPC, data science, materials science, and engineering
disciplines pushing polymer research forward with their gained knowledge of
Materials Innovation, Discovery, and AnalyticS—their ‘MIDAS’
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.