* 2125999
* Collaborative Research: Workshop Series on Sustainable Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Wuchun Feng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 04/30/2023
* USD 8,000.00

The advancement of computing remains focused on ever increasing performance.
While energy has become a metric of interest for mitigating thermal issues or
increasing battery life of mobile devices, energy efficiency has largely
neglected sustainability and in particular, computing's impact on the
environment and energy resources of the planet. For example, while embodied
environmental costs (e.g., carbon emissions) of integrated-circuit (IC)
manufacturing often exceed its operational carbon footprint, this is relatively
unknown or the reverse is presumed to be true in the computing community.
Furthermore, the use of rare metals such as tantalum, tungsten, and gold, in
electronic equipment contribute to the inevitable exhaustion of the planet's
resources. There is an urgent need to consider factors beyond operational-phase
energy consumption of the computing infrastructure to truly combat carbon and
other harmful emissions present during the full computing lifecycle to combat
the existential threat of climate change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes a series of community oriented activities culminating in a workshop to
both increase awareness among researchers in the domain of computing about these
factors of sustainable computing and to specify the challenges and potential
possible solutions to achieve sustainable computing including, but also beyond
the operational phase of the computing technology. A particular goal will be to
facilitate cross pollination of ideas among researchers across different
disciplines encompassing not only computing sciences but also, environmental
sciences and political sciences to identify sustainable methodologies for design
and operation of computing infrastructure. The novelty and intellectual merit of
this project is in identifying gaps in knowledge that need to be bridged to
truly make computers sustainable. In particular, this project will start with a
series of invited talks from experts from diverse fields with deep insights on
these aspects that ultimately affect the sustainability of computing resources
targeted at computing researchers. These talks will be delivered remotely with
an online platform. Following these enlightening talks, this project will host
an in-person workshop bringing computing researchers together to discuss the
lessons learned from the talks and how these ideas can be incorporated in
various types of computing devices from low power miniature systems such as
Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices to warehouse-scale computers such as data
centers. Through this activities, the intention is to create awareness and
strategies to create a sustainable future for computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.