* 2125952
* BCSER: Breaking the Language Barrier in Chemistry Assessment
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Eshani Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2023
* USD 285,813.00

Many students experience language-related barriers that may prevent them from
fully understanding and engaging in complex science content. Although dense and
technically-rich scientific language is challenging for most students to
interpret, it can become a systematic barrier for English Language Learner (ELL)
students when it interferes with their ability to demonstrate their science
knowledge. To learn how to make science course examinations more equitable, this
project will examine ways to modify general chemistry exam items to make them
more accessible to diverse student populations without reducing the chemistry
content difficulty. These assessment items will be tested by measuring and
comparing ELL students’ and native English speaking (NES) students’ performance.
The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR BCSER) program, which is designed to build individuals’
capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education research in the
core areas of STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will integrate research and professional development objectives to
support the principal investigator (PI) in developing the educational assessment
measurement skills needed to complement her established expertise in qualitative
research methodologies and achieve the research goals. The project will modify
general chemistry assessment items using the Equitable Framework for Classroom
Assessment to ease linguistic complexity without reducing the chemistry content
difficulty. An in-depth, qualitative study will also be conducted to understand
students’ perceptions of the features of the assessment items. The findings will
be used to optimize the assessment items before conducting a quantitative study
using differential item functioning analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of
the items in reducing the performance gap between ELL and NES students. The
project team will have frequent virtual and in-person meetings with their
research mentors to discuss targeted readings, as well as progress and plans for
developing and testing the assessment items. The PI will also complete two
online course series on the topics of advanced quantitative methods, Rasch
models and IRT; and attend the Inter-university Consortium for Political and
Social Research summer program in quantitative methods. Project outcomes will
include the development and testing of modified assessment items as proof of
concept of a method that can be implemented by STEM instructors in their own
courses to equitably benefit learners. The PI will share what she has learned
from her research and professional development experiences via local and
national workshops. By participating in targeted professional development
experiences, the PI will ultimately build her capacity to conduct fundamental
research on designing equitable STEM assessments in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.