* 2125018
* Galactomannan-based targeting of glycoproteins for secretion and cell wall incorporation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephen Free, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 950,000.00

This project addresses the question of how fungal cells are able to correctly
assemble their cell walls and secrete enzymes into their environment. Fungi
negatively impact society by causing food spoilage, damaging materials and
buildings, and being agents of plant and animal diseases. They are also used by
industry for producing citrate and a number of important protein products. An
understanding of the mechanisms involved in fungal cell wall formation will
facilitate efforts to control the growth of fungi in many practical situations.
A better understanding of the fungal secretion process could also facilitate
increased production of industrial proteins. An important aspect of this
research project is to provide training opportunities for postdoctoral
researchers and undergraduate students pursuing careers as research scientists.
Additionally, there is a program to involve high school science teachers in the
Buffalo area in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will define how
the model filamentous fungus, Neurospora crassa, correctly targets cell wall
proteins to the cell wall and secreted proteins to the environment. Both groups
of glycoproteins are secreted by the fungi into the cell wall space and must be
targeted either for incorporation into the wall or for release to the
environment. Previous work has demonstrated the importance of an N-linked
galactomannan structure for the incorporation of cell wall proteins into the
cell wall. The project tests the hypothesis that modifications to the N-linked
oligosaccharides are used to direct cell wall proteins into the wall and to
allow secreted glycoproteins to be released into the environment. The N-linked
modifications present on cell wall and secreted proteins will be examined in a
number of mutant isolates using techniques from glycobiology to identify and
characterize galactomannan structures. The DFG-5 alpha-1,6-mannanase plays a
critical role in generating the galactomannan structure needed for incorporation
of glycoproteins into the wall, and the research will characterize the enzymatic
activity of DFG-5 and the interactions between DFG-5 and cell wall
glycoproteins. These experiments will utilize a HIS6-tagged version of DFG-5 to
purify the enzyme. DFG-5 enzymatic activity will be assessed using substrate
galactomannans, and protein/protein interactions will be characterized in co-
purification and co-immunoprecipitation experiments using antibodies directed
against cell wall and secreted glycoproteins. Previous research from the
investigatorâ€™s groups demonstrated that lichenin (a glucan with a repeating
beta-1,4-glucose-beta-1,4-glucose-beta-1,3-glucose trisaccharide structure) is
used to attach cell wall proteins into the cell wall and the project will
identify and characterize lichenin synthases. This will be done using molecular
genetics to identify putative lichenin synthases and anti-bodies directed
against lichenin to demonstrate the synthesis of lichenin. In conjunction with
the published literature, the research will provide a comprehensive picture of
fungal cell wall biogenesis and will answer the question of how fungal cells
distinguish between secreted and cell wall glycoproteins and target them to
their correct extracellular locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.