* 2125197
* Morphologically Complex Data Collection and Analysis for Improving Lexicographic Models
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Keri Eggleston, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2023
* USD 104,995.00

Analytic dictionaries provide information on the possible and impossible sound
combinations and words and clause structures found in individual languages.
Linguists and cognitive scientists mine analytic dictionaries to uncover
knowledge about word meaning and cultural significance of places, things, and
actions and how these are referred to by speakers. These dictionaries are also
useful for discovery of universally predictable or newly discovered grammatical
patterns. This project collects data to create an analytic dictionary of a
language with unusually complex verb morphology. The original fieldwork
conducted with elder birth speakers for this project adds crucial information on
the structure of the language, which in turn informs various subfields of
linguistics such as historical linguistics, comparative linguistics, morphology,
and syntax. This project supports education and diversity, engaging the Native
American elders, teachers, and learners in creating a high-quality,
comprehensive, and enduring language resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
expands current lexicographic models to deal with complex verb morphology. The
project reviews existing lexical databases to locate gaps in entries and
analyzes and fills gaps through information collected via interviews of elder
speakers of endangered languages. These elders hold key pieces of lexical and
grammatical knowledge that have not been documented elsewhere. The investigator
adds this newly collected information to the existing in a data format that is
easily revised and augmented as new data becomes available. Research conducted
under this project implements a language documentation method that ensures that
current and future learners and researchers have the opportunity to access newly
documented lexical items, which provide the necessary data for the development
of scientific language materials. These materials can be used by the nonacademic
community for language and culture revitalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.