* 2125981
* EAGER: An innovative approach for quantification and prospective isolation of Nosema ceranae life stages from host cells with potential for application to diverse pathogen species
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Jonathan Snow, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 116,104.00

Some microbial pathogens are obligate intracellular pathogens. They are hard to
study because of their complex life cycles which occur inside the cells of their
hosts. In other areas of biology, a technique called fluorescence activated cell
sorting (FACS) is used to identify and separate different cell types from a
complex mixture to near homogeneity based on differential fluorescent-based
staining. This proposal will use this technique to measure and isolate different
life stages of a specific parasite (Nosema ceranae) that infects honey bees and
negatively impacts colony health. In the work funded by this proposal, use of
this technique is expected to increase the understanding of the course of
infection in honey bees. This new system can also be used to increase knowledge
of the biology of other intracellular pathogens in bees or other animals. AS
such, this project serves the NSF mission to promote the progress of science. In
turn, findings from using this technique can be the first step in identifying
means to cure or prevent infections. Thus, this technology can be used in the
bioeconomy by researchers who want to stabilize honey bee populations and
pollination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of obligate intracellular pathogens
is difficult because they cannot easily be reproduced outside the host in axenic
conditions. Many avenues of inquiry necessitate that cells of the pathogen be
separated from those of the host. In addition, to study intracellular pathogen
species with complex life cycles, it is critical individual life stages can also
be separated. The experimental challenges of such manipulations and separations
are compounded in situations where both host and pathogen are non-model
organisms for which there are limited or no species-specific molecular tools.
The obstacles presented can be addressed using flow cytometry-based techniques
for relative quantification and localization of different cell types from honey
bees that contain different life stages of the Nosema ceranae microsporidian, a
key pathogen of honey bees. Specialized cell dyes measuring general cell
features, in conjunction with flow cytometry to isolate distinct cell
populations, are expected to develop a new system to advance the understanding
of host-pathogen interactions and infection dynamics. Establishment of this
technique promises to facilitate a number of new directions in microsporidia
research. As some of the cellular features assessed by this technique are
widespread in eukaryotes, there is a high probability that the technique can be
adapted for use with other pathogen species from diverse phylogenetic groups
alone or in combination with other available dyes. This proposal will also train
an undergraduate student in microbiology research. As such, this proposal is
training the next generation of the science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.