* 2125806
* Multimodal Oscillatory Driving Forces and Precise Manipulation of Particle Motion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gregory Miller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 396,673.00

The goal of this project is to answer the question: how do “multimodal”
oscillatory forces affect the motion of particles and other objects? Most prior
research has focused on “unimodal” forces, which can be characterized by a
single frequency (e.g., 1 Hz). In contrast, a multimodal driving force involves
the superposition of multiple frequencies (e.g., 1 Hz and 2 Hz). Although
multimodal oscillatory forces are more complicated, an object subject to a
multimodal force may not move anywhere on average because the average of the
force itself is zero. Recent experimental work, however, has revealed that this
interpretation is not necessarily correct. Specifically, application of a dual-
mode oscillatory electric field induces net motion of particles preferentially
towards one electrode, but only if the two frequency modes are the ratio of odd
and even numbers (e.g., 3 Hz and 2 Hz). Further preliminary experiments revealed
that net motion is also observed for solid objects placed on a flat surface made
to vibrate laterally with dual frequency modes, again only if the modes are the
ratio of odd and even numbers. These similar observations in two very distinct
systems suggest that certain types of multimodal forces can be exploited to
precisely manipulate the motion of objects using oscillatory forces. A series of
experiments and modeling studies will be conducted on three prototype systems to
uncover the mechanism that governs the net motion in response to a multimodal
field. Results from the project will be useful in a variety of technological
applications, including particle manipulation for lab-on-a-chip devices,
electrostatic dehydrators, and particle separations for granular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the preliminary observations, this
project tests the hypothesis that the net particle electrophoresis and the net
vibratory drift both stem from symmetry breaking in the nonlinear driving terms
of the respective governing momentum balances, provided the oscillatory driving
force is “non-antiperiodic.” High-speed video and particle imaging velocimetry
will be used to precisely track the motion of objects in three different
experimental systems: particle electrophoresis, charged droplet levitation, and
vibrated solid objects. Specific experiments will be aimed at directly testing
the hypotheses generated from the proposed mechanism, by systematically varying
the ratio of imposed modes, the magnitude of the nonlinear resistances, and the
overall amplitude of the driving force. The experimental observations will be
tested against corresponding numerical models specific to each system, providing
groundbreaking insight on the behavior of nonlinear systems with multimodal
fields. Because nonlinear effects are ubiquitous in nature, if corroborated the
mechanism proposed here will provide fundamental and broadly applicable impact
on how multimodal driving forces can be used to manipulate particle
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.