* 2125510
* NRT CONDESA: Convergence of Nano-engineered Devices for Environmental and Sustainability Applications
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Thomas Harmon, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,999,902.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil, water, and air are
essential resources. Their quality critically impacts society at a local and
global scale in multiple ways, from farming productivity and food security to
human and ecosystem health. The effective monitoring of factors affecting soil,
water, and air quality requires the development of economical, multifunctional,
durable, and easily deployable sensors. These sensors must also be highly
sensitive to specific environmental properties or pollutants and able to capture
both instantaneous events and long-term processes. Nanomaterials are ideal
candidates for developing high-sensitivity sensors, as nano-engineering allows
tuning of material properties at the atomic scale. These properties enable the
development of highly specialized platforms for targeted application in specific
environmental problems. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to the University of California, Merced will develop a doctoral
training program where convergent research will be driven by the goal of
developing multifunctional nanomaterial-based environmental sensors. The project
anticipates training 200 Ph.D. students, including 25 funded trainees from
physics, chemistry, mechanical engineering, environmental science, and materials
science and engineering, thereby creating a new generation of diverse and
globally competitive nano-engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRT Convergence of
Nano-engineered Devices for Environmental and Sustainability Applications
(CONDESA) program will create a new generation of nano-engineers by cross-
training students in molecular biology, physics, chemistry, environmental
science, and sustainable systems. The program goal is to create multifunctional,
nano-engineered sensors for environmental media (air, soil, and water) and to
demonstrate their application in real-world testbeds to assess and solve
environmental health and sustainability problems. Monitoring complex, dynamic
patterns (“hot spots” and “hot moments”) in environmental properties requires
high-resolution sensing, spotlighting the need for low-cost, energy-efficient,
nano-enabled sensors. These properties include chemical concentrations, states,
and flows associated with pollution, biogeochemical cycling, and risks to human
health and ecosystems. Nano-engineering and nanotechnology allow tuning of
material properties at the most fundamental atomic scale, therefore making it
possible to develop highly specialized platforms for targeted applications. To
achieve rapid convergence on effective sensor designs, NRT CONDESA will engage
physicists, environmental and materials scientists, and device engineers to
collaboratively identify key applications and specifications, guide the choice
of transduction and materials, and design an integrated system that is resilient
to environmental conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.