* 2125383
* MIM: Systematic Dissection of Complex Synthetic Gut Bacterial Communities
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kerwyn Huang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,499,999.00

The species composition of microbial communities is key to understanding their
ecological functions. While the forces that determine composition are known to
involve a complex network of interactions, general rules remain mysterious in
part due to the lack of model systems with sufficient complexity that can be
precisely tuned and experimentally dissected in a systematic fashion. This
project will use a collection of the 100 most common gut microbes, to develop
and analyze models of gut microbial communities of realistic complexity, yet
defined composition at multiple scales, quantify the robustness of these
communities to nutrient perturbations, and discover the interaction mechanisms
most important for shaping these communities. This work is important because
microbial communities are critical components of practically every ecosystem on
the planet, including the healthy functioning of the guts of animals. This
project also has educational goals, including: (1) to establish outreach
programs at local high schools focused on a novel strategy for microbial
isolation; (2) to provide quantitative training in theory, computational
biology, and bioinformatics through the design of a project-based course; (3) to
broaden participation of underrepresented minorities in microbiology through a
novel partnership with UC Merced, a minority-serving institution, and via
improving practices in graduate student admission and hiring practices through a
series of workshops and materials; (4) to implement software for modeling
microbial communities that is disseminated to local high schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine high-throughput experimentation
and mathematical modeling to produce a mechanistic understanding of the assembly
and resilience of microbial communities. The research will perturb stable in
vitro communities derived from fecal samples to ascertain whether the synthetic
communities respond similarly to perturbations as in vivo. Critically, these
defined communities enable the equivalent of genotype-phenotype mapping in a
community context, to understand the roles of interspecies and strain-nutrient
interactions on community structure and function in a quantitative manner that
enables mechanistic modeling. Researchers will parameterize coarse-grained and
molecular consumer-resource models to distinguish between modes of interaction
and predict community dynamics, during growth in simple sugars, gut-relevant
metabolites such as corrinoids, and complex media. The results will provide a
mechanistic framework for understanding how nutritional and strain-strain
interactions dictate the composition and stability of microbial communities.
These scientific goals will be supplemented with broader impact achieved through
course development, outreach, and other synergistic
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.