* 2125288
* SCC-PG: Equitable and Ubiquitous Converged Data &amp; Transportation Services for Underserved Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sreedhar Upendram, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project will plan a powerful research capacity. The research will be
centered on data divide and transportation services. It will also plan
development of a solution to infrastructure inequality. It will take advantage
of strong, existing relationships between the University of Tennessee and its
community partners. The planning project will occur in Knoxville, Tennessee.
Knoxville is a low-density mid-size city in the southeast United States. The
project is a collaboration among three institutions. (1) University of Tennessee
is the state’s flagship and land grant university. (2) Knoxville Community
Development Corporation builds and maintains affordable housing in Knox County.
(3) United Way of Greater Knoxville funds and coordinates many poverty fighting
initiatives. Knoxville is an ideal natural laboratory for designing and
implementing innovative solutions based in the community. Knoxville deals with
social and technological challenges. These challenges drive racial and ethnic
health and wealth inequality. These challenges have been made worse by COVID-19.
Racial and ethnic income inequality is high in Knoxville. Knoxville faces
geographical and economic barriers to infrastructure development and
maintenance. These have created a transportation system dominated by
automobiles. There is a clear digital divide based on race, income, and rural
vs. urban. The project will engage traditionally underrepresented populations.
It will create a collaborative team structure and develop and deploy a working
prototype. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project investigates the viability
of convergent systems for transportation and information technology
infrastructure. The capacity for communities to use intelligent systems to
bridge spatial and technical mismatches in the built environment and expand
equitable access to resources is predicated on the ability to coordinate data
systems efficiently and share information securely and easily. Moreover, this
proposed planning project will demonstrate a process of engaging the community
at the front-end and throughout such that a broader group of stakeholders is
invested, and multiple perspectives are considered in the development,
deployment, and scaling up of any prototype. Such methods increase likelihood of
acceptance, adoption, and transferability of technologies and altered planning
and service systems. This project will identify key components necessary to
develop community-driven intelligent transportation systems. Replicated across
other communities, this will lead to development of more relevant intelligent
systems and successful uptake among communities. Over time, this will lead to
greater technical capacity across communities which they can leverage emerging
transportation data to make smarter, more resilient, and adaptable
transportation and communications infrastructure-planning decisions. with
equitable access to economic opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.