* 2125526
* SCC-PG: Park WiFi as a BRIDGE to Community Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jennifer Roberts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Urban greenspaces are untapped assets in infrastructure improvement and disaster
mitigation. Greenspace augmented with broadband infrastructure can serve three
crucial functions resulting in individual, infrastructure, and community
resilience: (1) an amenity to boost overall park use; (2) an information and
safety tool during normal times and mitigator during natural disasters; and (3)
as a bridge to propagate WiFi access into contiguous residential neighborhoods -
i.e., WiFi to homes without access. The project proposes a new model to Build
Resilience through the Internet and Digital Greenspace Exposure (BRIDGE),
leveraging off-the-shelf WiFi technology, novel algorithms, community assets,
and local partnerships to lower the cost of greenspace WiFi and ensure long-term
governance. BRIDGE adapts a sustainable WiFi infrastructure through direct
donations of internet bandwidth from geographically proximate community donors
(e.g., schools, churches, community centers). BRIDGE will lead to measurable,
productive shifts in community resilience through stakeholder engagement and
collaborative design and management of shared infrastructure. In this proposal,
Maryland-National Capital Parks and Planning Commission, Department of Parks and
Recreation, Prince George’s County (M-NCPPC), partners with the University of
Maryland to co-design, deploy, and evaluate a pilot a greenspace WiFi
infrastructure system. BRIDGE’s scalable, replicable, and collaborative process
will serve as a viable solution where greenspaces become broadband
infrastructure stakeholders, providing governance stability needed for other
community partners to join as bandwidth donors and long-term
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enables several socio-technical
contributions: (1) a novel, scalable methodology for financing, maintaining, and
expanding greenspace WiFi infrastructure via community co-design, management,
and long-term support; (2) assessing and expanding resilience indicators
including: (a) community capital supported through participatory design and
governance processes; (b) education and digital access equity with greenspaces
as a new community anchor; and (c) wellness, bolstered by WiFi greenspace
access. BRIDGE spearheads actionable research for the community, infrastructure,
and individual resilience and creates a viable solution for real-world
conditions that can be a model for community resilience across the country.
Moreover, it will advance national K-12 and professional education priorities by
actively involving community youth; university students; related technical and
professional development programs; and stakeholders who engage in multi-
disciplinary research including public safety officers. Broader benefits for
Parks include the potential for: (a) public safety interventions; (b) passive
counters to inform security patrols; and (c) supplementing educational
programming with digital components. Pending a successful pilot, a systemwide
rollout of WiFi in all M-NCPPC greenspaces is
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.