* 2125394
* I-Corps: Modular web applications to support patients in rehabilitation from neurodegenerative diseases
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Alexander Mamishev, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software suite of modular web applications to guide medical
rehabilitation from neurodegenerative diseases. Neurodegenerative diseases and
stroke lead to medical complications that require months of diligent
rehabilitation to improve the quality of life for patients. The goal of the
proposed technology is to provide a product that improves the lives of people in
the rehabilitation process. In addition, the platform may be used to help people
(especially children) with Autism Spectrum Disorder. The technology uses
gamification, incentivization, and machine learning, integrated with mobile
games and virtual reality, to support patients in the taxing and lengthy process
of routine medical rehabilitation. The proposed technology provides a platform
that allows patients and doctors to cooperate remotely in establishing habitual
routines and good habits that aid in improving patient quality of life. Medical
practitioners may use the platform to develop a structured, remote learning
curriculum that encourages patients to maintain the required level of limb
activity, engage in memory exercises, and complete the set of health maintenance
tasks that are critical to improving their quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
progressive web application that assists in the rehabilitation from stroke or
neurodegenerative disorders. The proposed technology serves to unite multiple
data sources and provide a backend for elements like data visualization, project
management, and task completion. The system employs continuous feedback,
incentives, rewards, and points to give structured feedback to both the end user
and mentor while also providing metrics that may be scrutinized for those
looking to refine such habitual or incremental processes. Gamification elements
are handled through the selective use of certain proprietary algorithms. These
algorithms may be used to make decisions regarding sending user notifications
and alerts to incentivize and motivate performance. The proposed technology has
great potential to be integrated with the growing trend of mobile and virtual
reality “serious games” used extensively in the medical field. In addition to
helping with stroke rehabilitation, neurodegenerative disease, or medical
applications, the platform may help parents build healthy daily routines for
their children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.