* 2125549
* SCC-PG: Closed-loop Intervention to Promote a Supportive and Interactive Environment around Children
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ou Bai, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 177,000.00

For both parents and educators, monitoring and adjusting their behaviors to
ensure that children develop appropriate prosocial and learning behaviors is a
complex balance between nurturance and limit setting. When these interactions
are strained, negative or coercive cycles may emerge that delay appropriate
development and exacerbate existing impairment. To disrupt the development of
coercive cycles, adults must have the ability to accurately assess the quality
of their interactions with children and integrate this information into personal
change. Approaches to measuring these types of interactions will inform what we
know about the mechanisms of child social, emotional, and learning development
in STEM learning settings, and enable the creation of adaptive interventions for
those moments when support is most needed. This project envisions a closed-loop
intervention framework to promote a supportive and interactive environment
around children. Smart wearables will sense interaction and responses between
the children and their parents or educators, using embedded machine learning
technology to recognize supportive behaviors. The perceived behaviors will be
sent to a cloud server where adaptive interaction strategies will be identified
from either online psychological consultation or artificial intelligence. These
interaction strategies will then be provided to the parents and educators in the
form of guidance cues to promote a supportive STEM learning environment around
the children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project aims to understand the
barriers and critical problems in the implementation of smart technology and
psychological strategies to support adult-child interactions in STEM learning
settings. The work will proceed by convening key stakeholders (parent
organizations, formal educational institutions, and informal educational
institutions) in a series of iterative discussions to produce a set of adult-
child behavioral targets that are essential to childrenâ€™s development of social,
emotional, and learning skills. Further discussions will then identify
mechanisms to enhance these behaviors, and reduce competing, less effective
approaches. Qualitative thematic analysis of the discussions will be used to
capture these behaviors and mechanisms. Then technologies will be developed to
measure, provide feedback on, and improve these behaviors. These devices will be
piloted with adult-child dyads. Audiovisual data collected by the devices will
be human coded as well as processed by algorithms to vet the technological
capacity of the devices to detect and respond to targeted behaviors. A series of
debriefing interviews and surveys with adult-child dyads will be used to
determine the feasibility, acceptability, and utility of the devices. The
collected preliminary data will support the forming of critical technological
and social science research questions that co-inform one another: questions
about the social engagement between adults and children will drive the technical
research, and what can be discovered via the technological research will open up
new questions that can be posed about social engagement between children and
adults. Adult-child interactions are key social factors that integrate to
produce student social, emotional, and academic outcomes. Within our informal
educational communities, our formal educational communities, and our familial
communities it is essential to find the best mechanisms for measuring, providing
feedback, and improving these interactions. This work thus seeks to advance a
new approach to, and evidence-based understanding of, the development of STEM
learning. This Smart and Connected Communities project is also supported by the
Advancing Informal STEM Learning program, which seeks to (a) advance new
approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development of
STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.