* 2125775
* Collaborative Research: Empirical assessment of the heterogeneous changes in electricity consumption behaviors due to co-adopting batteries, electric vehicles, and solar panels
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nathan Hultman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,093.00

This NSF project aims to examine empirically the heterogeneous electricity
consumption and technology-using behavioral changes due to the co-adoption of
distributed solar panels (PVs), battery storage, and electric vehicles (EVs) of
residential consumers. Understanding the heterogeneous co-adopter behaviors is
important for utilities and policymakers to adopt better-targeted interventions
to induce behavioral changes needed for demand-side management. The project will
bring transformative change to the understanding and simulation of the power
systems with increasing penetration of consumers that co-adopt these
technologies. This will be achieved by using a large scale, multi-year, high
frequency individual-consumer-level smart meter data, combined with an
interdisciplinary approach encompassing advanced data analytics, econometrics,
machine learning, and simulation methods. The intellectual merits of the project
include 1) developing a causal framework, through which we provide the empirical
estimates of the impact of co-adoption on consumer behaviors, as well as examine
how changes are affected by tariffs and observable characteristics of
technologies, homes, and households; 2) uncovering the behavioral heterogeneity
and categorizing each individual’s behavior changes into rational, irrational,
misinformed, or environmental-driven behaviors; 3) developing the first
empirically-validated buildings-to-grid integration framework that enables
evaluation of the impacts of new energy technology co-adoption. The broader
impacts of the project include facilitating the adoption of PVs, EVs, and
battery storage technologies, transforming relevant engineering modeling by
combining engineering with empirical behavioral analysis, and engaging industry
practitioners, whose decision-making will be assisted by the project’s products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing models to understand the electricity consumption
behaviors of co-adopters of these technologies are largely engineering-based and
do not account for actual consumer behaviors and the related heterogeneity.
However, consumers’ actual behaviors can deviate from those predicted by
engineering models and such deviations can be heterogeneous. Also, co-adopters’
behavior changes are not just a simple summation of the changes due to
individual technology adoption, because the usage of one technology can change
due to co-adopting another technology. This project fills these major gaps by
providing a first-of-a-kind empirical assessment of the heterogeneous impacts of
energy technology co-adoption as well as by advancing existing buildings-to-grid
modeling through incorporating empirical co-adopters’
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.