* 2125389
* SCC-PG: Building Community Response to Violence through the Rokwire Smart City Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sanjay Patel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,878.00

This project builds upon a highly interdisciplinary and well-connected team of
researchers and stakeholders from across the University of Illinois in Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) and the local Champaign-Urbana community. Through a series of
stakeholder meetings and community outreach, our team will explore and define
challenges, barriers, and opportunities for deploying and modifying technology
to address community violence. Our investigation will focus on social science
issues, such as how best to design smartphone apps to reduce violence, as well
as technological issues, such as how to assure data privacy so that users do not
risk revealing their identities at any stage of the research and community
activity process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the creation
and scalability of the smart community concept by bringing together a team of
engineers, social and behavioral scientists, and a community partner - the
municipal government of the City of Champaign - to leverage an open-source
digital platform, the Rokwire Smart City Platform, and build an integrative
community response to violence. Rokwire is an open-source mobile software
platform developed by Smart, Healthy Communities, an interdisciplinary
initiative based at UIUC. Designed to be the open-source system for tomorrow’s
smart communities, it is a mobile ecosystem that puts people and privacy first
while combining multiple streams of data and sensor technologies and integrating
that information into a single, open-source platform. This project is proposing
to design the coverage and functionality of Rokwire with the local community,
and in particular, the City of Champaign, which has a violent crime rate of
double the national average, to create functionalities in Rokwire that serve the
community’s desire to reduce violence. Our long-term goal is to use this effort
as a testbed for interested communities country-wide. The planning grant will
seek to address timely research questions in the social science and
technological dimensions. In the social science dimension, this project will
build Rokwire to create, together with the City of Champaign, a violence
reporting, tracking, and intervention capacity for Rokwire that will a) be
designed with community input to evaluate the prevalence of, and reduce,
violence in Champaign and b) work with the community to investigate and minimize
unintended consequences (e.g., racial profiling, victim-blaming) associated with
violence reporting technology. In the technological dimension, this project will
address pressing questions relating to communities and researchers extracting
useful and informative data while preserving individual
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.