* 2125411
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Smart and Connected Family Engagement for Equitable Early Intervention Service Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Natalie Parde, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,187,723.00

Infants and toddlers with developmental disabilities or delays use early
intervention (EI) for rehabilitation services. Yet, EI quality is compromised
for racially and ethnically diverse and socially disadvantaged families. A key
lever to improve EI quality is family-centered care, an evidence-based approach
that is grounded in family engagement for shared decision-making. This project
is motivated by the need to give families a smart and connected option for
engaging in the design of the EI service plan for their child. This effort will
develop and evaluate an upgraded Participation and Environment Measure (PEM), an
evidence-based electronic option for directing equitable family-centered EI
service design. PEM upgrades will (a) increase content relevance for racially
and ethnically diverse families, and (b) leverage modern artificial intelligence
solutions to personalize the PEM user experience to a broader range of EI
enrolled families. This upgraded PEM electronic option will be evaluated in a
population of racially and ethnically diverse EI families, to assess for its
capacity to improve EI quality and to appraise supports and barriers to its
longer-term implementation within the broader EI service system. This project
builds evidence for the first customized, culturally relevant electronic option
to direct family-centered care during EI service design. The approaches and
technologies developed may be applicable to similar service contexts.
Additionally, this project increases opportunities for conducting
interdisciplinary research at the intersection of computer science and
rehabilitation science, building interprofessional capacity for research
engagement among EI service providers and students training for pediatric
rehabilitation careers, and sponsoring students from historically
underrepresented groups in diverse research labs that value inclusive
excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops key innovations to
family-centered EI in two ways. First, for the PEM electronic option, the
project will (a) increase content relevance for racially and ethnically diverse
families, and (b) personalize the PEM user experience to a broader range of EI
enrolled families. For the former, the project will establish cultural
equivalencies of the original PEM assessment and critically examine its
intervention content to ensure that families can voice concerns about racial
climate and collect and share goal attainment strategies using community-
preferred communication channels. For the latter, the team will incorporate an
adaptive conversational agent into the PEM intervention to improve caregiver
navigation and guidance, and we will develop methods to automatically customize
its strategy exchange feature to individual caregiver needs. These innovations
will result in fundamental advances to natural language processing research
through the investigation of adaptive dialogue policies for task-oriented or
mixed-initiative dialogue systems, generalized dialogue act schema, and lexicon-
informed meaning representations. We will evaluate the upgraded PEM electronic
option with racially and ethnically diverse and socially disadvantaged EI
enrolled families, to assess for its capacity to improve caregiver and provider
perceptions of family-centered EI service quality, improve parent engagement in
EI service plan implementation, and increase the availability and relevance of
participation-focused EI service plans. We will engage EI stakeholders to
appraise supports and barriers to its longer-term implementation in EI. These
advances will yield evidence for a customized, culturally-relevant electronic
option to foster family-centered care in EI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.