* 2125560
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Revamping Regional Transportation Modeling and Planning to Address Unprecedented Community Needs during the Mobility Revolution
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Stephen Ritchie, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,551,068.00

This NSF Smart and Connected Communities Integrative Research Grant (SCC-IRG)
aims to address important equity and system integration challenges in mobility
systems that could directly affect individual users' quality of life and access
to critical services and employment opportunities. Results from this project
will support the improvement of metropolitan areas broadly and the San Diego
region specifically by exploiting emerging technologies and the public policy
levers these technologies engender. The research team will work with
transportation modelers and planners at the San Diego Association of Governments
to develop a substantially improved decision support system for regional
planning and investment decisions that could lead to more equitable,
sustainable, and resilient future mobility system, such as solutions that could
better connect people, especially disadvantaged populations, to jobs,
healthcare, groceries, and other activities. The project also presents education
and outreach opportunities to train next-generation engineers and practitioners
in an integrated and multi-disciplinary research environment and broaden
participation in STEM field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address socio-technical
challenges related to equitable mobility, accessibility, and environmental
sustainability, the research team will implement targeted improvements to
regional transportation system models in the short term and fundamentally revamp
regional transportation system models in the long run. To improve the models in
the short run, the research team will develop flexible and detailed models of
mobility-on-demand services, identify and develop equity metrics and equity
analysis techniques, and develop low-resolution models for rapid analysis of
potential policies. To fundamentally revamp regional models in the long run, the
research team will develop a prescriptive (i.e., optimization-based) multi-
level, multi-resolution, multi-objective pathway-based modeling framework to not
only analyze but actually recommend combinations of transportation and land use
policies and infrastructure investments over time. Moving from predictive to
prescriptive modeling for regional transportation planning will represent a
major theoretical contribution, as will incorporating equity into a multi-
objective optimization problem formulation. Additionally, developing a multi-
resolution modeling framework to support the bi-level, multi-objective
prescriptive modeling framework will represent a valuable methodological
contribution. Similarly, the new models provide sufficient flexibility to
capture the important components of mobility-on-demand services and new
technologies like connected automated vehicles thus represent an important
methodological contribution that will speed the effective deployment of smart
mobility solutions to address pressing social equity, sustainability, and
economic challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.