* 2125390
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Fostering Smart and Sustainable Travel through Engaged Communities using Integrated Multidimensional Information-Based Solutions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Srinivas Peeta, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,532,000.00

This Smart and Connected Communities award supports research that will develop
systematic deployment tools that smart and connected communities can use to
achieve their sustainable travel goals in a quantifiable manner by leveraging
advances in information, communication and sensor technologies. While the
deployment of advanced technological solutions offers great promise for
communities to improve residents' quality of life and prosperity, they are faced
with significant challenges in realizing these aspirations due to the diversity
in technological and travel needs and barriers faced by the residents. Solutions
to achieve sustainability objectives related to enhancing travel mobility,
safety, equity, and access will be developed using the City of Peachtree Corners
(GA) as an immersive living lab. They include building novel partnerships
involving emerging micromobility services in the private sector and the well-
established public transit modes. Further, they will involve personalized
behavioral interventions to nudge and incentivize personal auto users to
consider sustainable alternatives through seamless information provision. At the
community level, public policy interventions will seek to enable flexible and
novel travel alternatives while ensuring that all residents have access to
timely travel-related information. For underserved and underrepresented
residents, the solutions will include strategies to overcome information deserts
in lower-income neighborhoods, age-related technology savviness issues for
senior residents, and reduced access to smartphones and transportation options.
These solutions will be developed using data collected from community residents
and other sources, and deployed using an information design system that provides
targeted information delivery to the various stakeholders in the community using
multiple delivery mechanisms, including a community
app.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance theory and deployment
paradigms associated with holistic, community-level decision-making to achieve
travel sustainability goals characterized by multiple, disparate objectives
while meeting the needs and constraints of different stakeholders. In
particular, it will address the challenges of how to integrate disparate, multi-
source data from various stakeholders and use it to systematically generate
multidimensional solution options (partnerships, behavioral interventions,
policy interventions) to meet multiple sustainability objectives at the
community level in a systematic, quantifiable manner over time. It will draw on
methods from multi-objective and multi-agent optimization, machine learning,
behavioral economics, and data and policy analytics, to generate the
multidimensional solutions. Further, it will lead to novel paradigms and
algorithms for the solution options themselves, and for the development of
generalizable principles related to practical deployment frameworks in the
inherently complex, multidimensional smart and connected communities. The
project will also develop formal methods for information design and delivery
that translate the multidimensional solutions into actionable information that
is seamless for the various stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.