* 2125925
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Novel Algorithms and Tools for Empowering People Who Are Blind to Safeguard Private Visual Content
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Leah Findlater, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2025
* USD 316,356.00

People who are blind regularly use personal devices to take pictures and videos
and share them with others. Primary reasons are to seek assistance with everyday
visual tasks (e.g., recognizing objects, reading mail) and to socialize online.
Regardless of the reason, they have no easy or independent means of assessing
whether an image or video they are about to share inadvertently contains private
information. For this project, an interdisciplinary team will design and
evaluate an automated assistant that alerts users of privacy disclosures in
their visual media and edits their pictures and videos to obfuscate any
potential private content. If successful, these contributions will enable blind
individuals for the first time to independently avoid accidental visual privacy
leaks, thereby empowering them to live more independent and connected lives.
This project can also be helpful to the broader population as they sometimes
overlook private information in their visual content. The project team
anticipates this work would generalize, with minor adaptations, to benefit other
populations such as people with low vision, people with cognitive impairments,
aging adults, and children. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will involve
designing novel computer vision algorithms and end-user mechanisms that empower
people who are blind to independently safeguard private information in their
pictures and videos. Specifically, it will consist of three key tasks: (1)
creating back-end computer vision algorithms that learn to locate private
content in images and videos by observing only a few examples of it (i.e., few
shot semantic segmentation), (2) creating back-end computer vision algorithms
that learn to locate the foreground object in images and videos (i.e.,
foreground object segmentation) in order to support retaining only that content,
and (3) establishing effective design choices for an accessible front-end
interface that engenders a level of trust that is appropriate given the
algorithms' performance. The team will facilitate future extensions of this work
by sharing the generated artifacts including the code for privacy-preserving
algorithms, characterization of use with design recommendations for privacy-
preserving technology, and a working prototype.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.