* 2125922
* Workshop on Enhancing Postdoctoral Professional Skills to Advance Research and Workforce Development
* O/D,OIA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Selena Connealy, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,528.00

The University of New Mexico will host a workshop to effect sustainable
engagement of postdoctoral scholars in the national research community.
Postdoctoral scholars represent a critical component of the STEM professional
workforce. Many NSF projects provide an opportunity for recently graduated
doctoral students to pursue postdoctoral experiences and gain valuable
disciplinary expertise and skills that enable them to pursue productive careers
in academia, government, and business and industry. Consequently, NSF requires
postdoctoral mentoring plans for any project that employs postdoctoral scholars.
Such plans routinely include training and opportunities related to academic
careers such as advanced instrumentation, specialized analyses, and teaching and
publishing. Yet, various other knowledge areas, skills, and capabilities are
also central to postdoctoral career success such as leadership skills,
collaboration, and team science. The primary objectives of this workshop are to
identify the specific knowledge, skills, and capabilities that postdoctoral
scholars believe would contribute most to their ongoing research and future
career success and to develop a best-practices guide that can lead to more
impactful postdoctoral mentoring and training
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific workshop activities include 1)
designing and implementing a nation-wide survey of postdoctoral researchers to
determine their needs for training with respect to particular knowledge areas,
skills and capabilities, as well as the extent to which they receive this
training as part of their academic training; 2) assembling a team of subject
experts to design educational modules and training activities that would address
the needs identified by postdoctoral researchers; and 3) provide guidance to
faculty and administrators for designing and implementing more effective
postdoctoral mentoring plans. Identification, adoption and deployment of the
best practices and solutions identified as part of the workshop will result in
postdoctoral scholars that are better prepared and more successful as they move
into careers in academic, industry, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.