* 2125087
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Crowd+AI Tools to Map, Analyze, and Visualize Sidewalk Accessibility for Inclusive Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Joy Hammel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,018,000.00

Despite decades of civil rights legislation for Americans with disabilities,
many city sidewalks remain inaccessible. A key problem is the lack of reliable
data on where sidewalks exist and their quality. This lack of data fundamentally
limits how sidewalk accessibility can be studied in cities, the ability for
communities, advocacy groups, and local governments to understand, transparently
discuss, and make informed planning decisions, and how sidewalks and
accessibility are incorporated into interactive map, navigation, and Geographic
Information Systems analysis tools. This proposal aims to (1) advance
understanding of stakeholder needs and opportunities for socio-technical tools
to assess and plan for accessible sidewalks; (2) develop and evaluate crowd+AI
sidewalk data collection and assessment techniques to improve scalability,
reliability, and better support diverse stakeholder needs; and (3) develop and
evaluate a suite of open-source urban accessibility analysis and visualization
tools. To address these aims, this project's cross-disciplinary team will work
with urban and transportation planners, government leaders, disability advocates
(e.g. EasterSeals - which also is participating as a Co-PI) and people with
disabilities via participatory-design methods, crowdsourcing and stakeholder
focus groups and interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work makes
foundational contributions to Human Computer Interaction, urban planning, and
disability studies. First, this project will advance understanding of
stakeholder needs and opportunities for socio-technical tools to support
planning of accessible sidewalks, civic engagement, advocacy, and trip planning.
Second, this project will develop new data collection and assessment techniques
that will contribute new ML-based algorithms, crowd+AI workflows, and quality
control mechanisms that improve scalability, reliability, and better support
diverse stakeholder needs. The proposed crowd+AI approaches will enhance
understanding of the challenges, concerns, and future opportunities for engaging
people with disabilities in smart cities civic participation. Third, this
project will develop and evaluate a suite of open-source sidewalk accessibility
analysis and visualization tools, which are uniquely enabled by our data
collection techniques, to help urban planners and transit agencies develop ADA
transition plans for improving sidewalk accessibility, enable pedestrian and
disability advocates to examine geo-spatial patterns of inaccessibility and
review government progress, and help people with disabilities make safe,
accessible mobility decisions. The proposed data collection and visualization
tools have the potential to transform how sidewalk accessibility data is
collected and analyzed, how cities plan for and improve sidewalk accessibility,
and how infrastructure funding is dispersed in cities. The tools and data will
be open sourced, enabling others to build off our workâ€”including the over 80% of
US cities that do not yet have plans to remove sidewalk
barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.