* 2125516
* SCC-PG: A Sustainable and Connected Community-Scale Food System to Empower Consumers, Farmers, and Retailers
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Srirangaraj Setlur, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

A complex network of stakeholders, resources, activities, and information move
food from farm to plate through a soil to soil food system (FS). To ensure the
health of this system, especially through times of crisis and instability, all
of the system's stakeholders (e.g., residents, food-producers, researchers, and
policy-makers) need fresh, up-to-date information, something only possible at
scale through the aid of community members. This project lays the foundations
for a sustainable, community-driven data collection tool that will
simultaneously help community members to better understand their food system by
answering questions like "Where can I find healthy, fresh, low-cost food?" while
encouraging participation in the food system by helping to keep data fresh and
up-to-date. This planning proposal will develop a proof-of-concept, using image
recognition (e.g., at retail stores or farm stands) to streamline the process of
recording information about the availability, price, types, and other
characteristics of produce available at produce displays. The project will also
work with community members to drive adoption of the tool through healthy eating
workshops and data-collection competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working
collaboratively with non-profit and local government community partners in the
Western New York (WNY) food system, the project team of researchers and
stakeholder will develop data collection platform called REAP (Research,
Education, Action, And Policy for Resilience) to allow crowdsourced data to
augment an existing WNY food system dashboard. For example, by allowing for
crowdsourced produce price data, the team can analyze how this information
impacts the behaviors of both consumers and suppliers in the food system. The
project will advance the state of the art in computer vision and uncertain data
management by developing techniques to correlate multiple sources of information
in images while ignoring distractors, and for tracking the system's confidence
in the resulting information through the entire data presentation pipeline. The
proposed work also includes a meta-analysis, using pre- and post- surveys, as
well as graph analysis on the data captured through REAP, to examine how the
availability and flow of co-produced information and food-related behavioral
actions affect food system stakeholders. REAP lays the groundwork for ongoing
efforts to map the WNY food system, simultaneously studying both urban and rural
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.