* 2125906
* Collaborative Research: NRT-QL: A Program for Training a Quantum Workforce
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Ehsan Khatami, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 739,029.00

Recent progress in quantum information science and technology (QIST) promises
advances that will fundamentally reshape today’s leading technologies, including
computing, communications, and sensing. A well-prepared workforce is essential
to fulfilling this promise. In response to this critical workforce need, this
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Colorado
School of Mines (Mines) and San Jose State University (SJSU) supports the
development of rigorous, integrated, interdisciplinary training programs
preparing both Master’s and Doctoral students for careers in QIST. The program
has three components that address key challenges in training a quantum
workforce. First, new training materials will be developed to introduce QIST
basics to students from different disciplines. Trainees will come from physics,
electrical engineering, metallurgical and materials engineering, applied
mathematics and statistics, computer science, and quantum engineering. Second,
industrial and national lab partners will be engaged to provide trainees access
to cutting-edge technologies and research experiences. Finally, student
recruitment and mentoring programs, unconscious bias training, ally workshops,
and regular climate surveys will be developed to ensure diversity in the QIST
workforce. The project will train one-hundred and twenty-five (125) MS and Ph.D.
students, including thirty-five (35) fully-funded trainees. These efforts will
result in an institutionalized program that produces leaders in QIST for careers
in academia, industry, government, and national labs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program addresses three grand challenges in quantum technology: (1) How
can demonstrable quantum speed-up using existing or near-term quantum computing
architectures be achieved? (2) How can materials and electrical engineering
interface with quantum technology to provide meaningful advances in device
development and fabrication? (3) How can new directions in quantum algorithms
advance and challenge the notion that quantum technology can solve problems that
are impossible to tackle with conventional technology? These interdisciplinary
research challenges require close synergy between fundamental physics, materials
science, electrical engineering, and algorithm development. New courses and
degree pathways in QIST are being developed at both Mines and SJSU, which
include integration of professional skills development into the graduate
curriculum. Through classroom training and research, trainees will be exposed to
the full range of quantum technology architectures, providing a holistic view of
this rapidly developing field. An innovative educational agreement between Mines
and SJSU will provide opportunities for students to complete an MS/Ph.D. bridge
program from SJSU to Mines. The program will result in a template for QIST
graduate education, which will be accessible to STEM students from all
backgrounds and types of institutions, increasing diversity in QIST.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.