* 2125069
* MIM: A thermodynamic theory of microbiome assembly, adaptation and evolution evaluated using modular microbial environments
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Jinyun Tang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,400,000.00

Across Earth’s ecosystems, microbes adapt and form communities (microbiomes)
across gradients of energy and resource richness. Like the machines and
electrical circuits we engineer, power and efficiency are key features that also
determine the competitiveness of microbes in communities. Over evolutionary
time, microbes have optimized their own molecular machines to convert available
energy with high efficiency, minimizing the loss of waste energy as heat.
Microbes have a range of strategies, reflecting the balance between the rate of
new cell production (power), and its efficiency (yield), while also dealing with
various costs of survival that reduce yield. This research project will test the
hypothesis that microbiomes, assemble from individual members to form
communities that also optimize power while increasing efficiency. This principle
of power and efficiency optimization may apply generally across different levels
of biological organization from proteins to ecosystems. Researchers will study
microbiomes from soils and the human gut as model systems to test this idea.
They will develop a new experimental platform, involving multiple compartments
to control how microbiomes interact, with integrated nanotechnology sensors to
measure microbial efficiency as heat output, plus advanced microscopy to measure
yield as microbes grow. This work will test if information stored in microbial
genomes can predict their power-yield strategies, and if aspects of microbiome
diversity can be related to efficiency, developing a predictive modeling
framework. If this fundamental thermodynamic theory can explain patterns in
biological organization from cells to communities, it will provide an important
new framework to predict how biology will respond to future conditions on Earth.
Broader impacts include involving community college students in the research, in
addition to graduate and postdoctoral students. Outreach activities consist of
developing scientific videos for a storytelling platform, which would be
available to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes, like all living
organisms, maintain the order of life through the creation of entropy. They
exist in open, non-equilibrium thermodynamic systems, across gradients of free-
energy that fuel the formation and maintenance of structures (proteins, cells,
communities) that enhance exergy flow, while attempting to minimize dissipation
of waste heat – enhancing overall entropy production in the process. The
assembly and succession of microbial communities are driven by flows of exergy,
and it is the trade-off between maximum power and minimum heat dissipation that
regulate yield (i.e. efficiency). This trade-off towards the production of
entropy is a fundamental thermodynamic principle. As a biological optimization
function, the optimization of power and yield aligns thermodynamics and
evolution through natural selection, in that constraints such as resource
availability or stress, modulate the fitness of an organism depending on the
placement of their power:yield strategy across a Pareto optimal curve. How these
trade-offs manifest at the community scale has not been empirically tested. This
research will test this by (1) developing a novel integrated nanocalorimetry-
microfluidics platform to control gradients of resources and stress,
simultaneously quantifying power, yield and entropy production in an open
system; (2) performing a series of manipulative experiments to evaluate how
properties of microorganisms and microbiomes relate to power, yield and entropy
production and bio(geo)chemical outputs, and (3) develop simulation tools based
on the thermodynamics of power-yield trade-offs to predict the emergence of
microbiome function and composition. This thermodynamic theory is applicable to
all living organisms, with the outcomes being generalizable beyond microbiome
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award was provided by the
Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.