* 2125409
* SCC-PG: Connecting communities with real-time data collection and downscaled climate risk models to improve water quality and sustain salt marshes in the Buzzards Bay Watershed
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Linda Deegan, Woodwell Climate Research Center, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2023
* USD 148,959.00

Coastal communities face enormous challenges managing water resources in the
face of climate change. Degraded water quality driven by excess nutrients,
combined with rising sea levels, increased river flooding, higher temperatures,
and greater climate variation will increase nutrient delivery to coastal waters
and impair the ability of salt marshes to sustain themselves. Many
municipalities share coastal waters, with nutrient loading often originating
from watersheds farther inland. Community management of water quality and salt
marsh loss are inhibited by two critical factors. First, conditions that lead to
the biggest impacts occur infrequently, and climate change will increase this
variability. Second, data and information on these events are not well captured
by existing monitoring systems, making it difficult for managers to identify
appropriate solutions. Emerging technologies have the potential to provide
dynamic information on water quality, marshes and climate in ways that can
provide more comprehensive information and connect across communities managing
water resources. New automated sensors can be deployed across multiple locations
to provide time-series and information to better identify impacts and potential
solutions. Downscaled climate models can predict climate changes at local
scales. However, technologies will only be adopted if the information they
produce is both useful and useable as well as trusted and accepted by
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the potential
for continuously-collected water quality information and regional climate models
to support management of water quality and salt mashes in the Buzzards Bay
Watershed in coastal Massachusetts. Technology developers and stakeholders will
co-design data collection strategies to improve local water resources research
The project will engage scientists and members of the community who manage,
regulate, and advocate for water quality and marshes to determine: (1) What
information is needed to better identify impacts to water quality and salt
marshes and to guide water and marsh management? (2) What new sensor
technologies, field applications, and climate model projections could be
combined to produce the knowledge needed? and (3) How can these new technologies
be best deployed and managed to create a smart and connected community?
Workshops and interactions among scientists and community members will identify
the highest-priority and highest-value potential future uses of new sensor
technologies and identify the climate risks of greatest interest to the
community. The outcomes from the workshops will be used organize future research
to pilot the priority technologies and test conceptual models of how the
communities use the new technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.