* 2125944
* A person-by-situation approach to predicting behavior with implicit measures
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Colin Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 205,187.00

The ability to accurately predict human behavior is a signature challenge of
social science. Attitudes encapsulate specific thoughts and feelings that
presumably should predict behavior. However, often people are unwilling or
unable to provide accurate reports of their attitudes, which frequently is the
case when their attitudes reflect socially controversial beliefs. It has now
been roughly two decades since the invention and innovation of a class of
attitude measures termed "implicit measures", which were designed to access
mental content that a person is either unwilling or unable to report. This
important methodological advance has had an immense impact on both scientific
theory and public discourse. However, the evidence is mixed with respect to the
utility of these measures in predicting behavior. The current project reframes
decades of research to suggest that the mental content picked up by these
measures varies in predictive ability 1) across people who differ from one
another in important ways, and 2) as those people find themselves in a variety
of different situations. The appropriate question may not be "Do implicit
measures predict behavior?". Rather they are "Do implicit measures predict
behavior better for some people rather than others and in some situations more
than in others?" and "Do these two levels of inquiry interact so that prediction
works particularly well for some people in some
situations?"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides the most comprehensive
test to date of factors affecting the utility of implicit measures. The 12
studies test predictions using three implicit measures across five attitude
domains and examine eight individual differences within four different eliciting
contexts. Specific methods test person factors (attitudinal accessibility,
consistency) and situational factors (activation, control). The breadth of
inquiry and large samples are essential to make confident and generalizable
claims. The findings of this research have critical implications regarding the
validity of attitudes that are difficult to measure, including those that
contribute to the adverse treatment of others. Only by accurately assessing
attitudes across people and contexts can their downstream consequences on
societal problems be better understood and addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.