* 2125246
* SCC-IRG JST: PanCommunity: Leveraging Data and Models for Understanding and Improving Community Response in Pandemics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* K. Selcuk Candan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 720,000.00

The goal of this integrative research effort is to enhance the understanding of
the complex relationships characterizing pandemics and interventions under
crisis. The global-scale response to the COVID-19 pandemic triggered drastic
measures including economic shutdowns, travel bans, stay-home orders, and even
complete lockdowns of entire cities, regions, and countries. The need to
effectively produce and deliver PPE, testing and vaccines has affected different
communities of stakeholders in different ways, requiring coordination at
family/business units, counties/states to federal level entities. This project,
therefore, considers communities at local, federal, and international (US and
Japan) scales and investigate impact of testing, preventative measures and
vaccines, when used in combination, to improve community and inter-agency
response at the different scales. The impacts of this research includes
technologies to help save lives, restore basic services and community
functionality, and establish a platform that supports core capabilities
including planning, public information, and warning. The project organizes an
interdisciplinary community, bringing together (a) computer/data scientists, (b)
domain and social scientists and policy experts, (c) federal, state, local
governments, (d) industry and nonprofits, and (e) educators, to serve as a nexus
for major research collaborations that will: overcome key research barriers and
explore and catalyze new paradigms and practices in cross-community response to
pandemics; enable development and sharing of sustainable and reusable
technologies, coupled with extensive broader dissemination activities; act as a
resource for public policy guidance on relevant strategies and regulations; and
provide education, broadening participation, and workforce development at all
levels (K12 to postgraduate) for the next generation of scientists, engineers,
and practitioners. The project involves a close collaboration between Arizona
State University in the United States, and Kyoto University in Japan. The
project involves interfaces with community partners in Tempe, Arizona and Kyoto,
as well as national-level civic organizations in both the U.S. and Japan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort aims to answer several fundamental research
challenges across computing and community health: (a) epidemic, testing,
vaccination and behavior model/data integration and alignment, (b) multi-model
and multi-scale simulation ensemble creation and decision support, and (c)
multi-scale social impact of decision making across communities. To tackle these
challenges, the project develops new data and model informed methods, brought
together in PanCommunity, to develop testing and vaccination policies,
considering coordination, collaboration, and competition across communities at
multiple scales. This project will develop a novel model description,
assessment, and composition framework that supports seamless integration of
independently developed, reusable scientific model and analysis components
within the same framework as the data for understanding and improving community
response in pandemics. This project also develops novel coupled simulation and
optimization frameworks that account not only for economical but also social
costs in supporting decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
joint collaboration between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Science and Technology Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.