* 2125295
* NRT-HDR: Detecting and Addressing Bias in Data, Humans, and Institutions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Susan Brennan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,513.00

Data science has become a powerful tool for generating new knowledge, fueling
innovation, and dealing with society's most pressing problems. Harnessing this
data revolution requires broadening the participation of U.S. citizens in the
data science workforce, especially of women and other under-represented groups.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Stony Brook
University (the State University of New York at Stony Brook) will prepare a
diverse pool of students to become fluent in both data sciences and human-
centered sciences. The program will enable students to conduct convergent
research in problem domains that blend data science with deep disciplinary
knowledge. The project anticipates training sixty-eight (68) Ph.D. students,
including thirty-four (34) NRT-funded trainees, recruited from both the human-
centered sciences (HCS, consisting of Psychology, Linguistics, Economics,
Neurobiology &amp; Behavior, Political Science, and Sociology) and the data
sciences (DS, consisting of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics &amp;
Statistics). In the U.S., scientifically oriented domestic students tend to
gather in distinct siloes, with significantly higher proportions of women in HCS
than in DS fields. HCS students are well-trained in the traditional empirical
methods of their fields. However, many do not identify as "data scientists."
These HCS students may lack the preparation to dive into graduate coursework in
computer science to acquire cutting-edge research skills in areas such as
artificial intelligence, machine learning, and big data that could empower their
research. And many DS students lack a deep theoretical and practical
understanding of how datasets are collected and their limitations. Moreover, DS
students may lack the skills to assess the impacts of data-based technology upon
human beings and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this two-pathway training
model, DS trainees will take graduate coursework in an HCS domain, earning a
certificate in the Human-Centered Sciences. Meanwhile, HCS trainees will take
any needed intensive bridge courses to prepare them for graduate coursework in
DS and earn an Artificial Intelligence certificate. Trainees will come together
in three team-taught research practica centered on a relevant and inclusive
theme: biasâ€”in data, in humans, and in institutions. These practica will focus
on discovering how the use of powerful quantitative methods can camouflage
biases (both implicit and explicit) that, in a given context, advantage some
human beings and disadvantage others. Both trainees and trainers will practice
techniques for detecting and addressing biases in themselves and their research,
as well as within social and institutional settings. Together, they will join
convergent research collaborations that target pervasive problems of inequity
and the ethical uses of technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.