* 2125030
* EAGER: Engineering Optical Nanobiosensors for Detection of Coronavirus Proteases
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Stefan Bossmann, University of Kansas Medical Center Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 10/31/2022
* USD 294,100.00

Coronaviruses have emerged as major pathogens of respiratory disease outbreaks,
including most recently COVID-19 disease. Current assays for detection of the
SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, the causative agent of COVID-19 disease, are based on
reverse transcriptase-coupled polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or immunoassays
which use antibodies to detect viral antigens. However, these assays have
limited capacity to discriminate between active and past infections. The goal of
this project is to design and validate nanobiosensors capable of reporting
active coronavirus infections. Optical nanobiosensors will be developed that
detect two signature proteases of SARS-CoV-2. These optical nanobiosensors are
anticipated to provide quantitative assessment of active viral load, such that
disease trajectories can be measured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PCR-based and
immunological methods are limited in their ability to distinguish between
patients with active coronavirus infection and patients that have survived the
disease. Moreover, immunoassays are hampered by the incomplete specificity of
currently available antibodies. A critical need exists for a technology that is
capable of detecting the activity of a coronavirus in a "liquid biopsy" such as
plasma, serum, sputum or exhaled breath condensate. The hypothesis of this
research is that proteolytic activities of SARS-CoV-2 signature proteases PLpro
and 3CLpro will provide a real-time, quantitative marker of active viral
infection. Optical nanobiosensors specific for these proteases will be developed
and validated, leveraging the optical properties of magnetic Fe/Fe3O4 core/shell
nanoparticles linked to fluorophores and FRET-quenchers. Subsequent in vitro
validation will utilize biosamples from infected cell cultures and pre-clinical
models. This research builds on prior work by the Kansas State University team
who developed patented bionanosensor technology for the ultra-sensitive
detection of proteases and post-translational modifications, which has
demonstrated capacity to detect proteases (e.g., arginase) in the sub-femtomolar
range.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.