* 2125626
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Co-Producing Community - An integrated approach to building smart and connected nutrient management communities in the US Corn Belt
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Austin Omer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,017,780.00

Farmers in the United States (US) Corn Belt produce ~30% of the world’s corn and
soybean, which depends on the use of fertilizers containing both nitrogen (N)
and phosphorus (P). However, due to a lack of consistent and reliable
information, these farmers tend to over-apply fertilizer. This practice directly
affects farmers, as they are paying higher fertilizer costs than necessary, and
negatively impacts environmental sustainability. Yet, farmers’ perceptions of
nutrient management challenges vary widely as does their willingness to adopt
novel nutrient management approaches. Working collaboratively with the Illinois
Farm Bureau, the University of Illinois Extension, and engaging farmers directly
through the these partnering organizations, the team of academic and community
partners aims to build a smart and connected "Nutrient Management Community
(NuMC)" to help farmers adopt effective and trusted nutrient management tools to
address critical water quality issues stemming from nutrient runoff while
reducing farm nutrient application costs. The project is built on the premise of
voluntary adoption of nutrient management practices and includes social science
questions to assess the reasons and strategies for encouraging adoption of
voluntary “best practices.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enabling farmers to manage N
and P with greater precision is needed to increase farmer profitability and
decrease off-farm losses of nutrients, which can compromise water resources. The
objective of this research is to develop science-driven recommendations on N and
P management that can be tailored to different farmers’ needs, focusing on the
heart of the US Corn Belt: Illinois. This work has three objectives: (1)
identify major constraints on how Illinois farmers manage N and P management,
and determine to what extent these constraints vary among farmers; (2) determine
how much N and P are stocked in soils across a diversity of Illinois farm
(including through the use of soil sensors and satellite observations), and how
this soil nutrient capital contributes to crop growth in order to model field-
specific fertilizer needs; and (3) develop smart and connected technology
solutions that enable constrained farmers to join a Nutrient Management
Community (NuMC). This work will advance understanding of agricultural
management by and for farming communities by providing insights on interrelated
social science, biogeochemistry, and technology dynamics. The proposed approach
will produce a community-based cyberinfrastructure that will address an urgent
need: providing Illinois farmers direct access to high-quality and unbiased
information on management nutrients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.