* 2125017
* Kickstarting Advances in Assistive and Rehabilitative Technologies
* O/D,OIA
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Patricio Vela, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2021
* USD 118,904.00

Overview: A virtual workshop on the topic of assistive and rehabilitative
technologies for persons with disabilities or impairments will be conducted The
main objective of the workshop is to understand the existing landscape of
research, development, and practice for these technologies and how they promote
better and healthier living for persons with disabilities or impairments.
Building on participant insights and expertise, the challenges and opportunities
for convergence based research thatâ€™s inspired by users will be identified by
workshop participants. They will engage with each other to answer several
relevant questions regarding this landscape and to develop a framework for
identifying investigations and initiatives ready for convergent acceleration.
Inspired by grounded theory studies, the synthesized knowledge and identified
categories will be fed back to the participants for further exploration and
refinement. &lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit: The workshop aims to identify
candidate research and translational gaps related to assistive and
rehabilitative technologies. This will be made possible by bringing together a
diverse group of stakeholders from academia, industry, other agencies,
nonprofits and the users themselves. To provide a coherent structure to the
workshop , the overall research area has been decomposed into the intervention
type, the various populations with disabilities or impairments, and the enablers
of the technological interventions. Participants and perspectives from across
these classes will be invited. In bringing together professionals and people who
would not normally comingle, the intent is to compare and contrast the different
perspective to arrive at a holistic understanding of the field and answer the
questions: What initiatives or innovations would most effectively address the
most impactful needs of the various target populations.? Are these initiatives
capable of resulting in a proof-of-concept deliverable within a 3-4 year period?
These answers should identify some clear themes that need convergence and are
ready for an accelerated delivery of some tangible outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: Beside the potential to seed new research
collaborations, the work will connect researchers, practitioners, nonprofits and
industry in some very unique partnerships. Secondly, the topic of investigation
is one that touches on most members of society given the prevalence of
disabilities or injury-related impairments within the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.