* 2125264
* SCC-PG: Connecting Coastal Communities (CCC)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ilya Zaslavsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This NSF S&amp;CC grant explores the role of quantitative information (e.g.
data) and qualitative information (e.g. images, stories, social media) in
forming relationships between people and the coastal community in which they
reside. The project will explore whether the combination of quantitative and
qualitative information is more effective at connecting people with their
coastal environment compared to using only quantitative information. Members of
a Cape Cod community and a Wampanoag tribal community across Cape Cod Bay from
each other will engage in separate workshops to document and share the stories,
data, and images that connect them with their coastal settings. While these
coastal residents live in similar environmental settings (i.e., similar
quantitative data), they hold different qualitative information (i.e., different
cultural or social perceptions of the local environment). Comparisons of these
two case studies will reveal the similarities and differences between
communities, and also help to uncover how and which stories have influence
across communities. This project will provide a new understanding of the types
of information, perspectives, and actions that form robust, resilient, and
sustainable coastal communities in the face of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this NSF Smart and Connected
Communities grant is to develop effective and sustainable responses to the
climate change impacts that affect coastal communities. Specific objectives
include: 1) To promote deep personal connections with the coast through
unstructured data such as images, videos, and social media and through
structured data from both embedded sources as well as community science efforts
using distributed sensors; 2) To expand connections across geographical
boundaries among communities with similar relationships with their coasts; and
3) To enhance sustainable connections with place through history and traditional
ecological knowledge. The project is based on the premise that the deficit model
of education is inadequate for influencing behavior change. Instead, the project
is designed to test McGuire’s (2015) hypothesis that intuition, emotion, and
community norms are more important to impact behavior change than simple
presentation of facts. A series of deliberative stakeholder workshops will
result in a co-created list of data needs, communications strategies, and
overarching research questions. The project will produce best practices both for
increasing diversity among stakeholders consulted in response to climate change,
and guidance for effective engagement with communities that will lead to
sustainable decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.