* 2125984
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital therapeutic virtual reality tool to address social isolation and improve geriatric care (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Richard Hoagland, RALPHVR INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2023
* USD 272,082.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a technology to support social-emotional
health by fostering co-presence, defined as a sense of being together in a
virtual environment analogous to person-to-person physical interaction.
Loneliness can be debilitating and have detrimental impact on patients aged 65
and over, causing an estimated $7 billion in Medicare costs associated with the
effects of morbidity and mortality factors, such as dementia, heart disease,
stroke, and depression. The recent COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted both the
challenges and opportunities of digital tools in fostering connections
associated with mental and physical health. The proposed virtual reality
solution and the emerging digital therapeutics sector can address significant
challenges faced by hospitals, assisted living care facilities, and mental
health facilities, improving clinical outcomes. The findings of this project are
expected to impact other human interaction contexts, such as training,
education, and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances translation of digital therapeutic
tools to foster co-presence. The project compares physiological and
psychological markers between pairs of individuals in both real and virtual
contexts in search of significant markers for co-presence. Objectives include
development of a custom virtual reality application and collection of
quantitative data on pairs of individuals interacting in three social contexts.
Proposed research will evaluate the degree to which virtual reality fosters co-
presence and focus on specific algorithms and design choices as significant
drivers of co-presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.