* 2125684
* NRT-HDR: Finding Signal in the Noise to Enable Science-Based Community Response to Change in Coastal Region
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Stephen Moysey, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,999,736.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal environments throughout
the world are undergoing substantial changes in response to climate and human-
induced disturbances. Natural disasters and climate stressors make already
pervasive inequities and environmental injustices in coastal communities even
more pronounced. Therefore, there is an imperative for a workforce that can
investigate how coastal regions are changing in response to human and natural
stressors. The resulting science can then be translated to aid communities in
assessing the risks of, and actions to address, these challenges. A variety of
agencies and stakeholders routinely collect environmental and socio-economic
data that could help to address these problems. However, the data required for
traditional analyses or modeling approaches are rarely collected. Therefore,
understanding the drivers of coastal change requires creative ways to make sense
of available diverse data sets. Trainees in the Coastal Community Environmental
Data Scholars (CCEDS) program will represent multiple graduate degree programs
and undertake activities that train them in how to apply data science skills
while building their confidence as data science scholars – an important issue as
many students coming from backgrounds like geology or biology may see data
science as a barrier to success rather than a pathway to career enablement. The
trainees will extend their dissertation research by applying their basic science
skills in partnerships with local communities to identify and solve problems of
concern. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
East Carolina University (ECU) will train interdisciplinary scientists and
engineers to address problems of critical importance to coastal communities via
data science. The project anticipates training 36 Ph.D. students, including 18
funded trainees, from two of ECU’s flagship doctoral programs, the Integrated
Coastal Science program and the Interdisciplinary Doctoral Program in Biology,
Biomedicine, and Chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-driven tools like
empirical dynamical modeling and deep learning have an advantage over
traditional modeling and analysis methods when insufficient information is
available to develop mechanistic models of environmental processes and their
coupling with human activities. These data-driven tools can bring new insights
to the understanding of complex systems, particularly in detecting changes in
system behavior that can be complemented with more traditional studies to
understand why or how the change occurred. The proposed traineeship supports
research activities focused on the convergence of two distinct Ph.D. programs
and ensures the preparation of an interdisciplinary data science workforce,
especially important for economically developing coastal regions. Trainees will
build on their data science experience by taking part in a 2-year sequence of
six program activities involving practices supporting convergent research,
science communication, and community-engaged research. Further, the traineeship
is based on and tests the effectiveness of best practices for training students
to overcome issues such as imposter phenomena and stereotype threats related to
data science. The experiential activities are structured to build trainees’
confidence and identity while preparing them for real-world data science jobs
within and beyond academia. This program will benefit society by training a
diverse workforce to collaborate with community partners and use data-driven
activities to mitigate environmental issues that impact equity and social
justice in coastal regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.