* 2125909
* SBIR Phase I:  A Platform for Health Care Data Integration Using Blockchain and Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* Irene Woerner, EMTRUTH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2023
* USD 254,091.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to improve health outcomes while managing
costs. The proposed technology enables the integration and retrieval of data
from many places and formats across a distributed ecosystem secured by
blockchain. Healthcare, a $2.9 B market segment, is targeted because the need is
great and the US healthcare market is highly fragmented. Making healthcare data
faster to interoperate and share while maintaining data integrity, security and
privacy is key to potentially improving healthcare outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is advancing foundational technology for searching and retrieving
heterogeneous data secured in blockchain across a distributed data platform.
Multiple data sources with different formats and data models will be transformed
into more granular data blocks in blockchain. In addition to normalizing
blockchain data into more granular data blocks for sharing and re-use in
different applications (i.e., simplifying data integration and
interoperability), research will use natural language processing (NLP) to assist
in automatically generating metadata tags to facilitate searching across
blockchains. To improve the accuracy of data returned in the search, a human
expert-curated healthcare dictionary and thesaurus will be created and used in
concert with NLP assistance. This combined approach should improve the accuracy
of data retrieval by non-IT, healthcare, users across a secure, peer-to-peer
data platform where data owners retain full ownership and control of their data.
The proposed research will also validate through performance testing new
blockchain search capabilies will meet the responsiveness and scale required by
healthcare enterprises, a key need for commercialization. In particular, the
project will establish benchmarks for speed and latency across a geographically
dispersed network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.