* 2125065
* Collaborative Research: MIM: Gut-inhabiting fungi influence structure and function of herptile microbiomes through horizontal gene transfer and novel metabolic function
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Donald Walker, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2025
* USD 870,000.00

Reptiles and amphibians are among the most threatened species on the planet, and
an increasing number of their species must be managed in captive breeding
programs. Understanding the biodiversity and function of microbes that are
present in the digestive tracts of reptiles and amphibians is critical for
insight into their role in animal health. Early research suggests that the
filamentous fungus Basidiobolus is an important member of reptile and amphibian
gut microbiomes, and that this fungus influences what types of bacteria are
present in the digestive tract. Genomic sequencing of the Basidiobolus fungus
shows that genes have been transferred to the fungus from the gut bacteria. This
transfer of genes between bacteria and fungi results in novel metabolism in the
fungus that may play important roles in regulating the reptile/amphibian host’s
immune system, iron metabolism, and chemical communication with the gut
bacteria. An interdisciplinary scientific approach will be used to understand
the functional roles that specialized metabolites play in microbial interactions
between fungi and bacteria in gut microbiomes of animals and also other natural
microbiomes. Outreach activities with zoos and the Great Smoky Mountains
National Park will share information about reptile and amphibian gut microbiomes
with the general public, and educational material will be provided to educators
for inclusion in K-12 and university curricula. Interdisciplinary training of
students and postdoctoral researchers to prepare them for careers in research,
education, and outreach is central to the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will advance a new scientific understanding of the fundamental roles that
specialized metabolites play in microbial interactions between fungi and
bacteria in gut microbiomes. This will be accomplished through an
interdisciplinary approach combining ecology and evolutionary biology, genomics
and metagenomics, natural product chemistry, synthetic microbiome experiments,
and controlled amphibian feeding trials. Preliminary data reveal that fungi in
the genus Basidiobolus are dominant members of the herptile microbiome, and that
microbial community structure is shaped by the genetic diversity of
Basidiobolus, which has acquired specialized metabolism through HGT. Integration
of biological, molecular, genomic, metagenomic, and chemical resources in the
proposed herptile system will allow for tests of the following hypotheses: H1:
Herptile microbiomes are characterized by unique fungal communities not found in
other nonpathogenic, microbiome systems. H2: The bacterial assemblages of
herptile microbiomes are structured by interactions with fungi. H3: HGT from co-
occurring bacteria to herptile gut fungi allowed Basidiobolus to acquire novel
metabolic functions necessary to adapt to, and function in, the herptile
microbiome. H4: Fungal-bacterial interactions in herptile GI systems are
regulated by metabolites that influence community structure and function. H5:
The phenotype of the host-microbiome association is species/context dependent.
This work will further refine the general model that the animal gastrointestinal
environment promotes HGT between bacteria and fungi, and that this HGT selects
for specialized metabolites that modulate the host immune system (cyclic
peptides), and allow fungi to function in a reduced oxygen environment and
compete in a bacterial rich microbial community (siderophores and
surfactins).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.