* 2125283
* SCC-PG : Human-AI Teaming for Flood Evacuation Decision Making
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Pamela Murray-Tuite, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Evacuation of coastal communities, particularly in rural areas, can be a
challenge due to the topography, dispersed residential and population patterns,
and limited number of roadways that lead further inland. This Smart and
Connected Community Planning project will assess the viability of leveraging
human knowledge and social media data with an artificial intelligence (AI)
system to create a human-AI teaming (HAT) paradigm addressing flood evacuation
decision making in isolated coastal rural communities. In the process of
creating a HAT paradigm, we will integrate transportation network data with
river information as well as volunteers’ observations and social media data to
leverage the strengths of local members of a Community Emergency Response Team
(CERT) with AI. This Planning project advances the field by conducting a
feasibility study of this HAT decision-making tool, which will be tested through
real-world flood evacuation examples in Charleston, Berkeley, and Dorchester
Counties located in the Lowcountry region of South Carolina (SC). Additionally,
we will determine the barriers and motivations for understanding the usability
of the researched HAT decision-making tool using qualitative (interview)
protocols. This project supports education and diversity by providing research
experiences to diverse students, as well as focusing on vulnerable, rural
communities. Additionally, this planning project supports NSF's mission to
promote the progress of science and to advance the nation's health, prosperity,
and welfare by seeking to (i) enhance flood evacuation by automatic data-driven
decision making and (ii) identify potential barriers to the adoption of
technology in rural volunteer communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will co-create and implement a pilot solution for flood evacuation decision
making by including systems thinking, human–machine engagement, human
development training, and AI-driven decision making. The focus is on the
advancement of flood evacuation techniques by transferring the traditional
determination techniques (the expert evaluation approach) toward new and
coherent HAT computing. By leveraging HAT protocols and applying them to a flood
evacuation decision-making tool, our project has the potential to be
transformative. Tackling these issues will enable us to harness the full
potential of AI as a partner in emergency management and response. This planning
project brings together researchers from water resources engineering, social
sciences and communication, transportation engineering, disaster science,
computer science, and numerous volunteers and stakeholders to co-create
solutions, build/strengthen collaboration with key stakeholders and CERT
organizations and identify potential barriers to technology use in rural
communities challenged by a higher incidence of flood hazards and substandard
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.