* 2125895
* Exploring Dislocation Structures with Conventional EBSD
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Ulrich Faul, SUNY College at New Paltz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 223,744.00

The interior of the Earth is not frozen but continuously turns over. The motion
of rigid plates at the Earth’s surface is driven by the thermal convection of
solid rocks in the planet interior. Plate tectonics likely began early in
Earth’s history. The continuous deformation leaves a record within rocks that
can be sampled at the surface. Such a record is also observed in minerals and
rocks deformed experimentally at conditions reproducing natural deformations.
The record includes the size and shape of the minerals forming the rocks, called
microstructure, as well as specific defects within individual crystals. These
defects contain critical information about the permanent deformation – called
plastic deformation – that the mineral experienced. A key ingredient of crystal
plastic deformation, first recognized and extensively studied in metals, are
line defects called dislocations. These small linear defects can be imaged by
electron microscopy. Yet, because of their small size, it is challenging to
observe them together with their host crystal, usually much larger. Here, the
team develops a new method to image dislocations over areas that are
representative of the microstructure of natural rocks. The method, based on
scanning electron microscopy, can be routinely applied to experimentally and
naturally deformed rocks. It provides a new time- and cost-effective way to
study processes that shape the Earth. The researchers first benchmark the method
on crystals which have been experimentally deformed and extensively studied by a
range of imaging techniques. They then apply the new imaging technique to
naturally deformed rocks, gradually unveiling their deformation history. The
project supports an early-career female scientist and the training of
undergraduate students at SUNY College at New Paltz (NY). Its outcomes provide
the scientific community with a blueprint for improving microstructural studies
of Earth materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the Earth's crust and upper
mantle deform by dislocation creep. Grain-internal structures of experimentally
and naturally deformed samples are usually examined either by oxidative
decoration of dislocations or TEM imaging. The former is not a routine analysis
method and cannot resolve the full geometry of dislocations. While the latter
comprehensively characterizes dislocations, the investigated volume is only a
few microns, a fraction of the grain size even of fine-grained experimental
samples. Up to now, electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) mapping has
primarily been used to determine grain sizes and lattice preferred orientation;
but the speed and quality of EBSD indexing has substantially improved over the
last decade. Automated EBSD mapping allows routine imaging of relatively large
areas (up to thin section scale). High-resolution EBSD mapping has been shown to
be able to image dislocation structures in olivine and quartz. HR-EBSD, however,
requires substantial additional resources in comparison to conventional EBSD.
Here, the team investigate whether conventional EBSD mapping can provide
accurate enough indexing to characterize dislocation type/slip systems, for both
distributed dislocations and sub-grain boundaries. To test the method, the team
map single crystals previously deformed experimentally, for which the
dislocation structures have been comprehensively evaluated by oxidative
decoration and TEM. The method will then applied to natural samples with
different fabric types, which allows indexing their dislocation microstructures
in a cost-effective way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.