* 2125441
* Floodplain ecogeomorphic processes: interactions between floodplain forest characteristics, wood accumulations, and hydrogeomorphology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Katherine Lininger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 407,205.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Downed, dead pieces of wood in
rivers and floodplains influence physical and ecological processes in river
systems. Many river restoration efforts use wood to provide habitat for
organisms, but wood on floodplains can also create habitat. However, very little
is known about how wood is moved onto floodplains by rivers and then moved from
floodplains back to river channels. This project uses scaled physical models of
rivers and floodplains (flumes), numerical modeling, and fieldwork to determine
how flooding, forest characteristics, and physical characteristics of rivers and
floodplains cause the deposition of wood onto floodplains. The results of the
project will be presented to the river restoration community. The project will
also create educational lessons using flumes for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate level students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Downed, dead wood on the
floodplain influences geomorphic processes and provides ecological benefits to
river corridors. However, understanding the interactions between floodplain
vegetation, wood, and hydrogeomorphology is a new frontier in geomorphic
research, and numerical modeling of wood transport and deposition has only
recently been developed. This project combines flume experiments, numerical
modelling, and field observations integrating floodplain forest stand
characteristics, hydrogeomorphology, and wood transport and deposition during
floods to assess the controls on wood deposition in floodplains and subsequent
wood remobilization. The research objectives include (1) understanding the role
of the forest stand density on the deposition and storage of wood in
floodplains, (2) unravelling the importance of floodplain and channel morphology
on floodplain wood dynamics, and (3) assessing overbank flow conditions needed
to deposit and remobilize wood onto and from the floodplain to better understand
wood jam formation and persistence. Flume experiments will simulate different
forest stand densities, overbank flow conditions, and wood transport regimes.
The data gathered during the physical experiments will provide baseline
information needed to develop empirical relationships for floodplain flow-
forest-wood-morphologic interactions. The flume experiments will be used to test
and enhance a 2D hydrodynamic model to further explore wood dynamics on
floodplains, which will then be applied to a field site where large amounts of
floodplain wood jams are present due to a recent flooding event. The results of
the project will be disseminated to management agencies and restoration groups
in the US and Europe that are incorporating floodplain wood into efforts to
enhance floodplain ecosystem functioning. This project will also develop K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate level flume laboratory assignments and lessons on
floodplain dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.