* 2125530
* SCC-IRG JST: Hyperlocal Risk Monitoring and Pandemic Preparedness through Privacy-Enhanced Mobility and Social Interactions Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Cyrus Shahabi, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Hyperlocal risk monitoring is critical for gaining a better estimate of the
current and future infection risk at a population level during a pandemic, as
well as a better understanding of disparate infection risk in vulnerable groups.
However, many challenges remain in enabling hyperlocal risk monitoring and
decision making for community-based pandemic preparedness. First, most popular
disease prediction models are at a coarse-grained level without considering
mobility and social interactions data. Second, a one-size-fits-all approach
fails to appropriately address heterogeneity in mobility patterns and
interactions, which can be highly community or country specific (e.g., US vs.
Japan) and the risks are affected by regional, socioeconomic, behavioral, and
cultural differences. Finally, privacy concerns limit the access and use of
fine-grained mobility and social interactions data. This project represents a
multi-disciplinary collaboration between US and Japanese researchers including
lead institutions at Emory University and Kyoto University. The project includes
strong community engagement with communities in the US (primarily Georgia and
Southern California) and Japan (primarily Kyoto prefecture) as well as local and
regional health centers.. The project aims to develop a framework for privacy-
enhanced monitoring and analysis of fine-grained mobility and social
interactions data to enable hyperlocal risk monitoring and data-driven decision-
making. Such hyperlocal situational awareness can help governments and response
officials at all levels (from schools and businesses to county and state) for
policy making, e.g., open in-person or online; close or partially shut down; and
reallocate medical supplies and workforces to vulnerable areas. It can also
benefit an individual’s personal decision making in the community, e.g., to
avoid high-risk areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes an integrative
research agenda that addresses both technical and social science questions to
enable hyperlocal data collection, analysis, and decision making: 1) develop
computational and modeling methods for fine-grained risk estimation and scenario
analysis (e.g., future estimated risk under partial shutdown) by incorporating
real-world mobility and social interactions data; 2) study how mobility
patterns, social interactions, behaviors, and risks change and differ by region,
socioeconomic status, and country using the US vs. Japan as exemplars; and 3)
develop privacy-enhancing technologies and study their social adoption and legal
implications for collection and aggregation of mobility and social network data.
The team will engage with community stakeholders across the entire data-driven
decision-making pipeline including data providers; local public health agencies;
local decision makers; and community members. The goal is to not only build a
data aggregation and analytics platform but also a feedback loop that enables
data-driven policy and decision making while simultaneously enabling social
scientists, epidemiologists, and decision makers to steer the data collection,
aggregation, and analysis, ultimately enabling better preparation and readiness
for future outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a joint
collaboration between the National Science Foundation and the Japan Science and
Technology Agency&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.