* 2125354
* SCC-PG: Edge Computing for Bringing Smart Services to Under-served Urban Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Umakishore Ramachandran, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Today we are entirely dependent on centralized infrastructures (aka Cloud) for
pretty much all our everyday activities such as online education, neighborhood
apps, access to driving directions, and restaurant suggestions in a
neighborhood. This reliance on the Cloud has serious implications. Most
importantly it is one of the primary causes for the increasing digital divide
between the affluent and under¬served communities. The thesis of this proposal
is that such reliance on a centralized infrastructure is the bane of
under¬served communities blocking them from reaping the benefits of information
services that are available at the fingertips of residents in affluent
communities. Ubiquitous availability of low-cost software services that are
tailored to the needs of the community and pertinent to the local conditions
without reliance on the Cloud are key factors in enhancing the capabilities of
such communities. The key hypothesis to be validated through the planning grant
is the power of edge computing to address the digital divide and future¬proof
these under¬served urban communities. The findings from the planning grant will
help reveal feasible technological interventions for future¬proofing
under¬served urban communities from the digital divide. There is promise that
the results of this research could be replicated elsewhere leading to a positive
impact on the lives of under-served communities nation¬wide, if the hypotheses
of the larger research vision is validated by the data collection being done
through this planning grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the Westside communities
of Atlanta as an exemplar for under¬served urban neighborhoods, the planning
grant wishes to carry out the following pilots along the technology dimension:
(a) edge¬compute based video¬conferencing solutions for the residents of the
community (e.g., for meetings of the stakeholders, tutoring help for students,
etc.) ; (b) edge¬compute based smart prefetching of content pertinent to the
needs of the residents (e.g., entertainment, videos and presentations pertaining
to school work, etc.) ; and (c) ad hoc connectivity solutions to bring WiFi
hotspots to different neighborhoods. Along the societal dimension, the project
will recruit participants (about 30) representing different demographic groups
(such as community leaders, teachers, students, mentors, and local residents)
for using the technology pilots. The data collection from the user group will
consist of: (a) general understanding of the pressing needs of the community;
(b) specific requirements of the focus groups for identifying the types of
content to be prefetched and/or cached in the edge nodes; and (c) user
experience on the technology pilots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.