* 2125012
* SCC-IRG Track 2: The “Community Tech Workers”: A Community-Driven Model to Support Economic Mobility and Bridge the Digital Divide in the U.S.
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Julie Hui, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,435,769.00

Information and communication technologies allow individuals to apply for
benefits like health care and housing, to have groceries delivered to their
homes, to schedule/attend healthcare appointments, and to apply for employment.
However, digital inequalities in terms of access, use, and self-efficacy reflect
offline socioeconomic inequalities and pose a serious threat to today's
increasingly tech-reliant society. The digital divide is a multidimensional
phenomenon that refers to three levels of differences: first, in who has access
to the Internet; second, who has skills to use the Internet; and third, how the
Internet is actually used. Many efforts to bridge the digital divide have failed
because they only address the first level (e.g., providing public Wifi,
computers, computer labs) without continued onboarding and training support.
This project aims to address digital disparities in Southeast Michigan by
leveraging and building the digital literacy of local experts (level 2) to
provide digital support to communities (levels 2 and 3). Inspired by the
transformative Community Health Worker model, this work proposes "Community Tech
Workers" (CTW), a community-driven, "train the trainer" approach that promotes
digital literacy in communities. Participants include a public housing authority
in Detroit's Eastside neighborhood, a refugee resettlement agency that serves
refugees in a public housing community in Ypsilanti, an advisory board
consisting of local workforce development agencies and industry representation,
and a steering committee of individuals who are involved in outreach, education,
and interventions related to increasing digital proficiency and public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will (1) develop and validate a survey
instrument measure to assess community digital capacity; (2) develop an initial
CTW training program; (3) assess the training, learning experience, and impact
of the CTWs within each community; and (4) capture and evaluate the economic
value of the CTW model. The survey instrument will extend existing assessments
for measuring individual digital capacity to create a novel instrument that
measures digital capacities at a community grain size. This instrument will be
validated across two communities, and then be used to measure the impact of the
CTW activities on the two communities over time. CTW training activities will be
evaluated via interviews with participants and observations of the training
sessions. Recommendations for a credentialing system to document CTW proficiency
and for a marketplace system to promote employment opportunities will be
elicited via participatory co-design sessions, information which can be used to
inform integration with or development of job recommendation and gig work
applications. Finally, data on costs will be collected to generate a cost-
benefit analysis of the CTW model, to explore its further scalability. Secondary
outcomes of the work include providing local residents with free training to
obtain the necessary skills to become a CTW, and in the future, temporary
employment for selected tech workers and connections to local IT employment
opportunities. Incorporating the model across multiple communities will help
uncover generalizable requirements for creating equitable socio-technical
infrastructures that support community digital capacity and expand local
opportunities. This systemic perspective on the development and deployment of
the CTW model aligns well with the goal of the NSF Smart and Connected
Communities (S&amp;CC) program, which is to accelerate the creation of the
scientific and engineering foundations that will enable smart and connected
communities to bring about new levels of economic opportunity and growth, safety
and security, health and wellness, accessibility and inclusivity, and overall
quality of life. This project is also supported by the Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education program, which seeks to support projects that have high potential
for broader societal impacts, including improved diversity of students and
instructors participating in STEM education, professional development for
instructors to ensure adoption of new and effective pedagogical techniques that
meet the changing needs of students, and projects that promote institutional
partnerships for collaborative research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.