* 2125528
* NRT-FW-HTF: NSF Traineeship in the Advancement of Surgical Technologies
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Brian Mann, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,967.00

Rapid changes in surgical technologies have created new demands on the future
engineering workforce. For example, future engineers will create intelligent
surgical instruments, autonomous robots that use artificial intelligence and
machine learning to make clinical decisions, and tools that augment the
performance and capabilities of surgeons. This will require a convergence of
skillsets and knowledge to traverse technological, regulatory, ethical, and
societal hurdles to create technologies that safely and successfully meet modern
challenges. Most graduate engineering programs excel at teaching the fundamental
tenets of their respective disciplines. However, graduate engineering curricula
often lack the training that enables students to transcend their disciplines and
engage in convergent research that involves not just other engineers, but also
professionals from other STEM fields, medicine, business, and law. By engaging
with these other disciplines, this traineeship will provide a more holistic and
innovative approach for the professional formation of engineers to impact the
future of advanced surgical technologies. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Duke University will train Masterâ€™s and
Ph.D. students in the interdisciplinary fields of engineering, computer science,
data science, and surgical technologies. This project anticipates training a
total of 230 students, including 30 NRT-funded trainees from Engineering,
Computer Science, Math, Science and Society, and Statistics. The vision for this
traineeship is to provide a new research and training framework for engineering
and computer science graduate students to access other disciplines and thereby
design advanced surgical technologies that integrate medical provider, societal,
end-user, and patient needs throughout development and
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed traineeship model combines classroom-
based, research-based, and professional development activities completed
concurrently over two years, leading to four core learning outcomes: (1) a
common knowledge base; (2) subject expertise across multiple, convergent
disciplines; (3) a translational experience at the forefront of surgical
technology research and development; and (4) professional development
opportunities that prepare students for both academic and industry-based careers
in surgical technology. A specific novelty of the proposed program is the use of
topical primers interconnected with mini design challenges in which trainees
will shadow a surgeon, use current surgical tools and robots, and take knowledge
primers in robotics, surgery, machine learning, rapid prototyping, ethics,
intellectual property, and medical law; these activities are designed to enable
students to acquire a diverse knowledge base and necessary professional
development quickly. Trainees will also receive feedback from stakeholders such
as surgeons and external board members from industry to provide further
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.