* 2125279
* SCC-PG Improving the Safety and Appeal of Public Transit in COVID-19 Times
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Roberto Manduchi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,974.00

Public transit has suffered disproportionally from loss of ridership due to the
COVID-19 pandemic. New technology is called for to ensure that passengers feel
safe while riding a bus vehicle or a train cart. This project will address two
interconnected services that will contribute to a safe travel experience:
effortless ticketing and crowdedness monitoring. By effortless (or implicit)
ticketing, methods will be developed that enable payment of the correct fare as
triggered by the mere presence of the user inside the vehicle. Effortless
ticketing removes the need to physically approach a validation point, thereby
eliminating “accumulation points” of social proximity, which may slow the flow
of passengers entering the vehicle and thus increase boarding times. Crowdedness
monitoring consists of techniques for the real-time assessment of the number and
distribution of passengers in a bus vehicle or a train cart. This information
may allow passengers awaiting at a bus stop or train station whether to board
the upcoming vehicle, or, if they determine that the vehicle is too crowded for
their comfort level, wait for the next one, or use a different means of
transportation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The same mechanism that enables effortless
ticketing can be used for assessing and tracking the distribution of passengers
in a vehicle. This project will use Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons as the
underlying technology for both services considered. This Smart &amp; Connected
Community Planning Grant will focus on a crowdsourced data collection exercise
that will be conducted in the University of California at Santa Cruz campus.
Participating students, while using the free campus shuttles in their daily
routine, will run a smartphone app, developed as part of this project, that will
record data from in-vehicle BLE beacons, as well as inertial and GPS data. This
annotated data set, which will be openly available to other researchers, will be
instrumental for the future development of BLE-based effortless ticketing and
crowdedness monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.