* 2125165
* SCC-IRG JST: Multimodal Data Analytics and Integration for Effective COVID-19, Pandemics and Compound Disaster Response and Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Steven Luis, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 03/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in huge amounts of confirmed cases and deaths
both in the United States and globally. The nation experienced grave
repercussions to citizens’ lives, health, and the economy. Due to its high
contagiousness, policies such as quarantine and lockdowns were put in place to
slow the virus’ rapid spread. Some major challenges are identifying vulnerable
communities to provide immediate help and determining policies that are
effective in slowing down the spread with minimal adverse effects on people’s
livelihood, mental health, and the economy. This project aims to develop tools
that can locate communities in crisis, identify their problems and demands, and
predict pandemic transmission trends and impacts in diverse communities based on
mobility and social media data. The developed tools and technologies are
critical for effective disaster management and pandemic recovery. Furthermore,
pandemic and other natural disasters’ co-occurrence is even more challenging
given that mass evacuation and sheltering processes may cause a spike in cases
of transmissible pandemic diseases. This project will develop new technologies
that can aid emergency managers under a pandemic scenario based upon our
previously developed tools for natural disaster
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research provides potential
solutions to solve crucial disaster information management challenges for
COVID-19, future pandemics, and compound disasters while leveraging the team's
previous work. Furthermore, the proposed techniques will help better understand
the disaster situation to assist the preparation and recovery for a broad range
of communities, including minority and low-income populations. This project will
also have the potential to have societal and economic impacts by providing the
most accurate information on pandemics and compound disasters to prevent
unexpected losses. The developed solutions could be later expanded for other
disaster and information management. This project fosters collaboration between
the Florida International University (FIU) and the University of Tokyo, as well
as institutions across the public and private sectors (including the cities of
Miami-Dade, Florida, and Tokyo, Japan), to develop advanced techniques for
effective emergency response and management for COVID-19, future pandemic, and
compound disasters. This work’s broader impact is aligned with the national goal
of building smart and connected communities by developing innovative disaster
information exchange and analysis tools with real-life data. In addition, FIU is
one of the nation’s leading minority-serving research universities and ranks
first in awarding undergraduate and graduate degrees to Hispanic students. The
research findings of this project will be disseminated through workshops,
publications, and presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a joint
collaboration between the National Science Foundation and the Japan Science and
Technology Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.