* 2125654
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Designing and testing remote services to support formerly homeless persons in permanent housing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kiran George, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,215,370.00

Permanent supportive housing is an evidence-based approach to addressing
homelessness that involves access to community-based housing combined with
supportive services, such as access to physical and mental health information
and care. Little research has examined technological innovations for providing
services in housing for vulnerable populations. This interdisciplinary
community-based project brings together investigators from computer science and
engineering, public health, and social work, and two large housing initiatives
in Southern California. The research team is investigating the social and
technical challenges of adopting sensor-based technologies, such as tele-mental
health services. The project team is exploring the issues using a combination of
surveys and an innovative "lean design" approach. Lean design refers to
developing a solution in an iterative way with rapid development of prototypes
that can be quickly evaluated and the lessons learned applied to the next
iteration. This approach includes the community partners in the design and
evaluation of technology prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates the social and engineering dimensions of three key technologies
that can significantly impact how services are delivered: (1) minimally
intrusive environment and user-borne sensors to facilitate tele-mental health
services and increase safety, (2) privacy-preserving data sharing algorithms
that can be tuned to meet the expectations of multiple stakeholders, and (3)
mobile user interfaces for accessing the Internet and remote services. Tunable
privacy-preserving data sharing algorithms accommodate the different preferences
of the multiple stakeholders in permanent supportive housing. The project
identifies the social and technological factors that affect the successful use
of remote services and combines them into a general model for predicting when
tele-services can be effective. This project will lay the groundwork for
community-based research to help meet the mental health needs of PSH residents
and influence the design of supportive housing units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.