* 2125220
* SCC-PG - Prisons Evolving as Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Eden Badertscher, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,998.00

United States prisons exist in geographically bounded, technologically
disconnected communities. Restrictions on services and isolation from the
outside world, including lack of access to digital devices and the internet in
prisons, has restricted prisoners’ opportunities for education and healthcare,
has limited their future work and career prospects, and has reinforced divisions
between incarcerated people and their communities. Recent legislation and the
work of many volunteers and organizations is making it possible for correctional
institutions to dramatically improve prisoner’s options and opportunities for
education, communication, and future well-being. Nonetheless, regardless of
delivery model, access to, and training in, a robust technology infrastructure
is essential for these opportunities to become a reality. This project seeks to
support technology access and the people impacted by incarceration, with the
ultimate goal of fostering their prospects for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this planning award, the project team is
tackling challenges to technology access and use through purposeful community
engagement and is drawing on community-based systems dynamics research as a
practical and empirical tool to constructively approach system change.
Strategically selected focus groups will ensure the project team is addressing
systemic factors and their interrelationships based on a variety of prisoners’
and experts’ perspectives and experiences. A working group is applying these
findings in the development of a plan, which will be central to determining the
recommendations for an infrastructure that disrupts current dehumanizing
systems, supports successful re-entry, and addresses challenging conversations
about security and administration. The leadership team will ultimately develop
full project to develop and test this infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.