* 2125672
* SCC-PG: Using a Network of Campus Testbeds and Community Engagement to Accelerate the Mutual Creation, Adoption, and Transfer of Urban Innovation in Cities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Richard Corsi, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 11/30/2022
* USD 149,893.00

This proposal highlights two barriers limiting the ability of technology to
improve the quality of life in cities: (1) a mismatch between the needs of
communities and of the private and public sectors, and (2) a distrust among
community members of companies and city governments promoting technological
change. It explores the hypothesis that both challenges can be overcome using a
network of campus-based testbeds where city residents, governments, companies,
and academics can assess new applications under relatively controlled conditions
before dispatching them more broadly. Using five contrasting testbeds in
Portland OR, Seattle WA, and Vancouver BC (Portland State University, the Oregon
Museum of Science and Industry, Portland International Airport, University of
Washington, and University of British Columbia), and focusing on three distinct
application areas (accessibility for people with disabilities, integration of
building energy efficiency and public health, and protection of the climate-
ameliorating capacities of urban trees) this project will compare how
stakeholder groups use novel technologies to increase prioritized civic values.
The testbed network will create an urban innovation evaluation pipeline
consisting of problem identification, digital assessment of current conditions,
implementation of campus-based testing, and evaluation and scaling of results to
create civic value, all in partnership with five core constituencies: community
stakeholder groups, city government, large tech firms, small startups, and
universities. The highly interdisciplinary research proposed here builds on a
unique set of corporate, academic, municipal, and nonprofit investments and
partnerships to help define a more inclusive and responsive ecosystem of urban
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through close coordination with core urban
constituencies, this project will design and deploy novel combinations of
technologies across a five-campus network. This project will also use three
strands of social science research to examine: (1) how locally tested
innovations can increase their impact on larger socio-technical systems through
better coordination, (2) how negotiation and compromise can overcome different
constituenciesâ€™ objections to implementation, and (3) how engaging communities
earlier in the evaluation process can address concerns and help resolve the
mismatch between community motives and technological outcomes. Recommendations
from these studies can increase the chances that technology use leads to more
inclusive, productive, and impactful urban problem-solving. Success will be
measured by (1) cities more rapidly finding new combinations of digital
applications that effectively address community needs; (2) community groups
reporting that their city is more responsive to their priorities; and (3)
companies creatively and profitably responding to what urban residents
want.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.