* 2125113
* CRII: CHS: Harnessing Machine Learning to Improve Human Decision Making: A Case Study on Deceptive Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Chenhao Tan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 145,886.00

Humans are the final decision-makers in a wide variety of critical tasks that
involve ethical and legal concerns, ranging from predicting criminal recidivism
by the courts, to medical diagnosis, to identifying misleading information.
These are challenging tasks for humans and for machines. However, for some
closely-constrained tasks where vast amounts of training data are available,
machine learning algorithms can outperform humans. If the knowledge encoded in
the machine learning models can be elucidated to humans, these implementations
can support human decision making and even tutor humans to achieve better
performance. Those are the goals of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates human decision making with assistance from machine learning
models for the task of detecting deception. It explores two domains routinely
encountered on the Internet, online reviews and news articles. It develops two
forms of assistance from machine learning models to improve human decision
making while retaining human agency: 1) providing information based on machine
learning models for real-time support of human decisions, and 2) automatically
generating tutorials to help humans understand the nature of this task from the
perspective of machine learning models (offline training). This project develops
novel algorithms that incorporate educational psychology to help teach humans
the knowledge encoded in machine learning algorithms. The project evaluates the
two forms of assistance by tracking human performance improvement in user
studies. The project explores additional indicators, such as trust and time to
complete tasks, to further understand collaboration between humans and machine
learning algorithms. The knowledge gained in the project will inform design
principles for effective integration of artificial intelligence into human
decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.