* 2125023
* Concrete Micromechanics Validated with In-Situ Stress and Strain Measurements
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ryan Hurley, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,356.00

This research will examine the mechanical response of concrete at micrometer to
centimeter length scales to validate theories and computational models used to
predict its behavior and failure. Concrete is the world’s most-common building
material and extensive research efforts are on-going to improve its resiliency
and environmental friendliness. Concrete is composed of particles and inclusions
with varying properties and dimensions ranging from nanometers to centimeters
that interact during mechanical loading. The results of these interactions are
captured by theories and computational models in the field of micromechanics.
While micromechanics-based theories accurately predict many mechanical
properties of concrete, the assumptions underlying these theories have not been
validated at small length scales. Furthermore, determining the resolution needed
for accurate computational modeling of concrete is still challenging. This
research project will employ new, advanced x-ray measurements to assess the
response of concrete from micrometers to centimeters, to test the hypotheses
underlying micromechanics theories, and to provide the research community with
high-fidelity data for validating models. The results of this research are
expected to improve predictions of concrete’s mechanical response and promote
understanding of its properties. The research results will also be used to teach
advanced concepts in a graduate engineering course and to provide research
opportunities to under-represented high school students interested in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research consists of making in-situ x-ray
tomography and diffraction measurements of stress and strain at micron to
centimeter length scales during mechanical loading of concrete specimens at
laboratory and synchrotron facilities. These measurements will be used to
validate and extend micromechanics theories, such as Eshelby’s inclusion and
Mori-Tanaka’s theories, and their underlying assumptions across length scales.
For instance, the measurements will be used to examine whether average inclusion
stresses used as intermediate variables in deriving homogenized material
properties are accurate and to what degree individual inclusion stresses deviate
from the average. The measurements will also be used to examine the accuracy of
mesoscale modeling with varying levels of microstructural refinement, addressing
open problems related to the length scales that must be captured in such models.
The outcomes of the project will be a fundamental understanding of stress and
strain variability across length scales in concrete, guidance for mesoscale
modeling, and high-fidelity datasets for calibration and validation of theories
and models used throughout the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.