* 2125393
* SCC-PG: Revitalizing Rural - Equipping Rural Communities with Technology Literacy for Seizing Productivity
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Julie Angle, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Lack of participation in the digital economy is an impediment to societal well-
being and production which asymmetrically affects rural communities. The
literature indicates that technological availability (e.g., broadband) is only a
part of the problem: rural communities are not as active as their urban
counterparts in technology adoption. The adoption problem covers the extent to
which rural communities have the financial resources and awareness, skills, and
aspirations (or collectively, the literacy) to seize the productivity
opportunities afforded by smart and connected technologies (SCT). This planning
project will conduct a pilot study to determine how improved technology literacy
can impact the rural adoption of SCT for building productivity to economically
and socially revitalize rural communities. Specifically, this project will
explore the development of a novel educational tool for technology literacy
called Productivity Enhancing Technology Experience-Kits (Pete-Kits). Pete-Kits
will be combinations of low-cost devices such as microprocessors and sensors
that make use of communications technologies like WiFi, Bluetooth, and Radio
Frequency ID (RFID), and which can be combined with cloud connectivity to
support high school students as they develop entrepreneurial SCT projects within
their rural communities. These kits will be developed with input from high
school students and community members. High school teachers and students will
receive training on how to use the kits, and students will then be invited to
develop their own SCT entrepreneurial projects which will be judged in a final
community competition event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine: (1)
how rural awareness of SCT is influenced by hands-on experiences with Pete-Kits,
(2) to what degree are the basic skills for using SCT increased through
interactions with Pete-Kit, and (3) the effects are of Pete-Kit based training
and competition on rural participants’ productivity, and their aspirations for
entrepreneurship, remote work, and quality of life within their community. These
questions will largely be addressed via survey instruments, administered both
before and after the intervention, to both participants and to attendees of
community events. Community forums and workshops will also be held to review the
strengths and weaknesses of the Pete-Kit program, and to develop relationships
with other communities and tribal nations for future scalability. This planning
project aligns well with the Smart &amp; Connected Communities program’s goal to
accelerate the creation of the scientific and engineering foundations that will
enable smart and connected communities to bring about new levels of economic
opportunity and growth. This project is also receiving funding from the ITEST
program, which has priorities for (1) increasing awareness of STEM &amp; ICT
occupations, (2) motivating students to pursue educational pathways to those
occupations, and (3) developing disciplinary content knowledge and skills
necessary for entering those occupations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.