* 2125677
* NRT-AI-FW-HTF: Co-Design of Trustworthy AI and Future Work Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Robert Pless, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

The nature and structure of work are fundamentally changing as artificial
intelligence (AI) becomes more deeply integrated within the structures of modern
workplaces. This integration creates tension between the opportunities for
ubiquitous AI to transform the workplace and emerging risks around bias,
security, and privacy. Currently, AI tools are being developed at an unusually
rapid pace, and deployed into environments where value maximization precedes
regulation. The next generation of innovators accordingly needs a new kind of
training. For algorithm designers, this means understanding and being sensitive
to the context in which their creations may operate in unexpected ways through
interaction with users in socio-technical ecosystems. For system designers, this
means knowing enough about how AI tools are evolving to reimagine how tasks and
processes could and should transform work in ways that fully leverage the
potential power of AI tools. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the George Washington University will address these
needs by training doctoral students, master’s students, and graduate certificate
students who will be prepared to make convergent research contributions to AI in
the future workplace in a way that positively impacts society. The project
anticipates training one-hundred and twenty (120) students, including twenty-
five (25) funded Ph.D. trainees, primarily serving students in the discipline of
computer science and systems engineering but with close interaction with the
students and faculty in law, media, public affairs, public health, and
international affairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT aims to educate researchers
capable of “co-designing” AI algorithms and work systems to unlock new
opportunities in both the capabilities of new systems and their
“trustworthiness.” To accomplish this, the educational program aims to instill
the following: 1) Comfort in bridging distant disciplines. Through novel
onboarding sequences and shared experience of cross-disciplinary engagement with
peers, mentors, and industry, the program will educate interdisciplinary, “comb-
shaped” scholars who have a solid base in either AI algorithms or work system
design and are also comfortable engaging deeply with other disciplinary areas
fundamental to their chosen research problems. 2) Appreciation for contextually-
embedded problem-solving. Important issues arise when well-intentioned systems
evolve post-deployment. The NRT emphasizes context early and often as research
is being formulated. Summer bootcamps will facilitate research problem
formulation that enables early cycles of feedback and testing with a broad set
of stakeholders. Additionally, by intertwining students from different programs
by engaging them in a professional certificate through the onboarding sequences,
informal opportunities will be created for natural cross-pollination from theory
to practice and back. 3) Holistic professional identities. Although many Ph.D.
programs are starting to build scaffolding to support “soft-skills,” this
usually occurs separately from core program elements. This program’s strategy is
to make communication, leadership, teamwork, and ethics central to each program
element. The bootcamps and seminars will also provide structured opportunities
for students to learn, practice, and reinforce their strategies, e.g., engaging
with ethics in context. 4) Valuing diverse perspectives in decision-making. AI
algorithms tend to exacerbate existing biases, making it especially important to
bring diverse perspectives into decision-making to mitigate unintended
consequences. Currently, AI adoption is being driven by a relatively homogenous
group. There is a need to increase participation from underrepresented groups
and expose students to the value of bringing in diverse perspectives early in
the process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.