* 2125636
* BCSER: Developing Expertise in Data Envelope Analysis (DEA) to Guide Investigations of Best Practices at HSIs Efficiently Graduating Hispanics with STEM Degrees
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Omar Lopez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 336,677.00

Improving graduation rates of STEM majors for Hispanic students at Hispanic
Serving Institutions (HSI) will contribute to the goal of broadening
participation in STEM career fields. Texas State University aims to identify
links between investment inputs and success in graduating Hispanic students from
Hispanic-Serving Institutions using data submitted to the National Center for
Educational Statistics (NCES). Patterns in HSI inputs that are associated with
institutions that are more efficient at graduating Hispanic students in STEM
degrees will be identified and communicated with HSI stakeholders to help inform
management and administrative practices. The project aims to advance knowledge
in the field through increasing research on HSI practices and their impacts on
graduation success. This knowledge will further impact the U.S. academic,
technical, and professional workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs
optimized models incorporating Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), a technique used
to evaluate organizational efficiency. Using data from the Integrated
Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS) at NCES, DEA will be used to provide
a framework for decision-making at HSIs to effectively graduate Hispanic
students in STEM majors with limited resources. The project is significant in
that it aims to assist HSIs in mitigating the frequent concern of limited
resources by identifying critical inputs that lead to effective graduation of
STEM students. The project will build capacity for conducting education research
through training in interpreting DEA data, building data science skills, and
advancing data science education research networks. The project is supported
through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
(ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build individualsâ€™ capacity to
carry out high-quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.