* 2125472
* SCC-PG: Enhancing Community Engagement in Flood Mitigation Using Integrated Hydrodynamic Modeling and Multi-Scale Socio-Economic Risk Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Emad Habib, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 149,944.00

This project will work with community stakeholders and groups in flood-prone
communities to codevelop technological tools that will promote a broader and
more comprehensive understanding of flood risks stimulating consensus and
support for flood mitigation strategies that can reduce the devastating and
costly impacts of flooding. Working closely with community stakeholders, the
project will provide diverse groups access to easily comprehensible information
and customized tools to engage in decision making and discover common ground
facilitating conflict resolution. The project team will support groups in
identifying their current knowledge gaps and tool preferences, facilitating the
development of appropriate technology for knowledge exchange and decision
making. Additionally, the co-development of this technology will enhance social
capital development at the individual and community scale. Through project
generated educational and partnership opportunities, community-based groups and
organizations will become more connected and smarter in dealing with flood
risks. By advancing the state of the science through innovations in information
and communication technologies to address flood risk and mitigation, the project
will support the National Science Foundation’s mission to promote the progress
of science and advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare when
addressing flood risks and supporting economically viable and sustainable
solutions for flood mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
planning project is to identify how recent advances in hydroinformatics
technologies including hydrodynamic modeling, geospatial visualization, and
fusion of heterogeneous data for socioeconomic analysis, can empower diverse
stakeholders in flood-prone communities to understand flood risks and engage in
formulating and supporting flood mitigation strategies. The community of
interest is Lafayette Parish in Louisiana, USA, that exemplifies experiences of
other US communities facing increasing flood risks caused by climate and land
use changes. Recent research indicates that disparate levels of risk perception
impact a community’s ability to function cohesively. Individual risk is often
understood through the lens of whether a particular location was flooded in a
past flood, failing to capture the whole interconnected dimensions at the
community level. Potential benefits of mitigation projects are often presented
as deterministic without accounting for climate variability or projected land
use changes. In addition to individual risk, economic and social conditions can
amplify risks to specific populations and groups with communities. The goals of
this project are: (1) to test research hypotheses on possible solutions for
reaching community consensus related to flooding risks and developing a shared
vision for addressing these risks at individual and community scales; and (2) to
refine a conceptual framework for using hydroinformatics technologies to
overcome these challenges. In this project, we will conduct interviews and
interactive workshops engaging diverse stakeholders to: a) assess information
gaps about flood risk, b) identify web-based applications integrating
hydrodynamic modeling, geospatial visualization, and socioeconomic analysis to
enhance engagement and collaboration across multiple sectors, and c) develop
technology-driven engagement tools informed by stakeholder
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.