* 2125561
* SCC-IRG JST: Active sensing and personalized interventions for pandemic-induced social isolation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Insup Lee, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 770,000.00

Social connections are essential for individuals' health and the growth of a
community. Social isolation is an increasing concern in developed countries with
aging populations. The American Academy of Social Work and Social Welfare calls
social isolation ``a silent killer as dangerous to health as smoking.'' The
onset of the COVID-19 pandemic greatly exacerbated the problems of social
isolation, depriving older adults of their personal interactions with peers and
often even with caregivers. This proposal aims to develop and evaluate techno-
social solutions to increase the social interactions between older adults within
a community, reducing the level of social isolation within a community, while
maintaining the required social distancing --- issues of great importance in the
US and Japan. This project represents a collaboration between academic
researchers and community partners in the U.S. and Japan, who will provide a
potential pathway for transitioning research results to practice. Although this
project focuses on social isolation in older adults, knowledge developed through
this project can be applied to other age groups and other domains in mental
health and healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim is to develop a technology
platform and tools to facilitate re-engagement of community members at high risk
for social isolation. It will enable the delivery of tailored interventions to
connect community members with peers and caregivers in the community at the
individual level, as well as interventions to plan and coordinate services at
the community level. The potential of this work will be demonstrated with two
distinctly different communities of older adults at high risk for social
isolation, one in the U.S. and one in Japan. This proposal addresses the
following technical challenges: (1) Identification of new sensing modalities to
complement sensors already used in the field. (2) Develop techniques and
algorithms to analyze collected state information to predict with sufficient
likelihood the onset of a problem early enough for caregivers to react to the
problem. (3) Personalization of the proposed interventions, i.e., adapting
interventions to a specific individual at runtime, with a focus on decision-
making at the community level. (4) Develop a platform to integrate sensors with
data storage and the analysis engine ensuring security of the system and
protecting privacy of the individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
joint collaboration between the National Science Foundation and the Japan
Science and Technology Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.