* 2125958
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing Recommender Systems against Data Poisoning Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Bin Liu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this project is to build secure recommender systems against data
poisoning attacks. Recommender systems are common online, suggesting movies,
products, news, and many other kinds of items in order to help people find
things they are interested in and make decisions. The influence recommender
systems have on people's behavior, however, makes them attractive targets:
attackers can create fake users who rate items in ways that lead the system to
recommend products that are more in the attackers' interests than the users'.
These "data poisoning" attacks threaten the integrity of recommender systems,
harming both the companies and people that use them. This proposal will develop
methods to detect, limit, and recover from the damage of data poisoning attacks,
making recommender systems more resistant to manipulation by bad actors and thus
more trustable and useful; the methods will also be incorporated into students'
coursework and research work, training a next generation of computer scientists
to build more robust machine learning systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
is structured around three main aims. Task 1 involves systematically
investigating the security vulnerabilities of recommender systems against data
poisoning attacks where attackers have varying levels of knowledge about the
algorithms and datasets. In task 2 the team will develop new recommendation
algorithms that provably prevent data poisoning attacks, i.e., a bounded number
of fake users provably cannot affect the system's performance no matter how the
fake users craft their rating scores. Task 3 is to develop methods to detect the
fake users in data poisoning attacks with provable guarantees and efficiently
recover a recommender system from data poisoning attacks. The project will
provide research opportunities for students with backgrounds that are
traditionally underrepresented in computing, and the work will be incorporated
into courses at Duke University and West Virginia University and disseminated
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Secure and
Trustworthy Computing (SaTC) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.