* 2125256
* Automating At-Home Balance Training Using Wearable Sensors
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Leia Stirling, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 865,445.00

Reductions in balance ability caused by aging and sensory disabilities have a
negative impact on quality of life and long-term health. Poor balance increases
the risk of falls, fear of falling, and sedentary lifestyles, which contribute
to subsequent morbidity, mortality, and increased healthcare costs. Balance
training designed to strengthen or restore the complex sensorimotor pathways
that lead to successful balance can improve function in individuals at risk for
falls; however, clinic-based sessions administered by physical therapists are
limited by patient load and insurance constraints. Current home-based training
is not as effective as it could be because patients cannot accurately assess
their performance or effectively self-progress their training without expert
guidance. This project will advance science and promote national health,
prosperity, and welfare by developing and verifying wearable technology and
data-driven models capable of 1) remotely assessing balance in users’ homes; and
2) recommending balance exercises informed by models of observed clinical
decision-making that adequately and safely challenge users based on their
evolving balance abilities. This research is a first and necessary step in
achieving the long-term goal of creating automated balance training technologies
to complement, supplement, and increase access to clinic-quality care. The
outcomes of this research have the potential to be adapted to a diverse
population of Americans with a wide range of balance and gait impairments
including sensory, neurological, and motor disorders. Additionally, students
will be engaged through multiple curricular offerings including hands-on design
course projects with broader community interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research takes the first step toward developing wearable technology and machine
intelligence that will enable balance training programs that can be performed in
the absence of real-time physical therapist (PT) guidance. The project will (1)
identify important kinematic and visual information used by physical therapists
to estimate underlying balance exercise ability and to inform clinical-decision
making regarding balance exercise progression, and (2) assess the capabilities
of adaptive machine learning models to simulate expert-informed balance exercise
progression strategies that are responsive to the evolving needs of different
individuals and groups. To achieve these objectives, eye movement tracking and
patient kinematic measures will be collected in both live and asynchronous
video-recorded formats to identify key aspects of information-gathering relevant
to physical therapists’ evaluations of adult balance capabilities. Additionally,
Markov decision process modeling under a reinforcement learning framework will
capture the dynamics of the physical therapist-patient co-adaptation of
effective exercise progression policies. The models to be developed will capture
the iterative, co-adaptive process of expert-patient interaction that evolves
over the course of the training program, where the patient adapts their
sensorimotor behavior due to the selected training and the physical therapist
adapts the training based on patient progress. This work will result in the
development of models that integrate heterogeneous clinical and biomechanical
data and generate new approaches for modeling expert-patient interaction that
are robust to patient differences and co-adaptive between the expert and patient
over time. The development of models that characterize the dynamic process of
physical therapist-patient interaction in a rehabilitative setting promises to
inform future efforts to develop effective, scalable at-home balance training
solutions for older adults and people with vestibular dysfunction. Such
solutions would complement and/or supplement the current provision of balance
training within clinical settings using adaptive wearable technology at home.
Furthermore, the framework and technology that will be developed through this
research may be adapted for use in other clinic-based training contexts (e.g.,
stroke recovery and post-surgical rehabilitation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.