* 2125764
* NRT-WoU: Establishing Multimessenger Astronomy Inclusive Training (EMIT)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Arnold Burger, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Vanderbilt
University will prepare the first generation of students in the emerging field
of multimessenger astronomy (MMA). With the discovery of gravitational waves,
there is a new window on the universe and with it, a once-in-a-generation
opportunity to launch a new field. The goal of this program is to pilot the
Establishing Multimessenger Astronomy Inclusive Training (EMIT) initiative. EMIT
will be a transdisciplinary graduate program that promotes diversity and
inclusion and produces scholars with the skills needed to drive discoveries in
MMA while expanding the STEM workforce. The project will train 300 students from
physics, astronomy, math, and engineering, including 19 funded trainees, through
new formal curricula, seminars, summer programs, and research. The aim is to
build a community of practice that is diverse from the outset through cohort
building, shared research experiences, visible underrepresented minority role
models, and a suite of evidence-based programming designed to promote inclusive
excellence.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;EMIT trainees will learn the interdisciplinary
concepts, research techniques, and the conduct of research critical to advance
MMA. Using educational research-supported practices, the program will prepare
students to take a team science approach while developing transferable skills
for transition to the workforce. Some trainees will earn a Master of Science
degree at Fisk University, a collaborating institution, and may directly enter
employment or go on to join a Ph.D. program. Other trainees will enter
Vanderbilt directly in a doctoral program. Regardless of the option chosen,
students will earn a graduate certificate in MMA through research, coursework,
and outreach. Joint student research between Fisk, Vanderbilt, and external
collaborators will bring together new nodes of expertise. These collaborative
research projects will complement and enhance the strengths of the partnering
institutions. The team will provide stage-specific professional development for
the entire student training period. The program supplements traditional
coursework with a novel modular curriculum specific to MMA. Some courses and
Blast Modules will be posted on an EMIT YouTube channel to reach the larger
community. A summer workshop, open nationally, will occur every other year and
broaden understanding of the research needs, promote the skills required for
MMA, and further stimulate teaching and communication for EMIT trainees. After
earning the graduate certificate, EMIT trainees will help lead this workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.