* 2125218
* III: Small: Integrated prediction of intrinsic disorder and disorder functions with modular multi-label deep learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lukasz Kurgan, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Proteins are remarkable biological machines. Hundreds of millions of protein
sequences were decoded over the last two decades creating a significant
knowledge gap related to the fact that we do not know what most of them do. A
common way to decipher protein functions relies on the sequence-to-structure-to-
function paradigm where protein function is learned from the protein structure
that is produced from the sequence. However, recent research has identified a
large family of the intrinsically disordered proteins that lack a stable
structure under physiological conditions and which therefore cannot be
characterized using the structure-based approaches. These proteins are
particularly abundant in the eukaryotes and are involved in the pathogenesis of
numerous human diseases. The discovery of the intrinsically disordered proteins
has prompted the development of a new generation of computational methods that
predict presence of intrinsic disorder directly from protein sequences. A
recently completed Critical Assessment of protein Intrinsic Disorder prediction
(CAID) experiment has shown that these methods are fast and provide accurate
results. However, while intrinsic disorder can be readily and accurately
identified in protein sequences, its function remains a mystery. This proposal
will conceptualize, design, implement, test and deploy an innovative machine
learning method that provides highly accurate and integrated predictions of
disorder and disorder functions directly from protein sequences. The team will
utilize this method to produce functional annotations of disorder on an
unprecedented scale of dozens of millions of proteins, addressing the knowledge
gap problem for this protein family. In the long run this project will advance
understanding of fundamental biological processes and related human health
issues in the context of the intrinsically disordered proteins. This project
will also train STEM students and researchers via high-school outreach and
multidisciplinary teaching and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students
and postdoctoral researchers, producing highly skilled researchers who are
sought after by industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary
and challenging problem of the structure of intrinsically disorder protein
structure at the intersection of bioinformatics and machine learning fields is
addressed by the team. Building on expertise in the computational analysis of
intrinsic disorder and with focus on technical innovation, this project will
deliver a novel deep sequential multi-label transformer architecture that
provides accurate predictions of disorder and disorder functions. The solution
will be designed to accommodate for the biological underpinnings of protein
data, such as the inherently multi-label outcomes, imbalanced labels and
sequential nature of protein data. Moreover, this architecture will feature
modular design to facilitate transfer to other areas of protein and nucleic
acids bioinformatics. The resulting method will be extensively benchmarked and
disseminated to maximize impact. The code will be deposited into relevant public
repositories and pre-computed functional annotations of intrinsic disorder will
be made available using modern online resources, such as data repositories and
webservers, in order to meet the needs of a broad spectrum of users including
biologists, biochemist, biophysicists and
bioinformaticians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.