* 2125116
* AI-DCL: EAGER: Explanations through Diverse, Feasible, and Interactive Counterfactuals
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Chenhao Tan, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 252,472.00

This award supports a research project that will help people to better
understand decision algorithms that are developed using machine learning
techniques. The research team will facilitate that understanding by making use
of a promising class of explanations that use counterfactual scenarios. Such
explanations provide understanding by showing how outcomes change when
hypothetical changes are made in factors that together serve to determine the
decision outcome. As a concrete example, consider a person who applies for a
loan from a financial company but is rejected by the loan distribution algorithm
used by the company. To help the person understand why the decision algorithm
rejected the application, the explanation algorithm would generate
counterfactual scenarios in which the applicant's situation is hypothetically
changed in viable ways (such as moving to a nearby city, or changing jobs) to
see whether this affects the decision outcome. If this approach is successful,
it would be applicable to a variety of societally critical domains where machine
learning holds promise for improving decision making including healthcare,
criminal justice, finance, and hiring. The project will have other impacts as
well. The research team will release a public web site to engage the public with
human-centered machine learning approaches. The PI will work with the University
of Colorado Boulder's Science Discovery to present demos at events such as
"Family Engineering Day" and "Boulder Computer Science Week". In addition to
training graduate students, the PI will host high-school students as summer
interns, integrate findings from the proposed work into educational activities
at the University of Colorado Boulder, and make educational materials publicly
available for use by instructors at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks to explain machine decisions
by generating diverse and feasible counterfactuals and developing user-centered
interactive processes. The results of this project will constitute an important
step towards building machine-in-the-loop methods to empower users in
understanding algorithmic decisions. Specific contributions include developing
diversity and distance metrics for generating diverse counterfactuals,
integrating causal graphs to generate feasible counterfactuals that align with
real-world processes, developing novel user-centered designs to examine human
interaction with counterfactuals, and advancing design principles for explaining
algorithmic decisions. The team will also develop human-centered designs that
enable users to interact with counterfactual explanations. This will enable the
researchers to conduct large-scale user studies to understand human preferences,
which would in turn serve as an effective evaluation of their proposed method.
The results of this research project will contribute to the emerging area of
interpretable machine learning that emphasizes human-centered
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.