* 2125056
* EAGER: Demonstrating the Physics of Novel Solution-Phase Electrochemical Aptamer Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jason Heikenfeld, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2023
* USD 250,999.00

Continuous glucose monitoring for diabetes is a historical achievement in modern
diagnostics, but unfortunately is an isolated success despite numerous acute
needs across the broader field of human medicine. Glucose monitoring remains an
isolated success because glucose sensors are based on enzymes which can be
challenging to develop for analytes other than metabolites (e.g. glucose,
lactate, ethanol). An alternate class of sensors called electrochemical aptamer
sensors are simpler to develop for analytes beyond glucose (hormones, drugs,
proteins), but aptamer sensors have not yet demonstrated the longevity of use
required for most medical applications and often have limits in their
sensitivity. These longevity and sensitivity challenges, at least in part, exist
because a perfect layer of aptamer must be assembled and retained on an
electrode surface. This project will demonstrate and explore the physics of a
new sensor approach based on solution-phase electrochemical aptamer sensors.
Simply, the aptamers are allowed to float freely in solution, and when an
analyte binds with an aptamer the aptamer changes in shape in a way that is
measurable by an electrode. Solution-phase electrochemical aptamer sensors will
provide significant advantages in terms of (1) breakthrough longevity and
robustness due to their simplicity, and (2) improved sensitivity due to their
highly tunable physics. This project aligns with the goal of enabling
personalized medicine, by creating a new approach for biosensors that allow
continuous biosensing of hormones, peptides, therapeutic drugs, and other
markers across human health and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon
preliminary work, this project pursues two specific aims. Aim 1 - demonstrate
the underlying physics of solution-phase electrochemical aptamer sensors using
existing aptamer designs developed for optically measured aptamers. The
rationale for pursuing this aim is that leveraging fully characterized and
modeled aptamers will allow a rapid theoretical understanding of new
experimental data in this project. The product of this aim will be at least one
aptamer that can then be redesigned in Aim 2. Aim 2 - create a rationale toolset
for modifying aptamer design for achieving maximum changes in electrochemical
signal. By demonstrating this fundamental design toolset before pursuing
application-specific work, this second aim will enable all researchers to more
rapidly advance a new field of solution-phase electrochemical aptamer sensors.
The product of this aim will be both new knowledge of the physics of solution-
phase electrochemical aptamer sensors, and a launch-pad for follow-on work in
both fundamental and applied proposals to create continuous biosensors that can
be worn on the body or implanted in the body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.