* 2125813
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: SMALL: DrGPU: Optimizing GPU Programs via Novel Profiling Techniques
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xu Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,473.00

Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become common in modern computing systems.
However, it remains challenging to efficiently program GPUs due to the
complexity of architectures, programming models, and algorithm designs. This
project aims to develop a framework to identify performance inefficiencies in
GPU applications and provide intuitive guidance for code optimization. The
intellectual merits include three novel analysis techniques: (a) multi-scale
analysis to understand inefficiencies inside individual GPU kernels, (b)
coordinated analysis to measure inefficient data movement between devices, and
(c) differential analysis to view inefficiencies across different runs with
different execution configurations. The combination of these three analyses will
give a complete performance picture of GPU applications and help developers
obtain the bare-metal performance in modern and emerging
GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bridge the knowledge gap between
GPU hardware architectures and software developers. The success of this project
will enable significant enhancement of computing efficiency for production code,
and hence help maintain a sustained advancement of various domains, e.g., data
analytics, high-performance computing, and artificial intelligence. The proposed
framework will draw broad interest from industry, research institutes, and the
Department of Energy national laboratories for improving their code bases and
increasing system throughputs. Moreover, the outcome of this project will be
integrated into curriculum planning and educational activities, from which
students can directly benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.