* 2125988
* EAGER: Evidence-Based Model of Adoption of Robotics for Pandemics and Natural Disasters
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Paula deWitte, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 238,296.00

Robotics innovations (unmanned ground, aerial, and marine systems) have been
sporadically used for disaster response by emergency management agencies since
2001. Disasters pose a dilemma: on one hand, there is often an emotional urge to
try anything in the hopes of coping with overwhelming potential loss of life and
livelihoods; on the other hand, the poorly considered introduction of a robot
into a disaster can lead to worse outcomes than doing nothing. This EArly
Concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) study will bring together leaders
in robotics, law, emergency management, and public health with expertise in
emergency management and policy to investigate robotics innovations and
instances of ethical concerns during the COVID-19 pandemic. The result will be
the first theory of responsible robotics innovation for disasters. This will
transform how responders select robot technology during a disaster, ultimately
saving lives, mitigating long-term environmental and health impacts, and
accelerating economic recovery. The project will provide evidence for
anticipatory governance, such as new regulations and policies, to accelerate the
adoption of safe, effective robots during a disaster while reducing negative
consequences from either deploying unsound technology or deferring deployment of
technology. The project will impact how engineering, law, and policy is taught,
train graduate and undergraduate students in multidisciplinary approaches to
science and society, and increase the diversity of students in the research
pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multidisciplinary team will conduct a
rigorous analysis, featuring structured interviews with clinical healthcare
providers, public health and public safety officials worldwide who deployed
robots during the pandemic in order to understand the influences on adoption.
The demand analysis will be complemented by prior work in quantitatively
classifying the capabilities of the robot for a use case; together these
orthogonal sets of user-centric and robot-centric influences will create a novel
template for describing future innovation. The project will explore the legal
systems and how they adapted to the exigencies of the pandemic, especially any
correlations with national policies on robotics, and investigate emergent
ethical concerns. The resulting quantitative model is expected to be both
prescriptive for policy and predictive for future law and science research into
robotics adoption. The model will revolutionize the methodology for constructing
innovation theories. It will contribute to foundational responsible innovation
research and comparative law, especially how groups interpret legal uses of
robotics and how robotics impacts expectations of rights and responsibilities of
agencies and developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.