* 2125101
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Innovations for Community-Held Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jason Young, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,140.00

Internet access has become a critical component of urban infrastructure,
providing innumerable services including employment, banking, civic engagement,
education, and others. In spite of this reality, billions of people, even in
highly connected urban environments (5% of people in our home city of Seattle,
for instance), remain offline. To meet these needs, researchers and
practitioners have begun to explore community networks in order to explore novel
business models and connectivity paradigms. Community networks are Internet
access networks, owned, operated, and managed by constituents rather than by
traditional Internet Service Providers. Leveraging local capacity and interest,
these networks hold the promise of developing new access models and technologies
that allow for the sustainable connection of the “long-tail” of the digital
divide and have seen success in diverse areas such as New York City, Detroit,
Utiagvik, and many others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will develop a
series of community network innovations using participatory methods and co-
development processes with a uniquely interdisciplinary team of research and
practice oriented community organizers, technical researchers, and social
scientists. Researchers will work with technology practitioners and community
stakeholders to identify current technology conditions and community needs and
develop novel socio-technical systems that directly support local communities.
These agendas will be supported by STEM education programming within partner
communities, which will provide a context for local ideation, creation, and
support of technology design, implementation, and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's preliminary discussions with
partners have grounded this proposal in a set of initial directions that will be
adjusted based on community workshop outputs. These include the following
community-led innovations: (1) novel network services, such as localized content
delivery networks, community (non-law enforcement-led) crisis management, and
digital literacy training; (2) sensing systems, such as traffic collision
detectors (coupled with the above crisis management), and air and soil
monitoring, and (3) related security aspects such as network security and
community-based information and data privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.