* 2125293
* Health effects of decarbonization (HEALED): Understanding key determinants for health co-benefits and co-harms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vivek Srikrishnan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 277,169.00

Tangible human health co-benefits can motivate stronger support for climate
policy. For example, decarbonizing the energy system can produce sizable health
co-benefits by reducing co-emitted air pollutants. However, assessing near-term
decarbonization strategies with health considerations faces two key analytical
challenges: (i) unintended health co-harms from some carbon mitigation
strategies; for instance, large-scale bioenergy production can drive up food
prices, which leads to nutrition-related health co-harms, and (ii) deep
uncertainties about the future, such as socioeconomic patterns, technology
costs, and market factors. The objectives of this project are: (i) to improve
the quantitative understanding of key factors and processes that determine the
magnitude and distribution of health outcomes from decarbonization, and (ii) to
identify features of decarbonization strategies that are most likely to yield
robust net health benefits given deep future
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hypothesize that while
health co-benefits and co-harms are both affected by local technology choices
(e.g., electricity generation technologies and vehicle types) and socioeconomic
factors (e.g., income growth and population aging), the health co-harms are
further determined by complex interactions across regions and sectors, such as
inter-regional trade of electricity, biofuel, and food. With a focus on the
United States, the investigators will test the hypothesis by: (i) developing an
integrated energy-food-health modeling framework, by improving the
representation of health drivers in a state-level integrated assessment model
(GCAM-USA) and connecting it with a fine- resolution health impact assessment
module, (ii) constructing a large-scale ensemble of decarbonization scenarios to
represent a wide range of future uncertainties in socioeconomic patterns, energy
technology costs, and food/energy market setups, and (iii) identifying the key
factors and processes that determine health outcomes at the county, state, and
national levels. By combining knowledge from energy system modeling, health
impact assessment, and decision analysis, this convergent research targets
improving understanding of the non-linear interactions between low-carbon energy
strategies and human health, as well as the role of the market and natural
systems on which these interactions depend. Thus, this project seeks to advance
quantitative understanding of the complex systems governing interconnected
societal challenges on energy, health, and climate. Through a convergence of
various disciplines, it seeks to provide new insights on key interacting
dynamics that determine health outcomes from decarbonization. Further, by
leveraging modern computational capabilities to analyze a large scenario
ensemble, a data-driven approach is intended to enable quantification of the
relative importance of various socioeconomic, technological, and market
uncertainties in determining the health co-benefits or co-harms. The project
will produce open-source model code and teaching materials for research and
educational purposes. It will also train undergraduate and doctoral students in
a highly interdisciplinary environment. Findings are intended to guide
practitioners to improve their decisions to better navigate the climate-health
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.