* 2125426
* SCC-PG: Tapping the Potential: Contribution of Non-Expert Citizens to Expediting the Functional Recovery of Civil Infrastructures Damaged by Extreme Events
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Among the variety of efforts required to restore the functionality of civil
infrastructure components (CICs) after natural disasters, rapid damage
assessment is a critical task that helps residents, business owners, and
emergency management authorities evaluate the extent of loss, and subsequently,
secure the resources necessary for recovery at the earliest possible time. In
reality, however, immediate access to enough professional crews trained for the
inspection and condition assessment of CICs is not always possible, especially
after a natural disaster that impacts a large geographic region. Consequently,
the post-disaster safety and condition assessment of a vast number of buildings
and other critical facilities can take several weeks to months, not only
delaying the restoration of the community, but also incurring significant
indirect losses due to disruptions in everyday activities. To address this
critical issue, the proposed research plans to introduce a data-informed
platform to systematically utilize the hidden capacity of the general public for
the rapid damage assessment of CICs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of the proposed research activities is to engage those who have traditionally
had no direct contribution to the safety and condition assessment of damaged
CICs. For this purpose, the requirements necessary to establish a rigorous
computational platform to evaluate human performance in the context of CIC
damage assessment will be studied. Building on the capabilities of such a
platform, investigations will also be performed to understand the technical and
societal aspects of experiential learning methodologies appropriate for training
the general public to perform rapid damage assessment activities. To ensure that
a high-fidelity platform is delivered, the outcome of the individual tasks, as
well as the entire platform, will be systematically verified and validated.
Specifically, an array of community-of-practice activities have been planned to
scale up the investigations and engage a diverse group of non-expert citizens.
By creating a unique multidisciplinary opportunity to test the related
hypotheses from both technical and social science perspectives, the outcome is
expected to greatly facilitate mitigating the consequences of natural disasters,
especially in vulnerable communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.