* 2125377
* BCSER: Using Virtual Reality to Train Geo-Spatial Reasoning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Katharine Johanesen, Juniata College
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2024
* USD 138,607.00

Spatial reasoning skills include the abilities to visualize, interpret, and
manipulate information in two dimensions (2D) and three dimensions (3D). These
skills predict students’ persistence and success in STEM fields and are
recognized as crucial aspects of geoscience education. Thus, teaching
undergraduate students spatial reasoning skills is expected to enhance their
retention in STEM fields and ultimately increase the number and diversity of
STEM professionals nationally. This project will study the effects of Virtual
Reality (VR) training on students’ spatial reasoning in geoscience contexts and,
in the process, develop the principal investigator’s (PI’s) STEM education
research expertise. The project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research (ECR BCSER) program, which is designed to
build individuals’ capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in the core areas of STEM learning and learning environments,
broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM professionals tend to have strong spatial
reasoning abilities, and spatial abilities in adolescence correlate with
persistence in STEM fields. Decades of research indicate that these skills can
be significantly improved with training, which presents an opportunity to
improve student retention in STEM fields. The specific objectives of the project
are (1) to develop the PI’s STEM education research skills and expertise; and
(2) to design, implement, and disseminate the findings from a pilot study of the
efficacy of VR training modules at Juniata College and the University of South
Carolina at Columbia. The pilot study will measure geoscience students’ spatial
reasoning skills before and after participating in either a VR training module
or a more traditional training activity. The PI will work with an advisory board
to evaluate the success of the professional development activities and pilot
research project. The research, associated presentations, and interaction with
the advisory board will contribute to the growth of the geoscience education
research community through numerous new collaborations and related projects, as
well as stimulate interest in education research among students and faculty
members at the PI’s home campus. Improved training in spatial reasoning also has
the potential to promote broader participation, retention and inclusion in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.