* 2125488
* SCC-PG: Improving healthcare access in marginalized communities through smart connected technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Qi Zhu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This planning grant aims to deliver better healthcare to and encourage health-
promotion behavioral changes among seniors from marginalized communities, by
strengthening access to health care, services, and resources. The project
envisions a Smart Health Access and Resource Portal (SHARP), which offers both
an interface through which individuals gain access to care and resources in
health systems, and an engine that designs, recommends, and operationalizes
virtual and physical access. The results from this project will accumulate
knowledge about the existing healthcare barriers faced by seniors from
marginalized communities, reveal their health-related preferences and choice
behaviors, and prescribe potential solutions to strengthening their physical and
virtual access while maintaining privacy to health care, services, and
resources. They will also lay the foundation for a future integrative research
proposal that will implement, deploy, and evaluate SHARP. If succeeded, the
seniors who participate in the SHARP pilot study will see tangible health
benefits gained from better access to and engagement with healthcare systems.
Improving the health of seniors contributes to the overall wellbeing of the
society and helps lower healthcare costs. In the long run, SHARP can be deployed
in other marginalized/underserved communities to help build a healthier and more
equitable society. Research results will be broadly disseminated and adopted
through publications/presentations, collaborations with industry partners, as
well as engagement with various community
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integrative research spans
across social science and technology domains. Central to the promise of the
proposed solution is a holistic approach to integrating virtual and physical
access. The project assembles a team of experts from Northwestern University
(NU), Kaizen Health (KH), and Center for Neighborhood Technology (CNT), with
expertise in transportation and mobility systems, computer engineering,
behavioral science, social epidemiology, human-computer interaction and
informatic, healthcare logistics, and community engagement. The team will work
with a range of community partners led by CNT to identify and engage seniors
living in selected low-income neighborhoods located in the southside of Chicago.
The project will bring together academic, industry and community stakeholders to
(i) understand needs, priorities and barriers related to healthcare and mobility
via dialogue and discussions; (ii) assess the needs for an integrated digital
tool that addresses the identified transportation and healthcare access
challenges, and (iii) build partnerships for a meaningful future local pilot
study. To fulfill these community engagement objectives, the project will
conduct community-centered activities such as Steering Committee Meeting, Expert
Panel, Listening Session, and Survey. The project will mine various data
collected in this research and acquired from other sources. The findings from
data mining will lay the foundation for new socio-behavioral theory that
explores the complex relationship between mobility and health and between
healthcare accessibility and broad health-related behaviors (e.g., health
monitoring and management). They will also inspire new human-computer
interaction methods that aim to reveal how seniors currently interact with
digital tools, establish the correlations between such interactions and health-
related behaviors, and assess their needs for an integrated health tool like
SHARP. Taken together, the project will deepen our understanding of (i) the
barrier to healthcare access among seniors from marginalized communities, and
(ii) institutional and technological challenges in integrating conventional and
emerging mobility services from both private and public sectors. The project
will also lead to the creation of a suite of analytical and computational tools
that form the core intelligence of SHARP. These include (i) a human digital twin
model and a novel resource allocation model that address the choice between
virtual and physical access at the individual and the system level,
respectively; and (ii) mathematical models and solution algorithms supporting
the design and operation of an integrated transportation and health logistics
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.