* 2125727
* NRT: Sustainable Water Innovations in Materials: Mentoring, Education, and Research (SWIMMER)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Joel Tickner, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,998,922.00

Water resources are in a state of crisis both in the U.S. and globally. Water
management requires treating and delivering water from limited, often declining
resources to meet the needs of a growing global population. So-called ‘forever
chemicals’ are now found to contaminate drinking water supplies, and toxic
products are commonly discharged into waterways. The Sustainable Water
Innovations in Materials – Mentoring, Education, and Research (SWIMMER) program
will produce trainees who will research, innovate, manufacture, and manage
sustainable materials and chemicals aimed at protecting water resources over
their entire life cycle. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to the University of Massachusetts Lowell will harness and hone the
talent of young scientists and engineers from multiple disciplines to transform
the lifecycle of materials and their interaction with water ecosystems. The
project will train 60 master’s and Ph.D. students, including 25 funded trainees,
from the fields of Plastics, Mechanical, Chemical and Civil/Environmental
Engineering, Chemistry, Earth Science, Biology, Public Health, and Economics.
The SWIMMER trainees will engage in deep and meaningful interactions across
various disciplines. This interdisciplinary training will result in graduates
equipped to address multi-faceted challenges requiring STEM innovations,
understanding their socio-economic and political foundations, and responsive to
societal needs for environmental justice and inclusive decision-making. The
program leaders will also make a strategic commitment to broadening
participation of the SWIMMER cohorts by recruiting students from
underrepresented groups to pursue a STEM graduate
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SWIMMER trainees will conduct convergent research
across three transformative themes: Watersheds as Living Labs, Circular
Materials Design for Pollution Prevention and Remediation, and Sustainable
Product Design and Toxics Use Reduction. The program features bias and inclusion
training for a diverse and supportive community, communication skills training,
immersion in industrial history, a two-semester core course preceded by a
preparatory boot camp to establish a common convergent knowledge baseline, and
team capstone projects closely linked to academic research and the needs of
industry and society. Combined with the recruitment of diverse trainees from
partner institutions and in collaboration with industrial and community
stakeholders, this program will prepare the large share of graduate students
seeking industry positions upon graduation as well as the next generation of
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.