* 2125865
* NRT- FW-HTF: Linguistic diversity across the lifespan (LINDIV): transforming training to advance human-technology interaction
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,920.00

Technology such as smart voice assistants or computer-based intelligent tutoring
systems has become crucial to people’s private lives, education, and the
workforce. This technology is largely based on standard American English and the
misconception that there is a single, idealized variety of American English,
which conflicts with the true diversity of language users. Many U.S. speakers
use a regional variety of American English, African American Vernacular English,
a signed language, a language other than English, or have some form of
communication disorder. As the U.S. population is becoming older, age-related
hearing loss and language impairments will also increase. The linguistic
sophistication of technology has not kept pace with the growing linguistic
diversity within the U.S. This technology is intended to improve the lives of
humans and society at large, and people increasingly depend on it for access to
governmental, community, health, and educational services, making the
technology’s current reliance on standard American English problematic. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to the Pennsylvania State
University will educate a new generation of experts in human-technology
interactions to address this issue. The project anticipates training 48 graduate
students, including 23 funded trainees, from graduate programs in Psychology,
German, Spanish, Communication Science and Disorders, Computer Science and
Engineering, Information Sciences and Technology, and Learning Design and
Technology. The comprehensive two-year traineeships will prepare trainees to
address key challenges in human-technology interactions. Improvements in human-
technology interactions will help ensure the full participation of individuals
with diverse language backgrounds, fostering an equal, diverse, and inclusive
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By applying integrated learning and
transdisciplinary team science principles, trainees will be prepared to bridge
the gap between language science and technology. Trainees will also be prepared
to think beyond disciplinary boundaries. This approach is considered optimal to
prepare the next generation for the future of work. In a two-year program
culminating in the new graduate certificate ‘Linguistic Diversity and
Technology’, trainees will complete cross-disciplinary courses and professional
development in language and technology. Trainees will work on transdisciplinary
team research projects that address tractable goal and produce clear products,
such as a design project, pilot application, or research study focused on
integrating language science and human-technology interaction. Trainees will
also participate in seminars, research events, mentoring, and a linguistic
diversity outreach program. They will complete the program with an internship
with academic and private sector extramural partners to support careers bridging
linguistics and technology, both inside and outside academia, in national and
international settings. Trained to work in diverse teams, trainees will be
competent in creating knowledge and translating research outcomes into
technological solutions that alleviate social, educational, and economic
disparities for linguistically diverse populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.