* 2125954
* Latent-heat based measurements of the melting curve of iron to the pressure of Earth’s inner core boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Walter, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 641,554.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Earth’s core is a massive ball
of metal located 3000 km beneath our feet. Improved knowledge of its basic
properties will help Earth scientists better understand the way heat and
material move inside the solid Earth’s many layers (inner core, outer core,
mantle, and crust). For example, motion of liquid metal in the outer core
generates a powerful magnetic field that shields life at the surface from
harmful radiation, but the magnitude of forces driving the motion are uncertain.
Another example is that heat from the outer core might melt some minerals in the
rocks at the base of the mantle, but the amount of heat flow and the temperature
at the base of the mantle are unknown. One notable reason for these
uncertainties is that a basic fact about the Earth’s core remains highly
uncertain: its temperature. The best way to infer the core temperature relies on
a simple idea. The liquid outer core, which is mostly iron, freezes onto the
solid inner core as the Earth cools, meaning the temperature at the liquid-solid
interface is the freezing temperature, or equivalently the melting temperature,
of the mostly iron liquid material. Hence, the starting point for understanding
the core’s temperature, and its effect on the entire Earth, is to accurately
determine the melting temperature of iron when subjected to the enormous
pressure that exists at the inner core-outer core boundary: 3.3 million
atmospheres. The upcoming project aims to accurately determine this crucial
temperature by using a new type of laboratory measurement. In addition to these
scientific impacts, the project will engage undergraduate students, and benefit
physicists and materials scientists studying high-pressure phase transitions
that involve entropy changes - from magnetic transitions, to superconducting
transitions, to melting. The team will also publish the sample preparation
details in the video journal JoVE to clearly disseminate their methods to a wide
audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed to identify the
absorption of latent heat while samples of iron and iron-sulfide are rapidly
heated. The samples will be compressed in diamond anvil cells to pressures as
high as 3.3 million atmospheres, and heated with short pulses of electricity
that flow through the samples. This pulsed Joule heating procedure allows latent
heat detection by limiting the amount of heat escaping from samples, and also
limits chemical reactions by restricting the total time during which the sample
is molten to roughly 1 to 100 microseconds. The project aims to (a) dramatically
improve the accuracy of the melting temperature data for iron up to 3.3 million
atmospheres by achieving plus/minus 50 K accuracy up to approximately 1 million
atmospheres and plus/minus 200 K accuracy up to 3.3 million atmospheres, (b) to
prove that the latent-heat technique can be extended to partial melting of iron
alloys by measuring the solidus temperature of Fe(0.9)S(0.1) up to 1 million
atmospheres with plus/minus 50 K accuracy, and (c) assimilate the new
measurements into models of Earth core adiabats and hydrodynamic models of
magnetic field formation and evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.