* 2125361
* SCC-PG: Smart and Safe Prescribed Burning for Rangeland and Farmland Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Xiaolin Hu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Prescribed fire has long been used by farmers and ranchers in the Midwest as a
land management tool. It helps farming and grazing by replenishing soil,
increasing forage production, controlling harmful parasites, and protecting
prairies from invasive overgrowth. It is also increasingly used by land managers
to reduce the risk of wildfires. Despite the many benefits of prescribed fires,
there are health and safety concerns for prescribed burning events, including
air pollution to local communities caused by smoke, and damage of properties and
injury of people resulted from escaped and uncontrollable fires. This planning
grant enables research to develop an innovative community sensing, planning,
&amp; learning infrastructure to support smart and safe prescribed burning for
communities that use prescribed fires for land management. The proposed research
will serve communities as an informative guide and smart cyber connection for
landowners to optimally plan and coordinate their prescribed fires, collect and
share data, and train landowners to learn the most effective burn approaches.
The research outcomes of this project will make a broader impact on grassland
preservation, wildlife habitat, and environmental protection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will be based on a framework that
comprises multiple layers: 1) a multi-scale sensing layer to collect data from
three heterogeneous sources: satellite, Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS), and
crowdsensing; 2) a data fusion layer to fuse hard sensor data (from UAS and
satellite) with soft data (human reports and observations from crowdsensing); 3)
a modeling and estimation layer for burn effectiveness and smoke impact
modeling, spatiotemporal fuel mapping and estimation, and fire behavior
modeling; 4) a smart and safe planning layer to support planning of prescribed
burning events, and 5) a community use cases layer covering planning, training,
awareness, and outreach. The research team will work collaboratively with
several prescribed burning communities in Kansas--including a prescribed burning
association, farmers and other landowners, firefighers-, and the the state's
environmental protection agency--to develop and evaluate the proposed research
and piloting approach. The project will also establish an open data repository
hosting fire and other sensing data to share with the community of researchers
and other stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.