* 2125798
* NRT-HDR: Convergence at the Interfaces of Policy, Data Science, Environmental Science and Engineering to Combat the Spread of Antibiotic Resistance
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Liqing Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

The world is on the precipice of a post-antibiotic era, with projections that
deaths due to antibiotic resistance could surpass those due to cancer by 2050.
The antibiotic resistance problem is inherently challenging, as conflicting
drivers of the problem must be addressed simultaneously if society is to
continue to benefit from these life-saving drugs. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University (Virginia Tech) will tackle this problem by
equipping the next generation of scientists and policymakers with the technical
and professional skills necessary to successfully work in convergent systems and
harness the latest advances in data science to inform solutions. The Convergence
at the Interfaces of Policy, Data Science, and Environmental Science and
Engineering to Combat the Spread of Antibiotic Resistance (CIP-CAR) NRT project
addresses a compelling need for training in science-based policy and convergent
research across the graduate curriculum at Virginia Tech, nationally, and
globally. The project anticipates training 45 Ph.D. students, including 33
funded trainees, from Policy, Data Science, and Environmental Science and
Engineering programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIP-CAR NRT is a Ph.D.-level
program that combines cutting-edge research with four training elements: a
graduate certificate in CIP-CAR Science, Technology, and Engineering in Policy
(STEP), boot camps and workshops, a field project, and a transdisciplinary
dissertation chapter. The graduate certificate consists of 13 credit hours,
focused on ethically engaging with stakeholders and the appropriate use of data
science to inform solutions, with modules and case studies devoted to antibiotic
resistance and other relevant convergent research topics. Bootcamps will be held
annually to orient new students to the NRT. Workshops will be held bi-annually
as a forum for trainees to share their research with the CIP-CAR community and
to learn and practice transdisciplinary team science, science communication,
ethics, and stakeholder engagement skills. Field project partners span a range
of rural, urban, and international locales working with communities, wastewater
treatment plants, data consulting, and international research labs to provide
opportunities to deepen skills in stakeholder engagement and translating
research to practice. At least one dissertation chapter will result from a
transdisciplinary team science effort with trainee peers and faculty
representing different disciplines. The STEP graduate certificate will be
available to all Virginia Tech graduate students (masterâ€™s and Ph.D.). This will
further broaden the impact and sustain the CIP-CAR program beyond NSF funding.
An inclusive culture will be promoted through a multi-pronged approach to
recruitment, mentoring, retention, and training in diversity and inclusion. The
intent is that this inclusive culture will measurably increase the enrollment,
success, and satisfaction of women and underrepresented minorities in
participating degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.