* 2125733
* NRT: Transformative Research and Graduate Education in Sensor Science, Technology and Innovation
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Katherine Mirica, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Sensors impact the lives of nearly every human being, from image sensors that
have revolutionized digital cameras and social communication to biosensors that
rapidly detect and monitor disease. Our understanding of life, our planet, and
the universe has constantly improved through new sensor technology, from
astrophysics to cell biology. Advances in sensor technology rely on
understanding the fundamental physics of sensing, developing advanced materials
and electronics, and creating methods for processing data. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Dartmouth College will create a
comprehensive graduate traineeship that integrates basic and applied research in
sensor science and technology with student-centered STEM research and education
focused on Innovation and Entrepreneurship. The research will integrate the
foundations of sensor physics and materials with device development and sensor
applications across the science and engineering disciplines. This will enable
trainees to perform research needed to develop new sensors and platform
technologies for scientific discovery, health and medicine, remote sensing,
transportation, sustainable energy, defense, and many other fields. The
education component will provide depth in an engineering or science discipline
as well as professional development that emphasizes technology transfer and
innovation to prepare trainees to become global leaders in the sensor technology
arena. New pathways in STEM graduate education across Dartmouth will focus on
translating science and technology research to commercial products or services
that ultimately benefit society. This NRT program will train 129 MS and Ph.D.
students, including 19 funded trainees across biology, chemistry, computer
science, engineering, and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty members from
Dartmouth’s biology, chemistry, and physics departments will join computer
science and engineering faculty to prepare trainees to carry out
transdisciplinary research. Research topics will span the continuum from the
fundamental understanding of sensor physics and materials science (e.g., quantum
information and the quantum limits of sensing; interactions of small molecules
with materials; and development of optoelectronic materials, nanomaterials, and
nanostructures) to the applications of sensor innovations. The student-centric
program will be supported by training of faculty in mentoring and by adoption of
a comprehensive professional development curriculum. Informed by assessment
data, the project team will disseminate outcomes, insights and practices through
publications and attendance at meetings, and by providing access to online
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.