* 2125192
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Cyclic Mechanical Stress on Ionic Conduction in Composite Polymer Electrolytes for Solid-State Batteries
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sang-Joon Lee, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 330,187.00

This grant will investigate how cyclic mechanical stress affects ionic
conductivity in ceramic-in-polymer composite electrolytes for solid-state
batteries. Solid-state electrolytes are receiving increasing attention as safer
alternatives to conventional organic liquid electrolytes, which are flammable
and prone to overheating. Several composite polymer electrolytes have been
developed to balance high ionic conductivity and mechanical toughness. However,
solid-state batteries tend to suffer performance degradation with an increased
number of cycles. Internal stresses develop during charging and discharging
cycles, as lithium ions move back and forth between dissimilar electrodes.
Although degradation of electrodes has been studied extensively, very little is
known about mechanical and microstructural changes within the electrolyte. This
lack of knowledge limits the full development of safe and high-performance
energy storage systems for diverse U.S. industry sectors ranging from electric
vehicles, portable electronics, and biomedical devices. A more complete
understanding of how dispersed rigid particles affect the mechanical behavior of
polymer composites may further contribute to advances in other applications such
as fuel cells, photovoltaics, biomaterials, and flexible electronics. The
collaboration supported by this grant will engage and connect faculty and
students at a primarily undergraduate institution and at a PhD-granting research
university, both of which are Hispanic-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanical behavior of ceramic-in-polymer
electrolytes is especially intriguing because it involves a very large
difference in material properties between rigid particles and a viscoelastic
matrix, highly coupled interaction between mechanical stresses and
electrochemical ion transport, and a functionally critical space-charge region
at the interface between ceramic particles and polymer chains. The central
hypothesis of the project is that a limiting factor for long-range battery
performance (e.g., capacity fade) is viscoelastic remodeling of composite
microstructure. The project is organized along three objectives: (1) determine
how composite microstructure affects mechanical behavior, (2) interrelate
dynamic stresses and device-level electrochemical performance, and (3) determine
how nanoscale contact stresses affect interfacial ionic conduction. Using
complementary macroscale and nanoscale experiments, this investigation will
develop, interrogate, and validate a multiphysics model of the interdependencies
among mechanical properties, microstructure, and electrochemical
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.