* 2125222
* Energy and Activity Analysis based On-chip methods for Mitigating Denial-of-Sleep Attacks in Ultra-low Power IoT Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Aatmesh Shrivastava, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 356,506.00

The finite and often scarce available sources of energy (e.g., batteries) in
low-power internet-of-things (IoT) sensing devices have presented themselves as
unique weak points often being vulnerable to cyber-attacks. This project aims to
develop an innovative hardware security mechanism to protect the available
energy source to support longer operational life-time for such devices. This
project will develop a local, on-chip hardware security mechanism to enhance
security at the root but with lower power and cost overhead. The proposed
techniques are transformative and has the potential to harden security in ultra-
low power applications. Research outcomes from this project will be disseminated
as tutorials at leading hardware security and circuit conferences to raise
awareness about security vulnerabilities in low-power sensing devices. This
project will provide a platform for training graduate and undergraduate students
on circuit design, sensing systems, and cybersecurity. New educational materials
for the general public on the security applications of circuit design
considerations and possible tradeoffs for security, area, and power will also be
developed. Engagements of undergraduate students in research through the
research experience for undergraduates (REU) program and annual summer projects
are planned for visiting students from minority serving institutions, and high
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop ultra-low power,
on-chip, hardware security solutions for IoT sensing devices. Low-power sensing
devices duty-cycle their communication and sensing activity and as such spend
the large fraction of their time sleeping to conserve and harvest energy.
Denial-of-sleep attacks target this feature to deny them of much-needed sleep by
initiating frequent wake up and repeated communication requests to quickly drain
their stored energy. The goal of this project is to explore new methods of
defense against denial-of-sleep attacks by analyzing the energy consumption
patterns of a sensing device. Their activity and energy consumption patterns can
be extracted as features and learned to differentiate a denial-of-sleep attack
from a regular activity of the device. This project will develop an on-chip
learning method to prevent denial-of-sleep attacks. An energy monitoring system
will be developed to continuously track the availability and consumption of the
energy in a sensing device. The monitoring system will tap into key circuit
points of the power management system to realize a lower cost hardware solution.
Further, the architecture of a received signal strength indicator (RSSI) circuit
will be advanced to operate at ultra-low power level with a lower area overhead.
This circuit will reside outside of the radio front-end and will continuously
monitor the RF channel for jamming attacks. The proposed method allows ultra-low
power consumption and lower area which ensures lower cost overhead as new
hardware security solutions to be translational across a variety of IoT sensing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.