* 2125362
* NRT-AI: AWARE-AI: AWAREness for Sensing Humans Responsibly with AI
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Ferat Sahin, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,018,644.00

Sensing-based artificial intelligence (AI) systems use information gathered from
humans to make predictions and respond to humans in numerous applications. As
these systems become more widespread, enormous research challenges are emerging.
These AI systems must react responsibly and flexibly, respect diversity and
privacy, and achieve trustworthiness to avoid unintended consequences at a
larger societal scale. To address these challenges, gaps in graduate education
programs related to AI will need to be bridged to create a growing and
sustainable pipeline of well-rounded AI scientists and engineers who understand
software, hardware, human-computer interaction, and human cognitive aspects of
this technology, as well as ethical considerations. To ensure AI technology is
well-designed to improve all citizens' productivity, welfare, and safety, it is
also vital to build an inclusive research workforce. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Rochester Institute of
Technology will provide unique training to a diverse student body, whose members
will be future research leaders in developing responsible, human-aware AI
technologies. The project anticipates training 75 masterâ€™s and Ph.D. students,
including 25 funded trainees, from computing and information sciences,
engineering, mathematics, psychology, and imaging science. The Awareness for
Sensing Humans Responsibly with AI (AWARE-AI) NRT project will enhance U.S.
competitiveness in AI and help develop a diverse workforce by providing funded
traineeships to Deaf and Hard of Hearing, female, African American, Latino/a
American, and Native American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AWARE-AI NRT
project includes the combination of convergent research and educational
experiences to support trainees in achieving several learning outcomes: (a)
cross-disciplinary breadth in human-sensing AI systems, (b) depth in relevant
science and technology skills, (c) depth in advanced research practices, and (d)
holistic diversity and inclusion competency. Innovative educational features
include visits to facilitate early connections between trainees and minority-
serving institutions, roundtables on advanced research practices, dataset
development, lab rotations, national lab and industry internships, seed-funded
projects, and diversity and inclusion workshops. Trainees will advance
scientific knowledge in human-sensing AI across four research tracks linked to
use-inspired areas: (1) algorithms and software for the flexible processing of
multimodal-heavy input to enhance interaction systems, (2) human-robot
collaboration and efficient AI technology to improve human trust, safety, and
comfort in manufacturing contexts, (3) design methods for usable and accessible
AI-based systems for understudied older adults with hearing loss, and (4)
extension of cognition research to underserved populations for discoveries that
broadly catalyze human-aware AI. External program evaluation, dissemination of
open-source training materials and findings, and a new database of human-sensing
AI datasets for research and teaching will stimulate convergent research and
support replication of effective program elements at other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.