* 2125407
* Collaborative Research: PLANKTON SIZE SPECTRA AND TROPHIC LINKS IN A DYNAMIC OCEAN
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Robert Cowen, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,223,276.00

Marine plankton form the base of most ocean food webs that support valuable
fisheries. This highly diverse and complex community is composed of organisms
that drift with ocean currents. Planktonic organisms remain understudied: they
are difficult to sample given that their sizes span more than six orders of
magnitude from less than one micron to meters. Yet, understanding how these
communities respond to climate change, and ultimately how these responses affect
valuable fisheries, and therefore food security, is critical. Because many
ecological and physiological processes are dictated by relative size, the theory
of size spectra (i.e., the relationship between size and organism abundance as
it drives ecosystem properties such as food webs) provides a valuable framework
for forecasting climate change impacts on marine ecosystems. A deeper
understanding of the scope and nature of variability in size spectra under
contrasting environmental conditions is needed. The dynamic, highly productive
northern California Current off Oregon and Washington, during the summer and
winter seasons, produces a patchwork of oceanographic conditions including those
associated with hypoxia and ocean acidification. This study is sampling the
plankton communities in this region to investigate how gradients of temperature,
nutrients, dissolved oxygen, and pH conditions impact size spectra. The broader
impacts include the training of students, building scientific resources, and
outreach to broader communities. Undergraduate and graduate students are being
trained in oceanography, field research and new technologies. The automated
image analysis pipeline developed as part of the project is openly accessible to
the oceanographic community and the image data are available through the novel
Global Plankton Imagery Library, an open-access repository for plankton imagery.
Size spectra data from this study are shared directly with ecosystem modelers.
The project’s flagship outreach activity is the collaboration with the Sitka
Center for Art and Ecology and the hosting of an Artist-At-Sea Program. A
professional artist is competitively selected to join the research cruises and
to create artistic products that give a unique voice to oceanographic research
and the organisms under study. The artwork is being assembled into a traveling
public Art Exhibit with planned displays at the Sitka Center, Oregon State
University’s Hatfield Marine Science Center, University of Oregon’s Charleston
Marine Life Center and centers located in underserved coastal communities.
Finally, imagery data from the project are being shared via the Plankton Portal,
a public website developed in partnership with the Citizen Science Alliance’s
Zooniverse, that invites citizen scientists to participate in classifying
plankton images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coupling of in situ plankton imagery
and morphometric data allows quantifying scales of variation in plankton size
spectra as well as testing predictions of how changes in environmental
conditions (notably, temperature, nutrients, oxygen, pH) correlate with shifts
in size spectra to reveal functional consequences to the food web. Plankton size
spectra are being compared across environmental conditions by sampling in a
habitat with steep environmental gradients and during two contrasting seasons.
Planktonic organisms spanning 10 orders of magnitude in biomass are sampled
using two complementary high-resolution imaging systems: the In Situ
Ichthyoplankton Imaging System (ISIIS) and the Laser In-Situ Scattering and
Transmissometry (LISST) particle imager. High-throughput image analysis software
is used to create size distributions together with taxonomic classification.
Depth-discrete meso-zooplankton samples are collected in parallel to examine
community shifts in carbon, obtain length-to-carbon conversions and calibrate
image data. The normalized biomass size spectra computed from the image data are
tested for deviations from expected patterns. The plankton collections are also
being analyzed for diet and reproductive status of gelatinous zooplankton, and
diet and daily growth rate of representative larval fishes. These two groups
have been historically understudied yet play central roles in ecosystem
function. The data are being used to examine how these organisms are impacted by
environmental conditions, and how they affect plankton size spectra. This study
is foundational to the understanding of marine ecosystems within the context of
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.