* 2125319
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Independent Real-Time Sensing Data to Support Community Well-Being
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* P. Jeffrey Brantingham, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,422,463.00

Community-led solutions to crime and disorder hold considerable promise, but
also come with challenges. Community leaders and residents are likely to have a
much richer, empathetic understanding of local problems, but are also likely to
lack objective data. The infrastructure to collect and use data to support crime
prevention resides almost exclusively with law enforcement agencies. Community-
led solutions therefore require access to public or self-generated sources of
data if they are to be successful. The research team is developing a low-cost
acoustic gunshot detection network for use by civilian community intervention
workers in Los Angeles. The project is an example of “data democratization.”
Communities take the lead in data collection and dissemination as part of
solving community problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research network uses off-
the-shelf hardware and custom deep learning algorithms to recognize gunshots in
real-time, including where and when they occur. Community intervention workers
control the placement of detectors in the community and use a smartphone-based
alert system, developed by the research team, to support their violence
prevention efforts. Current evidence suggests that community intervention
workers can stop violent retaliations if they are able to respond quickly when
violence occurs. The research team uses controlled experiments and causal
inference methods to assess the impact of the gunshot detection network on
community-led violence prevention. The project builds trust in data and an
appreciation for the inclusion of experimental methods in community-led models.
Demonstrating successful data-driven solutions is essential to the development
of smart and connected communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.