* 2125858
* NRT-AI: Convergent, Responsible, and Ethical Artificial Intelligence Training Experience for Roboticists
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Junfeng Jiao, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,999.00

Given the potentially disruptive consequences of artificial intelligence
(AI)-based systems, humanity cannot afford to wait until problems arise to
consider their impacts on society. AI’s ethical and societal implications must
be considered as systems are designed, developed, and deployed. The increasingly
ubiquitous adoption of robots in homes and cities is poised to transform our
society. However, it remains an open question whether this technology will
develop in a way that increases the divide between haves and have-nots or
results in a more just and equitable society. Thus, there is a need for
convergent STEM graduate education to ensure that future roboticists are
prepared to consider ethical implications of robotics technology and build a
more just and equitable future for everyone. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Texas at Austin will
address the challenge of integrating responsible and ethical AI at all stages of
development, design, and deployment of service robots. The Convergent,
Responsible, and Ethical AI Training Experience for Roboticists (CREATE
Roboticists) program will integrate ethical robotics education, research, and
career development. The program will train 32 funded trainees and 150 additional
graduate students from the Departments of Aerospace, Computer Science,
Electrical Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering, and Schools of Architecture,
Information, and Public Affairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CREATE Roboticists will
train future roboticists who: (i) understand the ethical implications of service
robots and can develop new theories, methods, and techniques to satisfy ethical
requirements; (ii) design human-centered ethical service robots that respect
human autonomy and ethical values; and (iii) develop robotics policy informed by
cutting edge convergent research. This program includes six elements:
coursework, research opportunities, mentorship, professional development,
internships, and public service. Interdisciplinary coursework will include five
new courses, four of which are foundation courses, and a project-based capstone
course. Trainees will engage in research projects across four domains: delivery
systems, office service mobile robots, personal home robots, and industrial
robots. Two faculty members will mentor each trainee over the five years of the
program, with at least one mentor external to the student’s home department.
Mentors and students will develop personalized individual development plans
(IDPs) in the students’ first year as trainees. They will revise these IDPs each
semester in subsequent years of the program. The trainees will also participate
in ten hours of career development workshops every semester on topics including
article publication and grant-writing, startups and industry opportunities, and
career planning. Trainees will enhance their education with internships at a
private company, government, or non-profit organization. Finally, NRT trainees
will spend about one day per month volunteering for a local government program
or non-profit organization connected to robotics and AI.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.