* 2125259
* SCC-PG: The Prospects for Artificial Intelligence in Urban Planning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Thomas Sanchez, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2022
* USD 148,781.00

The breadth of artificial intelligence (AI) applications has grown
significantly, particularly over the last decade, increasing productivity and
efficiency across numerous sectors. Cities have become the primary sites of data
collection and algorithm deployment, but the professional field of urban
planning lacks a comprehensive evaluation of how AI can/should be used to
improve analytical processes. Urban planning anticipates and guides the future
physical and social conditions of communities to improve quality of life – all
with a heavy reliance on increasingly large and varied datasets, which suggests
the untapped potential of AI if the field were to develop robust frameworks for
ethical deployment. This project examines and seeks to address the tension
between improving the efficiency of public service provision and enhancing
redistributive and procedural equity within urban decision-making. As AI’s role
in society grows, so do the concerns that it may reproduce racial bias, deepen
“digital divides,” infringe on privacy, and do little to address the “wicked
problems” at the heart of complex social issues. In addition, it may shed light
on broader impacts of automation in urban life, such as workforce displacement,
lifestyle changes, and future developments in public service
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a partnership between Virginia
Tech, the American Planning Association (APA), and Arlington County, Virginia’s
Departments of Community Planning, Housing and Development (DCPHD Planning
Division) and Technology Services (DTS). As part of this planning grant, the
partnership will survey members of the APA and conduct feasibility analysis
workshops and focus group sessions with DCPHD. The objective is to assess a
broad range of tasks performed by County planners and determine which of these
have the highest likelihood of being assisted and improved by AI technologies.
This includes county-level responsibilities for comprehensive planning, land
use, infrastructure, environment, housing, parks, and transportation. This
project expects that each of these areas has the potential for more advanced
data and analytical capabilities. The approach partners researchers, planning
professionals, and community members will focus on the explainability and
transparency of AI-based planning activities. This relates to the equitable
deployment of AI methods and will also address concerns about trust in the use
of data and analytical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.