* 2125548
* SCC-PG: Building Smart Communities to Advance Solar Energy in Rural America
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Gary Brase, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This planning NSF S&amp;CC project aims to investigate key technical, economic,
social, and policy issues that influence the transition to a green and
sustainable energy future for rural communities. The project is based on a
hypothesis that policies, incentives and strategies that are community-focused
rather than individual-focused will be more effective in advancing solar energy
in rural America. The intellectual merits include convergent research to
investigate social, technical, economic, and policy issues in an integrative
manner to obtain detailed understanding of barriers to solar energy in rural
communities and to explore strategies to advance solar energy in these
communities using a smart and interconnected co-design framework. Broader
impacts include enhancing the understanding of barriers to advancing solar
energy in rural America and seeking solutions to overcome these barriers while
explicitly placing social equity as key criteria in the models. Advancing solar
energy in rural communities will not only contribute to the social goal of
reducing dependence on fossil fuels and mitigating climate change, it adds
economic values to the rural communities and provide economic opportunities to
its citizens. By engaging the community of citizens of Greensburg and other
rural communities in Kansas, and the community of rural energy service
providers, the project will disseminate relevant information for advancing solar
energy in rural America. The project will support students for research tasks.
Efforts will be made to engage women students and students from under-
represented groups in the project. The studentsâ€™ involvement will enable them to
receive hands-on training in a range of interdisciplinary research techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct appropriate surveys of the
community of residents in Greensburg, Kansas and other rural communities in
Kansas, and the community of rural municipalities and electricity service
providers to delineate issues that influence the transition to a green and
sustainable energy future for rural communities. Understanding these barriers
will enable effective strategies to foster an environment that would be
conducive to advancing solar PV in rural communities. This research will also
develop the application of persuasion research in psychology to real-world
problems and context in order to achieve positive social change. Innovative data
analysis, engineering, and economics principles will be used to determine
appropriate size and locations of the PV and storage for Greensburg. A key
innovative aspect is co-design of planning and operational framework with
engagement of city administrators, industry, community and other stakeholders.
The project will use a holistic approach to find solutions for optimal
deployment of solar energy and management of distributed energy resources.
Economic solutions will integrate impacts on social and economic equity for
rural areas in the transition to a green energy future. Given that solar energy
penetration in rural communities is at a nascent stage, the proposed co-design
framework could serve as a shining example for other communities aspiring to
transition towards a sustainable energy future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.