* 2125395
* SCC-PG: Exploring STEM Educational Delivery for Youth in Norfolk Juvenile Detention Center
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sampath Jayarathna, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steele
* 09/30/2024
* USD 166,000.00

Detained youth are a population that experience disparities in educational
opportunities and in particular, have systemically fewer rich opportunities for
STEM learning. Access to educational resources and STEM learning for detained
youth are critical to position them to have marketable employment skills and
potentially contribute to the STEM workforce of the future. Taking lessons from
the conditions and challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, this project seeks
to develop and deliver a Personal Learning Environment for Youth, an educational
ecosystem that is accessible to a wide range of detained youth learners and
provides individual tailoring based on youth interactions with the system. To
develop the system, the project takes input from a multidisciplinary juvenile
justice community collaborative working group that examines the existing
educational infrastructure, determines challenges and affordances, and provides
input into the design and delivery of the personalized learning system. The
outcome of this research will be a framework for facilitating STEM learning for
detained youth using smart and connected technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project takes place in the context of the Norfolk Juvenile Detention Center
(NJDC). The work pursues a set of research questions that seek to identify the
barriers and factors impacting accessibility to STEM learning and educational
services, how the pandemic conditions changed those challenges, and anticipates
the predicted challenges to delivering a personalized learning STEM education
ecosystem. Stakeholders, including the center's academic staff, management, the
public school system, and personnel related to juvenile justice, form a focus
group engaged in conversation about the current educational ecosystem and the
design features that would support stronger STEM learning for a personalized
system. Participant responses will be distilled into design principles using
grounded theory that will guide the design and development of the personalized
learning system. The primary outcome of the research will be a case study that
describes the framework for the personalized learning system and the design
principles on which it rests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.