* 2125748
* NRT-URoL: Decoding the Mechanisms Underpinning Biofilm Function and Architecture in Extreme Environments
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Brent Peyton, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,984,140.00

Biofilms, communities of microorganisms attached to surfaces, occur in/on almost
any environment and surface type. As a result, they have widespread impact on
many aspects of both engineered and natural systems including agriculture,
industry, and human health. Extreme environments provide unique opportunities to
conduct cross-cutting transformative science. Their reduced biodiversity and
extreme physical and chemical conditions enable detailed characterization and
quantitative descriptions of important physical, chemical, and biological
processes. This National Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Montana State
University (MSU) will train a diverse group of Ph.D. students to effectively
engage and understand critical properties of extreme biofilm systems across
multiple disciplines. The interdisciplinary research training will help to
generate new insights that can control biofilms in engineered and natural
systems. The integrative scientific training program uses innovative teaching
elements that will equip participants with professional, communication,
teamwork, research, and problem-solving skills that are broadly applicable
across a variety of industrial and academic research careers. The project
anticipates training 71 Ph.D. students, including 21 NRT-funded trainees, with
program activities also serving Ph.D. and M.S. students across a range of STEM
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NRT trainees will use life in extreme
environments to push the boundaries of interdisciplinary research, integrating
meta-omics-based approaches with high resolution imaging to understand intricate
and cross-cutting interactions occurring in multi-species and multi-domain
biofilms. Students will investigate extreme biological systems that span the
range of conditions where life survives, from the icy Antarctic cryosphere, to
Yellowstone National Park terrestrial hot springs, to the hydrothermal vents of
Guaymas Basin in the Gulf of California. Major research themes include: (1)
using metagenomics to examine genotypic variations and commonalities related to
metabolic potential and diversity in extreme biofilm communities; (2)
investigating patterns of biofilm composition and architecture using multi-scale
microscopic imaging instrumentation; and (3) identifying patterns of extreme
biofilm development, expression of novel pathways, and signaling molecules using
proteomics and metabolomics. The traineeship’s project-based and collaborative
science curriculum will help participants acquire the fundamental knowledge and
skills necessary to converge across disciplinary boundaries to investigate the
research themes, identifying properties and patterns of activity that explain
biofilm cohesion and organization in extreme systems. Key elements of this NRT
program are scalable and sustainable, including (1) a program that allows
students personalize their technical training, curriculum, and mentor team; (2)
seminars, courses, and activities that help trainees develop transferrable
professional and technical skills that feature strongly across a range of
research-related careers, and (3) recruitment, mentoring, and retention
strategies that broaden STEM participation, foster mentoring and professional
relationships, and improve students’ research productivity. The program provides
a holistic educational experience for the trainees, where innovative training
elements thoughtfully prepare participants to thrive in a variety of research
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.