* 2125633
* SCC-PG: Leveraging community partnerships and intelligent technologies to address septic system water quality risks in the Flathead Basin
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sarah Halvorson, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,998.00

Aging and poorly maintained septic systems can contribute to degradation in
water quality through supply of nutrients and pathogenic microorganisms.
However, as non-point sources of pollution, septic-derived wastes receive poor
regulatory oversight. Septic system maintenance and eventual replacement is
entirely reliant on individual homeowners. In the state of Montana, nearly half
of all homes utilize septic systems for wastewater disposal. The combination of
expanding populations, with dispersed development, and hence increased
dependence on septic systems, together with weak regulatory enforcement, has
high potential to lead to increased septic-derived degradation of surface waters
and groundwaters across the state. The harnessing of smart technologies,
including real-time data collection, transmission, and automated data analysis,
may provide a novel opportunity for engaging homeowners in septic system best
practices. This project will engage active stakeholder groups in the Flathead
Basin, including the Flathead Basin Commission, a state-legislated organization;
nonprofit water protection groups; and state and federal agencies. By forging
new collaborations between natural and social scientists and the basin-wide
community, the project will identify data-driven solutions to a growing problem
specific to lake water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage a
local stakeholder network, building on their work to date to address septic
systems as a non-point source of pollution to Flathead Lake in northwest
Montana. Specific planned activities as part of the project include: (a) co-host
a 3-day workshop of local and basin stakeholders to identify gaps in research,
knowledge, and expertise; (b) proof-of-concept on the use of real-time data to
motivate homeowners to adopt septic system best management practices; (c) pilot
a shoreline monitoring approach using a combination of remote sensing and
microbial source tracking technologies to identify lakeshore areas receiving
poorly treated septic leachate; and (d) assess policies and governance
frameworks, including incentives and financing solutions, that work to mitigate
the risks from failing septic systems to public health and surface water and
groundwater contamination. This project's interdisciplinary approach combines
efforts to understand environmental responses, potential behavioral responses of
homeowners, and possible policy and governance responses to the septic issue,
which is a first step to resolving knowledge gaps that prevent identifying
solutions. Outcomes from our activities will inform a subsequent effort to
advance data and research infrastructure in geospatial and socio-hydrological
sciences, with specific focus on strategies for developing a smart and connected
basin community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.