* 2125196
* SCC-PG: Online Role-Playing Games for Improving Multi-Stakeholder Collaboration in Concurrent Disaster Response Planning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,08/31/2023
* John Horel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,247.00

Effective community-level post-disaster response and recovery requires that
actions of all stakeholders involved in response be coordinated. But existing
approaches to disaster response and recovery management typically underemphasize
the role of such multi-stakeholder coordination, particularly the involvement of
community residents. Literature also provides limited advice on how to address
overlapping or concurrent disasters, especially where one of the disasters is a
pandemic. This becomes problematic when local authorities must respond to
multiple events at once; when response to specific disasters (e.g., pandemics)
is siloed; and when disaster concurrency exacerbates disproportional impact on
socially vulnerable community members. Effective and equitable response planning
for ‘overlapping’ or ‘concurrent’ disasters, therefore, requires better and more
effective understanding and this Smart and Connected Communities Planning Grant
(SCC-PG) study advances the NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science by
generating scientific knowledge of factors affecting disaster response actions
of diverse community stakeholders in the face of multiple hazards. This study
also advances knowledge of the role and value of inter-stakeholder collaboration
in disaster response planning as well its success factors. Lastly, this study
advances NSF’s mission to promote national health, prosperity, and welfare of
local communities by focusing on disaster response in the Intermountain West,
which is at significant risk from fast and slow-onset disaster events such as
wildfires, extreme heat events, earthquakes, and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SCC-PG project employs community engagement
techniques, qualitative inquiry methods and table-top role-playing games (RPGs)
to lay the foundation for development of an online multi-player AI-mediated RPG
to improve inter-stakeholder collaboration in response planning for concurrently
occurring disasters. The project examines four research topics: i) factors
affecting response decisions of various community stakeholders (such as
residents, non-profits, government, and utility providers); (ii) types of
information, data or communication structures needed to improve inter-
stakeholder interaction and collaboration for response; (iii) effect of
information exchange and collaboration on response decisions made at the
individual and collective level; and (iv) characteristics of effective and
equitable communication or collaboration structures for multi-stakeholder
response planning for concurrent disasters. The results of this study and the
subsequent SCC-IRG research will help any community undertaking disaster
response planning to identify response actions that are at once more equitable,
can work simultaneously for pandemics and other disasters, and integrate social
and infrastructural dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.