* 2125155
* MIM: Microbial Division of Labor in Polysaccharide-Degrading Communities
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Stephen Lindemann, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,396,627.00

Microbial ecosystems called ‘microbiomes’ colonize all environments on Earth.
Microbiomes play crucial roles in important environmental processes such as
nutrient cycling and stress resistance. In these ecosystems, microbes compete
strongly for easy-to-consume simple foods like sugars, which are rapidly
consumed. Therefore, microbial communities in nature typically survive on more
complex food sources like polysaccharides. In competition for a simple sugar
molecule, one microbe will eventually win and the losers will go extinct. In
contrast to simple sugars, polysaccharides typically require many different
enzymes for complete degradation because of their complex structure. This
provides opportunity for microbes to divide the labor of degradation amongst
themselves with each microorganism specializing in a few tasks. Thus, microbial
degradation of polysaccharides can allow diverse species to coexist. The goal of
this project is to uncover the rules of life that govern how microbes divide
labor when degrading complex polysaccharide molecules. To do so, the role each
microorganism plays in polysaccharide degradation will be measured in natural
and synthetic microbial communities. A computational model will be developed and
used to predict how members divide labor. Further experiments will test these
model predictions for validation. Successful completion of this research will
yield new understanding of the rules by which division of labor sustains
microbial diversity. Such information will have broad benefits by facilitating
the engineering of microbial bioprocesses and controlling natural microbiomes.
In addition, this project will help develop the next generation microbiome
workforce by providing training in advanced techniques for measurement and
modeling of microbial behavior. Further benefits to society will arise from
public outreach designed to boost awareness of microbial ecology and teach
microbial ecology concepts to K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to uncover the ecological rules governing how complex substrate
structure influences microbial diversity and community function through division
of labor (DOL). This project tests the hypothesis that polysaccharide substrate
molecular complexity sustains functionally degenerate microbial diversity
through diverse transport strategies and alternate gene regulatory patterns.
Together, diversity and gene regulation result in distinct hierarchies of
preferred polysaccharide structures and degradation products. These mechanisms
are further hypothesized to result in DOL among members that allows niche
partitioning of microorganisms that degrade specific molecular structures,
thereby minimizing competition. Specific research objectives to achieve the
project goals are to: i) define the niches of polysaccharide-degrading microbial
communities and the overall impact on community productivity and C and N flow;
ii) develop genome-scale metabolic network models of polysaccharide-degrading
communities and propose a theoretical framework that decomposes microbial
interactions into basic DOL units; and iii) determine how DOL plays a key role
in linking diversity to community productivity and stability. Successful
completion of this research will uncover mechanisms by which microbes divide
labor in communities consuming complex substrates and translate that mechanistic
knowledge into theory that describes how microbial DOL interactions maintain
diversity and influence emergent properties. Broader benefits to society result
from advancing synthetic ecology strategies for the engineering of microbial
consortia with applications in diverse fields ranging from remediation,
bioprocessing, and ecosystem sciences. Additional benefits result from efforts
to help build a microbiome workforce via project-based course development,
public outreach, training workshops, and development of instructional tools for
K-12 audiences. This project is supported by co-funding from the CHE Chemistry
of Life Processes program in the Math and Physical Sciences Directorate and the
CBET Environmental Engineering program in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.