* 2125760
* EAGER: What is the Cause of Strong Carbon Dioxide 15 Micron Emission in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere? Resolving the Puzzle
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Alexander Kutepov, Catholic University of America
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 122,780.00

This award supports a 2-year investigation into various infrared (IR) emission
mechanisms in the Mesosphere and Lower Thermosphere (MLT) region that may be
responsible for largely unexplained enhanced IR emission in the CO2 15-μm band
above ~90 km. This 15-μm emission is the main cooling mechanism of MLTs of
Earth, Venus and Mars. This IR emission is also used to retrieve MLT
temperatures by a number of satellite instruments such as SABER/TIMED,
MIPAS/ENVUSAT-1, CRISTA/ASTRO-SPAS, and others. In the MLT region the formation
of this radiation is dominated by excitation of CO2 molecules by inelastic
collisions with the O(3P) atoms and subsequent emission of the 15-μm quanta.
However, this process remains still poorly understood despite many studies over
the past several decades. Laboratory measurements at different laboratories
applying various techniques have found low values of the CO2+O(3P) reaction rate
coefficient. The use of this low rate in the model calculations does not result
in the CO2(ν2) excitation needed to reproduce the strong CO2 15-μm emission
observed. In order to fit these observations, the laboratory rate must be
increased by a factor of 4. This award is aimed at a search for one or more
significant mechanisms of the CO2 excitation that is not accounted for in the
current non-local thermodynamic equilibrium (non-LTE) models of the MLT IR
emissions. This award would feature the inclusion of a number of radically
different and complex processes of energy transfer to molecular vibrational and
rotational states which may be excited in the MLT region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new investigation is expected to lead to a more
accurate understanding of how this 15-μm IR emission serve as the main IR
cooling pathway for the MLT region. The new results would potentially have high
impact on the modeling of atmospheric dynamics, chemistry and climate for the
MLT region. Additionally, this study will provide a more robust analysis of IR
radiances that can be later expanded to other space missions, including those
designed to observe Mars, Venus and terrestrial exo-planets. The award would
also examine whether there is a need for significant alteration of the
calculations of the IR radiative cooling/heating of MLT in
GCMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.