* 2125586
* CAREER:  Climate and competition interact to determine species' phenology and coexistence.
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,01/31/2025
* Jeffrey Diez, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 01/31/2025
* USD 713,464.00

The types of organisms found within a community are determined by the climate of
an area and the presence of competitors, predators, and mutualists. Climate may
also influence the timing of different yearly life events (referred to as
phenology), such as when plants flower, insects emerge, and birds migrate.
Because organisms may have different sensitivities to changes in temperature and
rainfall, associated differences in the timing of their life events may lead to
the 'reshuffling' of communities. In other words, these changes in the
phenologies of organisms may lead some species to interact with new partners and
lose their relationships others. This project will examine how changes in the
timing of life events of plants may influence their competition with other
plants, which in turn may influence the types of plants that will be found in an
area. While focusing on wildflower communities in California, this project will
inform our broader understanding of how plant diversity can be maintained given
changing environmental conditions. This project will mentor underrepresented
undergraduate students, will incorporate citizen scientists in data collection,
and will train graduate students in advanced statistical methods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although it is well documented that species vary in their
phenological responses to changing climatic conditions, the causes of this
variation are still poorly understood, as are the associated consequences for
populations and communities. This project will examine how weather, phenology
and competition interact to influence species fitness, coexistence, and the
impacts of invasive species. By integrating results from a large scale
distributed field experiment and a centralized local experiment (where
precipitation and temperature, as well as, species diversity and densities can
be manipulated), this study will test coexistence theory to understand how
phenology and competition affect plant population dynamics and diversity. A
partnership between citizen scientists and ecologists will extend current
phenology monitoring approaches and collect demographic data for target species.
Results from the field and experimental studies will be used to parameterize
predictive demographic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.