* 2125644
* NRT-URoL: Data Driven Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Linda Petzold, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,024,000.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of California, Santa Barbara will develop, implement, and test an
innovative graduate education model on the theme of Data Driven Biology (DDB).
The program's goal is to train a new generation of biological scientists and
engineers who can work across disciplines, are fluent in data analytics and
experimental methods, and who will advance fundamental research in quantitative
biology and bioengineering. Cell and developmental biology are in transition
from qualitative observational sciences to quantitative, data-rich fields that
leverage modeling and design principles from physics and engineering. Advances
in imaging and sequencing technologies, paired with machine learning and
computer vision tools, are having a transformative impact on quantitative cell
biology. To take full advantage of these technologies, the modern biological
engineer needs to be fluent both in the design of biological experiments and in
data mining strategies to integrate information across scales (temporal and from
genetic/molecular to cellular and tissue scales). DDB seeks to provide students
with the breadth to collaborate across disciplines meaningfully and with the
depth to answer biological questions with scientific rigor supported by
knowledge of and experience with data science approaches. The project
anticipates training 70 Ph.D. students, including 30 funded trainees, from
doctoral programs in: biological engineering, biomolecular science &amp;
engineering, chemical engineering, computer science, electrical and computer
engineering, molecular, cellular and developmental biology, mechanical
engineering, and physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through DDB, students will learn
how to design experiments; acquire and integrate multi-modal, disparate data;
and integrate machine learning and computational approaches to extract patterns
and meaning from biological data to understand and leverage heterogeneity in
stem-cell-derived models. Trainees will be supported by a new curriculum, which
will serve as the basis of an emergent Biological Engineering Ph.D. program.
Onboarding will include a structured course on seminal research papers and best
practices for designing interdisciplinary inquiry. Armed with these training
elements, students will be immersed in an in-vivo research experience to conduct
hands-on redesign of seminal experiments and to personally implement advanced
research methods to test the conclusions of these seminal papers. Students will
also engage in co-mentored research rotation projects across diverse labs
(experimental and modeling). To support self-reflection, deliberate career
planning, and self-efficacy, the program will deploy a three-pronged mentoring
plan, including a faculty advisor, peer feedback, and self-assessment through
individual development plans. Finally, internships and externships will provide
trainees with immersive exchange opportunities across a research network
committed to convergent and translational training. This will allow students to
experience firsthand how fundamental discovery can ultimately impact applied
health applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.