* 2125978
* Continuation of COVID Postdoctoral Fellowship Program
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Silvia Ronco, Research Corporation for Science Advancement
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 261,603.00

With the support from the Division of Chemistry and Division of Physics in the
Mathematical and Physical Science (MPS) Directorate at NSF, the Research
Corporation for Science Advancement (RCSA) will support three fellowships for
highly trained postdoctoral associates in chemistry and physics, with the aim to
help stabilize a portion of the scientific workforce. The COVID-19 pandemic has
caused unprecedented disruption in many sectors of society. University budgets
have been reduced, hiring freezes put in place, and work stoppages/restrictions
enacted. Newer science, technology, engineering, and mathematical (STEM)
professionals hoping to enter the professoriate at this time face significant
challenges that could force many of them to leave the profession. This activity
complements the existing RCSA programs to help these highly trained members of
the STEM workforce bridge the gap between training and the start of their
independent careers, by helping to retain them in STEM while also augmenting the
breadth of their experience, especially for women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides three fellowships for
individuals caught in the wake of the COVID-19 crisis that has impacted their
prospects for securing independent positions on the scientific job market.
Rather than have these individuals leave the STEM fields, these fellowships will
provide them with at least one year of additional support. Beyond furthering
their scientific expertise in areas which they are already familiar, this
support will provide these postdocs with opportunities to gain pedagogical
training in active learning and its implementation in online and/or in person
classes. The mentors of these fellows will also benefit since they will be able
to maintain some stability in their research endeavors. These fellowships are
designed to help mentors retain highly trained and productive researchers at a
time when training new project members remains difficult. Colleges and
universities will benefit from these fellowships in that the fellows will become
an additional resource for course delivery, both over the fellowship period and
beyond, as they embark on their own independent faculty
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.