* 2125758
* NRT: Rivers, Watersheds, Communities: Training an Innovative, Cross-Sector Workforce for Equitable, Multi-Scale Decision-Making Towards Human and Ecosystem Health
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Erica Crespi, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 2,999,701.00

Rivers provide food and clean water, transportation pathways, energy production,
travel corridors for organisms, and cultural and spiritual values for people.
Despite their importance, many river systems are highly contaminated with
toxins, sediment, nutrients, and metals. Contamination originates from many
sources, including industrial activity, pesticide runoff, wastewater treatment
discharges, and urban runoff. This contamination is considered an invisible
water crisis posing serious risks for wildlife and human health in many places.
As this crisis escalates in watersheds, it impacts the communities living in
these watersheds adversely. Therefore, it becomes important to train a new
workforce capable of integrating scientific information, public policy, and the
knowledge and concerns of affected social groups, including Native American
tribes, for effective management of the resources of river systems. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Washington
State University will train graduate students from across the United States how
to study challenges in rivers, watersheds, and communities as they relate to
human and ecosystem health and will use the Columbia River Basin as the study
site. The project anticipates training 65 master’s and doctoral degree students,
including 25 funded trainees, from civil and environmental engineering,
biological sciences, environmental and natural resources sciences, environmental
sociology, and political science. Central to the traineeship is developing a
community engagement approach that begins with the recognition that communities
face diverse and complex issues and leverages knowledge of native communities to
identify key problems and implement equitable solutions. Students participating
in this program will engage with communities to co-produce solutions and
opportunities to the invisible water crisis through scientific training,
research, and problem-solving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT program will
integrate the natural sciences, engineering, social sciences, and traditional
knowledges to develop a transdisciplinary research program in river-watershed-
community systems that ultimately will produce equitable solutions to pressing,
societal problems experienced by diverse communities. Program activities are
focused on two education and training objectives aimed to: (1) cause a cultural
shift in STEM graduate education by embracing transdisciplinary learning and the
co-production of knowledge through community engagement, and (2) transform our
STEM graduate training into a student-centered mentoring model. Education and
research themes address basic and applied research questions related to water
quality and landscape dynamics of river systems, anthropogenic changes in the
environment that affect ecosystem health, and equitable mitigation of the
cultural, economic, or health consequences experienced by communities. The
traineeship program gives students the flexibility to pursue individualized
research paths and provides hands-on training experiences to build skill and
competency in communication, teamwork, ethics, cultural knowledge, traditional
knowledges, transdisciplinarity, and quantitative/computational research
methods. Program elements weave engagement experiences throughout the student
experience in the form of novel courses, leadership training, a Columbia River
Basin Living Atlas focused on data integration and visualization, and multi-
media communication. The student-centered mentoring model includes a trainee
development plan, external mentoring, and faculty development. Program elements
will be institutionalized in the form of a Science and Community Engagement
(ScienCE) certificate available to all STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development
and implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM
graduate education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.