* 2125908
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of Biodegradable Hot Melt Pressure Sensitive Adhesives for Use in Hygiene Products
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Kathleen Bailey, SHERO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is in development of fully-
biodegradable disposable personal care products, particularly menstrual pads. In
general, menstrual pads cannot be recycled or be composted by municipal
facilities after use because of issues with the biodegradable hot-melt adhesives
to construct and position them. Biodegradation may be the best way to reduce the
environmental impact associated with them, particularly in geographies where
municipal solid waste facilities are underdeveloped. Ultimately, non-toxic, safe
and effective disposable menstrual pads could improve quality of life for
menstruating women and the environment, and provide a new commercial opportunity
for producers in the US and around the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project addresses the technical challenge of synthesizing a combination of
biodegradable thermoplastics and biological additives that will create a
pressure sensitive adhesive (PSA). This PSA must performs well in commercial hot
glue application machinery as well as in the intended products, completely and
safely degrade within six months of use, and is commercially viable at scale.
These parameters have yet to be met by biological-based adhesives. The research
approach is as follows: First, develop and synthesize PSAs using a biological
base polymer and biological-based biodegradable additives, including
plasticizers, tackifiers, and compatibilizers to enhance the performance of the
PSAs. Second, characterize PSAs based on established use and manufacturing
requirements and optimize the composition to ensure the requirements are met.
Third, test PSA compositions for degradation, including length of time required
for complete biodegradation under landfill, soil, and water conditions,
including marine environments. Identify intermediate chemical molecules and
structures that form as a result of the biodegradation process, determine their
potential hazards on both the environment and the health of biological
organisms. This project will develop a biodegradable PSA that will meet
manufacturing and performance standards in menstrual pads and show that the PSA
can be fully biodegradable in less than six months under non-specialized
environmental conditions, without the need of mechanochemical or photo
degradation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.