* 2125142
* MIM: Machine Learning, Systems Modeling, and Experimental Approaches to Understand the Universal Rules of Life of Microbiota Using Marine Time Series Data
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Jed Fuhrman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,500,651.00

Understanding the relationships among microbial organisms, the functioning of
their genes and communities, the environment, and how these relationships
reflect universal rules of life remain essential problems in microbiology. The
team of investigators are leveraging metagenomics data, the collective DNA
content of the entire community, from a marine time series to address these
questions. Although the science of metagenomics is over a decade old, there are
still many aspects of metagenomic datasets that require new approaches to
extract valuable information. The research team will apply state-of-the-art
integrative machine learning, systems modeling and experimental approaches to
existing and newly generated time series metagenomic data to better understand
the interaction networks in microbial communities and their impacts on microbial
community function, which have major implications for understanding the global
cycling of elements and processing of energy in ecosystems. The machine learning
and mathematical modeling tools developed in this proposal should provide new
avenues for fundamental analysis of metagenomes. The theory and computational
tools will also directly benefit both the statistical and machine learning
community on causal inference as well as ecological modeling. Ultimately, these
tools will enable investigators to help uncover the universal rules of life
within microbiomes from many different environments, including those present in
animals and plants. The project will provide interdisciplinary training for
postdoctoral fellows, graduate, undergraduate and high school students with
emphasis on underrepresented groups in data science, computer science,
statistics, computational biology, environmental biology and ecology. Software
tools developed during the project will be disseminated to the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the past two decades, the San
Pedro Ocean Time (SPOT) Series associated with University of Southern California
Microbial Observatory has collected time series marker gene, metagenomic, and
metatranscriptomic data at different time scales (daily, weekly, monthly, and
seasonally) across various depths, locations and perturbations (pristine and
polluted) in the ocean. With the rich available time series data, the research
team will develop machine learning, systems modeling, and experimental
approaches to understand the universal rules of life of microbial communities.
The specific aims of this project are to (1) develop machine learning approaches
to identify all microbes, known or novel, within the microbial communities and
also host of mobile genetic elements, such as viruses and plasmids, through
metagenomic read assembly and binning, (2) further investigate the Granger
graphical models with knockoff false discovery control, apply the resulting
computational tools to the SPOT data to identify causal relationships among the
known microbial genomes, metagenome assembled genomes, and environmental
factors. (3) based on the causal networks constructed from the first two aims,
develop mechanistic models driving organism abundances and community structure,
such as competition, cross-feeding, virus-host interactions, grazing and
physical transport, and develop a predictive framework for application to
diverse and future ecosystems. (4) experimentally validate the predicted virus-
host interactions using proximity-ligation experiments and the dynamics and
emerging properties of the microbial communities. User-friendly software
packages to automate the procedures for analyzing metagenomic data will be
developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this research was provided by
the Biological Oceanography and Mathematical Biology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.