* 2125083
* MIM: Deciphering and Optimizing Cross-Domain Interactions to Increase Productivity in High pH-High Alkalinity Microalgae Communities
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Huyen Bui, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,191,654.00

Microalgae are responsible for more than half of the carbon dioxide fixation
worldwide and often have greater photosynthetic efficiencies than terrestrial
plants. Microalgae can use this fixed carbon to produce compounds like lipids
that have value as an alternative to crude oil for biofuel and chemical
production. Furthermore, microalgae can be cultivated on marginal lands using
waste water; thus, they their commercial cultivation does not compete directly
with existing food and feed crops. A major challenge for the large-scale
cultivation of microalgae is the lack of understanding about how microbial
communities affect algae growth. This interdisciplinary research and training
project will use microbiology and molecular biology approaches, combined with
engineering and computer modeling approaches, to bridge gaps in the
understanding of algal microbiome interactions to achieve maximum productivity
and culture stability. The research approaches and results will be transferrable
to other natural and industrial systems relevant to society such as wastewater
treatment, nutrient cycling, and nutraceutical production. Broader societal
outcomes will include improved algal cultivation strategies, the training of
graduate and undergraduate students with an emphasis on integrating students
from tribal colleges in Montana, and the development of educational outreach
modules for K-12 classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
focus on understanding and ultimately controlling the microbiome of highly
productive, high pH/high alkalinity algal cultures for stable and robust primary
productivity. Physical and metabolic interactions will be identified and
quantified in the algaeâ€™s natural habitat and in enrichment cultures.
Mathematical models of organismal and community metabolisms will be developed
and used to predict possible improvements in the microbiome and in interspecies
interactions. These predictions will be tested using well-defined experiments
including next generation sequencing and physiology studies enabling observation
of carbon and nitrogen exchange at both the culture and single-cell levels.
Iterative refinement of modeling and experiments will lead to an in-depth
understanding and ultimately optimization of community productivity, robustness,
and stability. On a broader, ecological level, this work will decipher
interactions of organisms in high pH, high alkalinity environments, which are
among the most productive ecosystems in the world. The results and approaches to
be developed will be readily transferrable to other phototrophic-driven
environments as well as to other multi-domain microbial communities such as
fungal-bacterial co-cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.