* 2125921
* NRT-HDR: Convergent Research in Integrative and Public Land Management
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Jonathan Coop, Western Colorado University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,969,598.00

This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Western
Colorado University will train diverse future scientists to help land management
institutions respond to the dramatic challenges faced by American public lands.
These challenges include global environmental change, rapid political and
economic shifts, increased recreation demand, and varying patterns of resource
development. Land managers face innumerable dilemmas associated with these
accelerating changes that demand both new ecological knowledge and the capacity
to effectively utilize that knowledge within complex social systems. The
increasing public availability of big data and powerful computing platforms
fundamentally change the questions ecologists can ask and answer regarding such
land management challenges. The project anticipates training more than 120
students, including 16 funded trainees, from the Master in Ecology and Master in
Environmental Management programs. Trainees will develop, implement and assess
adaptive management approaches aligned with rapidly changing environmental
conditions. This traineeship will cultivate a new generation of scientists to
inform and manage ecological and and land management projects at the scale,
speed, and direction needed to respond to ecological changes reshaping our
planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By converging big data, sensing technology, and
machine learning with the traditional site-level work of field biologists, the
research to be conducted by the NRT trainees will generate transformative
knowledge of ecological processes. Trainees will employ state-of-the-art data
tools to evaluate management dilemmas, inform on-the-ground decision-making, and
evaluate the effects of response strategies upon species and ecosystems.
Students will develop big-data skills through collaborations with engineering
and computer science colleagues to build machine learning algorithms or
customize data generation tools. The program will advance research
collaborations undertaken in partnership with ecological researchers, land
management agencies, and the public. Intervention strategies will be designed
and implemented within an experimental framework to facilitate the rigorous
assessment of effects and effectiveness. In addition to developing cutting-edge
research capabilities, NRT trainees will attain the leadership skills necessary
to analyze and apply scientific knowledge to the complex realities of planning,
policy development, and management of public lands. By integrating targeted
training in ecological data science with professional leadership, the
traineeship will foster a high-return, interdisciplinary synergy between science
and professional masterâ€™s degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.