* 2125940
* BCSER: Using Computational Language Processing Techniques to Determine if Parental STEM Language Varies By Child Gender
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kathryn Leech, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 335,948.00

This STEM education research capacity building project combines a research
project that investigates whether parents transmit gender stereotypes about STEM
to pre-school children in everyday conversations and a detailed professional
development plan that enables the principal investigator to develop competencies
in computational research methodologies, skill in mentoring junior colleagues,
and knowledge of research on the underrepresentation of women in STEM. The
research will examine whether parents use more STEM words and topics with boys
than girls, providing evidence that parental language may contribute to girls’
underrepresentation in STEM. The project also will develop and test a new
research method by using a novel quantitative methodology, computational text
analysis. The research project and professional development plan will support a
research trajectory aimed at using computational text analysis to examine how
variations in parents’ speech impact children’s downstream outcomes, such as
scientific thinking and STEM participation using longitudinal research designs.
The project will position the investigator to explore potential malleable
factors associated with gender differences in STEM outcomes, with the goal of
proposing targeted interventions to broaden representation in STEM for all
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be guided by the sociocultural
theory of learning and development, gender schema theory to contextualize why
parents may communicate about STEM differently with boys versus girls, and
expectancy theory to explain how gender differences in parents’ beliefs and
behaviors may impact children’s future STEM motivation and persistence. The
investigator will examine three research questions: (1) Are there differences in
parents’ use of STEM language based on whether the parent is interacting with
their son or daughter? (2) What family characteristics moderate associations
between parents’ STEM language and child gender? and (3) How reliable is
computational text analysis compared to manual coding approaches for identifying
parental STEM language? Videotapes and survey data of demographic constructs,
science attitudes, and gender schemas will be collected for 80 families.
Transcripts from both sources will be compiled into one corpus for analysis.
Computational text analysis will be used to determine whether parents’ use of
STEM-related words and topics differ when speaking to their sons versus
daughters. The investigator will use the open-source R statistical modeling
language to perform the entire text analysis workflow. The research findings
will advance core knowledge about the processes underlying how STEM stereotypes
are transmitted from parents to young children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the ECR: Building Capacity in STEM Education Research
competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR) Program. ECR funds fundamental
research focused on STEM learning and learning environments, building capacity
in STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.