* 2125924
* NRT-QISE: Accelerating Interdisciplinary Frontiers in Quantum Sciences and Technologies (AIF-Q)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Quantum sciences and technologies have progressed remarkably in recent years.
This progress includes, for example, new quantum processors with unique
computational capabilities, secure channels over metropolitan distances, and
unprecedented resolution in fields and force sensing. Continued progress
requires the training of a new generation of scientists and engineers to develop
these technologies. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to the University of California Los Angeles will accelerate these
computation, communication, and sensing milestones and their interdisciplinary
interfaces by training doctoral students in this nascent field of quantum
science and technologies. The program will train 134 doctoral students,
including 67 funded trainees, bridging relevant concepts from engineering,
physics, materials, chemistry, and mathematics. The traineeship has a
particularly strong emphasis on increasing the representation of women and
minority students in quantum sciences and technologies through broad yet
specific outreach recruitment, mentoring, and retention
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Interdisciplinary Frontiers in
Quantum Sciences and Technologies (AIF-Q) program consists of four thrusts.
These include: (1) atomic qubits and novel chemistry; (2) materials and
algorithms towards new forms of computation; (3) optical qubits for quantum
simulations; and (4) trapped ions for many-body physics. Spanning these
interdisciplinary layers, the traineeship ties together core pillars of
heterogeneous materials, microwave spectroscopy, and quantum algorithms. Central
to the thrusts and core pillars is interdisciplinary graduate education and
research training, guided by the faculty and industry-national laboratory
interactions. The integrated training program consists of interdisciplinary
three-faculty advising and mentoring through laboratory rotations, new course
offerings in interdisciplinary quantum sciences and technologies, distinguished
external advisory and internal steering councils, and formative-summative
assessments. The program team will pursue seed and joint interactions together
with industry and national laboratory partners. A long-term institutional
commitment will be embodied in the proposed formation of a University of
California Inter-Departmental Degree Program in Quantum Sciences and
Technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative, and scalable models for STEM graduate education
training. The Traineeship Track is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas, through the
comprehensive traineeship model that is innovative, evidence-based, and aligned
with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.