* 2125664
* EAGER: Understanding the genomes and strain mutations of SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses using comparative and population genetic approaches
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Noah Zaitlen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Comparative genomics provides a powerful lens in which to understand novel
genomes. This EAGER award sees to gain a deeper scientific understanding of the
genomes and strain mutations of SARS-CoV-2 and other viruses by developing and
applying innovative comparative genomic and population genetic methods
leveraging the expertise of the investigators in these areas. These analyses
will elucidate the relative contributions of evolutionary forces that shape the
SARS-CoV-2 genome and other virus genomes across deep and recent evolutionary
time scales and will pinpoint functionally important positions in their genomes.
They will inform efforts of the broader scientific community to model the
dynamics of infection, strategies for mitigation, and to develop therapeutics.
This research will be integrated into educational programs that leverage the BIG
summer undergraduate research program and the Computational Genomics Summer
Institute at UCLA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims are to develop and
apply comparative genomic analyses for SARS-CoV-2 using multiple genome
alignments of various coronavirus genomes. The work will leverage the recently
developed ConsHMM method to annotate the SARS-CoV-2 genome at single nucleotide
resolution into different conservation states. ConsHMM defines conservation
states based on the combinatorial and spatial patterns of which species align to
and match a reference genome using a multivariate hidden Markov model (HMM).
These conservation states will be related to other annotations of the SARS-CoV-2
genome including (inter)genic and key protein regions. Population genetic
approaches will be applied to publicly available sequences of the SARS-Cov-2
genome to infer fundamental properties of mutations. To estimate these
parameters, novel structured coalescent-based models will be developed that
account for demographic processes across multiple time points and locations.
While the initial investigation will focus on the large collections of SARS-
CoV-2 genomes that are becoming available, the methods developed will be
applicable to the study of viral genomes (such as other coronaviruses,
influenza, ebola, and HIV) and their strain mutations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.