* 2125375
* SCC-PG: Planning for Resilience and Equity through Accessible Community Technology: Developing a Community-Led Planning Tool for Climate Readiness
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Christina Rosan, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

PREACT (Planning for Resilience and Equity through Accessible Community
Technology) is a multipurpose and multi-scalar climate preparedness and
neighborhood planning software application informed by community needs and
assets, to be piloted in the city of Philadelphia. While most planning tools are
designed and built in a top-down manner, centering software developers and
planners, this project will articulate a framework for technology co-production
that fully takes into account the needs and experiences of community members and
allows for the integration of social and scientific data for more informed
decision-making. PREACT will enable users to specify a geographical area of
interest, choose from and weigh the importance of a range of factors relevant to
a climate planning concern, and generate a map indicating areas of greatest
vulnerability. PREACT will also help identify ways to systematically address
vulnerabilities through support for existing community assets (like parks and
other greenspace), opportunities to reinvest in social, ecological, and physical
infrastructure in communities, better local enforcement of existing public
health regulations, and changes in land-use decisions and planning. The
inclusion of resident groups in the creation of PREACT ensures that the data and
assumptions that underpin PREACT reflect community need and lived experience.
Through the process of designing and using PREACT, we anticipate creating
opportunities for a more deliberative dialogue among residents, scholars,
government, and business about needs and preferences for policy interventions
and infrastructure investments. The goal is to co-create a socio-ecological and
technological tool that promotes climate resiliency, empowers residents, and
makes the government more responsive to community
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PREACT will be designed using a co-design process
for the development of an interactive planning and data visualization tool to
help educate the diverse stakeholder of the trade-off associated with decision
making and investments for climate preparedness and adaptation. Through a series
of community design workshops and the creation of more specialized working
groups, the project will produce (a) a data collection plan that outlines the
desired inputs including environmental data, citizen-science data, energy data,
socioeconomic data, and data on neighborhood amenities and risk factors, and how
they might be collected; (b) a data integration plan for how to incorporate the
various data sets and forms into PREACT software, including the quantification
of qualitative measures and a model for understanding the ways that factors
interact with each other; (c) a software development and data visualization plan
involving a series of wireframes detailing how PREACT software will work,
addressing both how users interact with the software and how the data
integration, visualization, and analysis will be carried out; and (d) a
community-engagement plan detailing methods for further engagement of community
members as citizen scientists and planners for the implementation of
PREACT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.