* 2125174
* CAREER: The Development, Design, and Ethical Issues of Algorithmic Hiring Tools
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Ifeoma Ajunwa, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2025
* USD 338,980.00

This project explores the development and implementation of Automated Hiring
Platforms that use complex mathematical formulas and artificial intelligence
when making choices about whom to hire for a job. This is an important issue
because Automated Hiring Platforms have sometimes been found to be biased in
their selection of employees from particular social groups and because they
often lack transparency regarding the factors that go into their decisions. This
project aims to understand the social and ethical dimensions of how Automated
Hiring Platforms are created and how they function within the job market. This
will be accomplished through surveying companies that use Automated Hiring
Platforms about how they use them, observing how Automated Hiring Platforms are
designed, and through interviews with those who design and develop them and with
human resources professionals and job applicants. The project will also result
in the creation of a new code of ethics for the design and use of Automated
Hiring Platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automated Hiring Platforms are among the
most visible and consequential forms of artificial intelligence because of their
importance for hiring decisions, because they can be systematically biased in
their selection criteria, and because they often operate as 'black boxes' the
design and inner workings of which are unknown. This project would advance
recent research in Science and Technology Studies that has begun to consider the
social and ethical implications of artificial intelligence for human-computer
interaction, social stratification, and the future of work. The main goals of
this project are: 1) To provide better social scientific understanding of the
human-computer interactions involved in using Automated Hiring Platforms and how
they are designed; 2) To educate the public and organizations about the
technical capabilities, limitations, and ethical issues arising from algorithmic
hiring tools; and 3) To facilitate the development of ethical codes of conducts
for designers, developers and consumers of algorithmic hiring tools. This will
be accomplished via a mixed-methods research design involving surveys,
interviews, observations, and documentary content
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.