* 2125182
* SBIR Phase II:  Budbreak Delay Gel Technology for Frost Management and Mechanization of Vineyards
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Manfredo Seufferheld, FROSTDEFENSE ENVIROTECH, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 995,228.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project is to allow America’s grape
industry to reduce crop losses due to spring frost, estimated at over $1 billion
per year, as well as related job losses – more than 11,000 individuals in the
State of Washington alone. The encapsulating bud break delay technology and
predictive analytics support farmers with decision making tools ahead of
impending frost events during bud break season. Such tools may enable rural
communities to achieve economic stability by decreasing yield losses and
lowering production costs. The technology fills gaps in knowledge needed to make
informed decisions on individual farms, resulting in better management decisions
in the face of increasing complexities of spring freeze threats. Additionally,
use of the encapsulation technology may reduce carbon emissions and water usage
from current fossil fuel-intensive conventional frost mitigation measures such
as burners, wind machines and sprinklers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
encapsulating bud break delay technology involves two main advances. First, a
gel encapsulation spray biologically delays the process of bud break
consistently up to 14 days and increases cold resistance up to 6 degrees
Celsius. Second, to guide growers in delivering this product, a Decision Support
System (DSS) aids grape growers in deciding when it is necessary to mitigate
pending frost conditions. The Phase II project focuses on increasing the
predictive accuracy of the DSS and scaling the system. Specifically, the team
will focus on: a) optimizing the formulation and testing in the lab, b) field-
testing and data collection at five sites, c) enhancing DSS capabilities with
additional data and analysis, d) scaling up for large-scale manufacture and
application, and e) gathering data for regulatory approvals. This gel
encapsulation solution for frost protection of vineyards may find future
applications in other fruits crops such as apples and stones fruits that are
even more susceptible to spring frost damage than
grapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.