* 2125844
* Case Studies of a Suite of Next Generation Science Instructional, Assessment and Professional Development Materials in Diverse Middle School Settings
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Nancy Songer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,210,260.00

New state science standards are ambitious and require important changes to
instructional practices, accompanied by a coordinated system of curriculum,
assessment, and professional development materials. This project addresses a gap
between vision and implementation of such standards by designing a coordinated
suite of instructional, assessment and teacher professional learning materials
that attempt to enact the vision behind the Next Generation Science Standards.
The study focuses on the design of such materials using state-of-the-art
technology to create an 8-week long, immersive, life science field experience
organized around three investigations. Classes of urban students in two states
will collect data on local insect species with the goal of understanding,
sharing, and critiquing environmental management solutions. An integrated
learning technology system, the Learning Navigator, draws on big data to
organize student-gathered data, dialogue, lessons, an assessment information.
The Learning Navigator will also amplify the teacher's role in guiding and
fostering next generation science learning. This project advances the field
through an in-depth exploration of the goals for the standards documents. The
study begins to address questions about what works when, where, and for whom in
the context of the Next Generation Science Standards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project uses a series of case studies to create, test, evaluate and refine the
system of instructional, assessment and professional development materials as
they are enacted in two distinct urban school settings. It is designed with 330
students and 22 teachers in culturally, racially and linguistically diverse,
under-resourced schools in Pennsylvania and California. These schools are
located in neighborhoods that are economically challenged and have students who
demonstrate patterns of underperformance on state standardized tests. It will
document the process of team co-construction of Next Generation Science-
fostering instructional materials; develop assessment tasks for an instructional
unit that are valid and reliable; and, track the patterns of use of the
instructional and assessment materials by teachers. The study will also record
if new misconceptions are revealed as students develop Next Generation Science
knowledge, comparing findings across two diverse school locations in two states.
Data collection will include: (a) multiple types of data to establish validity
and reliability of educational assessments, (b) the design, evaluation and use
of a classroom observation protocol to gather information on both frequency and
categorical degree of classroom practices that support the vision, and (c)
consecutive years of ten individual classroom enactments through case studies
analyzed through cross-case analyses. This should lead to stronger and better
developed understandings about what constitutes strong Next Generation Science
learning and the classroom conditions, instructional materials, assessments and
teacher development -- that foster it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.