* 2125868
* NRT-NNA: Convergent Arctic Research Perspectives and Education (CARPE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Meghan Howey, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,299,651.00

The cascading impacts of climate change on natural and human systems are more
evident in the Arctic than anywhere else on Earth. Temperatures are rising twice
as fast as the global average. Dramatic sea ice reductions, significant glacier
and ice sheet mass loss, and rapidly thawing permafrost impact Arctic peoples’
and ecosystems’ daily activities and well-being. Many of the most profound
changes result from shifts in seasonality—the timing of cultural, biological,
physical, and chemical events—especially the nature and timing of spring and
autumn. Addressing how changing seasonality across the Arctic affects
ecosystems, the built environment, and human communities requires the
convergence of many disciplines capable of recognizing the interlinked
challenges posed by climate change. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of New Hampshire (UNH) will train
graduate students to use a convergence research framework to investigate and
understand the interwoven impacts of changing seasonality on Arctic natural and
human systems. The program will train 10 M.S. and 30 Ph.D. students, including
20 funded Ph.D. trainees, from the natural sciences, social sciences, and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Connecting Arctic Research Perspectives
and Education (CARPE) NRT aims to train the next generation of professionals to
tackle the complex socio-ecological challenges of changing seasonality in the
Arctic using a convergence research framework imbued with a perspective that
respects the viewpoints of indigenous communities. The primary objectives are to
train graduate students and their faculty advisors to design and conduct
convergence research projects focused on the impact of changing seasonality in
the Arctic natural and human systems while building capacity to engage with
Arctic Indigenous communities and local stakeholders. CARPE will prepare the
trainees to pursue academic and non-academic careers to address grand challenges
posed by a changing climate and the cascading impacts on society. In addition,
the program will transform graduate training at UNH by integrating convergent
approaches to research and preparing students to build reciprocal research
programs with Indigenous and other community partners. Hence, they will be
better equipped for societally-focused careers. CARPE trainees will participate
in program elements including coursework providing the theoretical and practical
foundations for conducting research oriented toward a changing Arctic;
transdisciplinary group research projects; collaborative, solutions-focused
internships with external partners; communication training for engaging with a
variety of audiences; and ethics training in building relationships with
Indigenous and local peoples. Evidence of mastery of knowledge and skills will
be assessed via synthesis reports, individual and team presentations,
contributions to workshops, conferences, community discussions, and outreach
events, completion of a convergent research project, and via external
evaluation. In addition, each student will draft and refine an Individual
Development Plan throughout their time in CARPE, with input and guidance from
their mentors and CARPE leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this award is being provided by
Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) program one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA supports
projects that address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing
Arctic, empower new research partnerships, diversify the next generation of
Arctic researchers, enhance efforts in formal and informal education, and
integrate the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award aligns
with those goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.