* 2125646
* CC* Compute: A campus-wide computing resource for research and teaching at the University of Washington Bothell
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eric Salathe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 394,473.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UW Bothell has no general access
to research computing resources - this project transforms the capacity for
computational science research and education on campus. The University of
Washington maintains an integrated, scalable, super-computing infrastructure
called Hyak to support research computing across all units and campuses.
Academic and research units at the university purchase nodes on Hyak as an
alternative to deploying and operating their own high-performance systems. This
award allows the small University of Washington Bothell campus to become a
participant in the Hyak system creating a dedicated research computing capacity
for our faculty and students. The team of researchers participating in this
project form the core users of the new system and span a wide range of
computational research fields including astrophysics, climate modeling,
biochemistry, genomics, machine learning, operations research, and mathematics.
The new capacity allows the development of a larger cross-campus initiative for
computational science education supporting our undergraduate teaching
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports the acquisition and
operation of compute nodes and associated hardware in the Hyak system. UW
Bothell is a sponsor of the Hyak facility and participates in its governance and
decision-making processes. HPC nodes procured include 60 Intel Xeon Scalable
Gold 6230 20-core 2.1GHz CPUs for 1,200 total cores and 8 NVIDIA Quadro RTX6000
24GB GPUs. Each node includes 192 GB RAM and a 100 Gbps cluster interface. Data
storage is provided by 33 TB high-speed scratch storage and 33 TB of archival
tape storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.