* 2125913
* NRT-AI: Digital Transformation of Development (DToD)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Annalee Saxenian, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Over the past two decades, a massive amount of digital information has become
available on every aspect of human existence, from income and climate to housing
and health. Combining these data from the Internet of Things, and drawing on
techniques for analyzing them through Artificial Intelligence/Machine Learning
(AI/ML), is now considered crucial for progress in all sectors. Digital
transformation is the staple of multiple sectors of industry and commerce.
However, more far-reaching consequences of digital transformation for poverty
alleviation, humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, and, more generally,
improving outcomes for under-resourced or low-income populations are
understudied. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award
to the University of California-Berkeley will allow us to provide
interdisciplinary training for our students in design methodologies, algorithms,
and problem-solving approaches to substantively analyze, ethically investigate,
and develop verifiable, fair, inclusive, and useful observations from datasets
and models. From these insights, students will be able to devise and deploy
digital tools to accelerate growth for low-income populations in the U.S. and
globally. The project anticipates training 100 master’s and doctoral students,
including 28 NRT-funded trainees, from any degree program at the university that
expresses interest in researching digital transformation of development (DToD).
A key concern has been how the analytics and other mechanisms developed using
big data benefit the populations surveyed. By ensuring that the analytic
techniques and algorithms, privacy, fairness, mechanism design, and
implementation of digital technology are relevant to under-served populations,
the DToD traineeship also expects to increase diversity and inclusion of members
of underrepresented minority groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DToD
program will include interdisciplinary research activities, formal coursework
and curriculum building, immersive lab and field training, the creation of
official DToD concentrations at both the doctoral and master’s degree levels,
and career development. In addition, the program’s effectiveness in developing
critical skillsets for multinational workforces will be assessed through
formative evaluation. The program will rely on both interdisciplinary research
faculty and development practitioners in three broad application areas: (1)
Measures for Alleviating Poverty with Data, Algorithms, and AI Applied to
Policy; (2) Poverty Interventions that Integrate the Natural and Built
Environments in Low-Resource Settings; and (3) Improving Health and Wellbeing in
Low-Income Populations. DToD will also contribute to the development of shared
public datasets aligned with national strategies and priorities related to
advancing AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new,
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high-
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.