* 2125511
* CPS: Medium: Sufficient Statistics for Learning Multi-Agent Interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Dorsa Sadigh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,114,158.00

Multi-agent coordination and collaboration is a core challenge of future cyber-
physical systems as they start having more complex interactions with each other
or with humans in homes or cities. One of the key challenges is that agents must
be able to reason about and learn the behavior of other agents in order to be
able to make decisions. This is particularly challenging because state of the
art approaches such as recursive belief modeling over partner policies often do
not scale. However, humans are very effective in coordinating and collaborating
with each other without the need of any expensive recursive belief modeling. One
hypothesis is that humans can effectively capture the sufficient representations
required for coordinating on tasks. Similar to humans, the agents in a multi-
agent setting can look for the sufficient statistics needed for coordination and
collaboration. This project is about learning and approximating such sufficient
statistics to enable effective collaboration and coordination. In addition, the
investigators will study teaching and learning in settings where the agents have
partial observation over the world and need to teach and learn from each other
in order to achieve a collaborative task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Important
successful demonstrations of reinforcement learning for single agents have
spurred the drive to determine whether such methods can extend to multiple
agents. There have also been notable developments in the area of multi-agent
systems, both in understanding the structure of the resulting interacting
dynamics and in the development of practical reinforcement learning algorithms.
The core objective of this project is: 1) the development of learning methods
that approximate the well-known concept of sufficient statistics in multi-agent
interactions; 2) the development of a reinforcement learning algorithm that
leverages the representations of sufficient statistics for more effective
planning, coordination, and collaboration in multi-agent settings; and 3) the
development of algorithms that use the representations of sufficient statistics
to enable teaching and learning in multi-agent settings under partial
observation over the environment. The overall outcome of this project will be a
new formalism along with algorithms, tools, and techniques that enhance multi-
agent learning and control. The investigators will ground this in two main
applications: 1) collaborative search and exploration and 2) collaborative
transport of objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.