* 2125326
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Toxic-Free Footprints to Improve Community Health against Respiratory Hazards
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Amy Mueller, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Fifty years after the passing of the Clean Air Act in the U.S., nearly half of
the nation’s population is estimated to live with and breathe polluted air in
2020. The recent acceleration in the number and intensity of wildfires driven by
climate change and the devastating COVID-19 pandemic have made air pollution
effects on public health an even more heightened concern. This Smart and
Connected Communities project builds and enhances technological, economic,
political, and social infrastructures in vulnerable communities to better sense
and monitor air quality, prevent exposure to respiratory hazards, and raise
awareness of and battle misinformation on air quality. The research aims to
build smart and connected toxic-free communities, which resonates with NSF’s
mission “to advance the national health, prosperity, and welfare.” The research
team collaborates with local grass-root organizations, communities, research
centers, and planning agencies in two communities, Roxbury, Boston, MA and St.
John the Baptist Parish, LA. The new technological approaches and air quality
data generated by the project along with the deep community engagement will
potentially influence and enhance policies and benefit underserved communities
with more equitable access to a healthy environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this research project, the research team (1) develops data-driven approaches to
seamlessly link human mobility (i.e., a person’s footprints within and beyond
the residential place) and respiratory hazards measured by air quality monitors;
(2) designs real-time AI technologies to connect information and communities
that support both network-based interventions; and (3) deploys the methodology
in two representative local communities characterized with minority and
diversity both burdened by air pollution. The research focuses on volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) and particulate matter (e.g., PM2.5) for their known
health impacts of causing lung cancers and cardiovascular and respiratory
diseases. The key deliverables of work include: (1) a data-driven and real-time
AI-based framework that links multi-model data streams (e.g., geolocations, air
quality, social networks, etc.) to quantify and predict air pollution exposures
associated with human footprints; (2) social network-based interventions
strategies developed interactively with and tested by two communities burdened
by air pollution (Roxbury, Boston, MA and St. John Parish, New Orleans, LA); and
(3) real-time AI-powered mobile application (App), Toxic-Free Life, for
mainstream smartphones that allows real-time estimations of air exposure and
supports network-based interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.