* 2125969
* Transitioning Secondary to Tertiary Educators' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Anne Ho, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 286,181.00

This project investigates the significance of Mathematical Knowledge for
Teaching (MKT) in an understudied population of instructors who fall between
traditional divisions of high school and college teaching. Past research has
typically assumed that an instructor is either a high school or college
instructor, but not both. Degree and certification programs also make this
assumption. However, many educators teach both secondary (high school) and
tertiary (college) classes throughout the course of their careers, sometimes
simultaneously. This project highlights educators in the secondary-to-tertiary
(S2T) transition with implications for teaching practices in both settings.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to study and better support
these S2T math educators by using ideas of MKT. MKT includes various domains of
math educator knowledge such as knowledge of math content, connections between
topics across courses, and knowledge of students, teaching, and curriculum. In
phase one, a qualitative study will compare and contrast the priorities of
individuals who have expertise in both secondary and tertiary education. In
phase two, the expert perspectives will be embedded in a capstone course for a
masterâ€™s degree program targeting S2T educators. A second round of data
collection and analysis will explore the possible impacts on teacher knowledge
for the target population. This project initiates a research trajectory that can
inform the math education community about the S2T transition for educators,
part-time and dual-enrollment faculty, community college instructors, teacher
education, distance or online education, and adult
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.