* 2125959
* A Machine Learning Student Behavior Model to Identify Struggling Students in Introductory Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Monica Vroman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 339,602.00

This project, administered by Rutgers University New Brunswick, builds capacity
in STEM Education Research (SER) through the investigator’s participation in
intensive professional growth experiences and application of their new knowledge
in the design and implementation of a SER study. The investigator will build
proficiency in mixed methods research by engaging in focused coursework,
professional conferences, and mentoring by SER experts over the life of the
project. In tandem with professional development efforts, the investigator will
design and test a machine learning tool tailored to assess student progress in
real time in computer science coursework. Once the project goals are realized,
the developed tool holds potential for improving student outcomes in computer
science, an area of critical need in the United States workforce. The tool will
be adaptable for use across disciplines to support student STEM outcomes
overall, while the researcher will be prepared to further advance the knowledge
base in effective STEM education practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigator’s professional growth activities, customized via a gap assessment,
will focus on qualitative research methods, learning theory, and learning
analytics. Through scholarly study that includes regular formative meetings with
experts in SER and engagement in focused coursework and professional
experiences, the investigator will build expertise to enable the development of
a machine learning tool employing behavioral models that predict student success
in computer science courses. Detection of student struggles enroute will promote
the timely use of intervention strategies to enhance success across demographic
groups, thereby improving representation in vital STEM disciplines such as the
computer sciences. This project is supported by the ECR Building Capacity in
STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR
funds fundamental STEM education research projects that focus on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.