* 2125104
* Collaborative Research: MIM: The impact of the fungal microbiome in metal tolerance and soil biogeochemical transformations
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Gregory Bonito, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2026
* USD 898,475.00

Some metals are essential nutrients for life, while some are non-essential or
even harmful to living organisms. Fungi and bacteria are microorganisms that
often live in a close association and play a key role in transforming and
detoxifying metals in the environment. In spite of this importance, there is
relatively little understanding of how the interactions between bacteria and
fungi influence the transformation and/or detoxification of metals. The goal of
this project is to address this knowledge gap by identifying how fungal-
bacterial interactions affect metal transformation. This will be achieved
through a novel multidisciplinary research approach employing advanced, state-
of-the-science analytical techniques. Knowledge gained through this project will
allow the engineered control of metal transformations for a wide range of
applications in environmental cleanup, biorefining, production of nanoparticles,
and other beneficial applications. Successful completion of this research has
strong potential to benefit society through improvements in environmental
remediation and industrial manufacturing. This project will improve the Nationâ€™s
STEM workforce by providing a unique training opportunity for student
researchers that bridges diverse fields such as environmental engineering,
microbiology, geochemistry, bioinformatics, and
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remediation of metal contamination is a major
environmental challenge because, unlike many organic pollutants, metal species
cannot be degraded and can only be extracted or biotransformed to less toxic
forms. While past approaches to biotransform metals have focused primarily on
single microorganisms, host-microbiome interactions have shown potential to
biotransform surrounding environments and improve host resiliency. However, the
mechanisms for metal biotransformation by microbial host-microbiome systems are
largely unknown. The overall goal of this project is to elucidate the rules of
life that govern fungal microbiomes. This goal will be achieved through a
specific focus on fungal microbiomes, which include a fungal host, endosymbionts
(endobacteria), and symbionts (exobacteria that live extracellularly) as a model
host-microbiome system. The specific research objectives of this project
designed to achieve the goal are to: understand the effects of metals and
metalloids on the diversity and transmission of fungal microbiomes (facultative
and obligatory); and determine the role of fungal microbiomes in metal tolerance
by mediating the uptake, transformation, and sorption of metal ions,
nanoparticles, or other metal species. A deeply integrated multidisciplinary
approach will be used to investigate physiological, genetic/genomic, and
metabolic processes that govern the structure and function of fungal microbiomes
in the presence of metals. This will be achieved using novel state-of-the-
science isotope probing, advanced microscopy, spectroscopy, and integrated
genomics, transcriptomics, and metallomics to elucidate how the microbiome
influences the metabolic activity of the host towards metal ions. Successful
completion of this research has strong potential to identify new genes and/or
pathways for metal tolerance and biotransformation, as well as expand our
mechanistic understanding of the structure and function of fungal microbiomes in
nature. This knowledge has strong potential to benefit society by facilitating
applications in remediation, water treatment, electronics manufacturing,
antimicrobial production, medicine, and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.