* 2125201
* Collaborative Research: RI: Small: NL(V)P: Natural Language (Variety) Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Yulia Tsvetkov, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2023
* USD 165,949.00

No language is a monolith. Languages vary richly across countries, regions,
social classes, and other factors. Despite recent advances in natural language
processing (NLP) technology for translating between languages, answering
questions, or engaging in simple conversations, current approaches have largely
focused only on "standard" varieties of languages. By ignoring other varieties,
treating them essentially as statistical noise, current technologies neglect the
millions of people who speak these varieties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is creating ways to enable language technologies such as translation and
question-answering systems, both to process and to generate fine-grained
language varieties. The team will develop computational methods to automatically
recognize features of different language varieties and then create approaches
for integrating such linguistic information into the models powering language
technologies. Additionally, the team will design methods to adapt models into
varieties for which minimal training data may be available. The resulting suite
of general methods will benefit diverse communities and less-privileged
populations that speak underserved languages and
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.