* 2125088
* MIM: Discovering in reverse – using isotopic translation of omics to reveal ecological interactions in microbiomes.
* BIO,EF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Mary Power, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2026
* USD 3,000,000.00

Microbiomes in freshwater rivers comprise hundreds of species of algae,
bacteria, fungi and microscopic animals. How do these groups of micro-organisms
interact? Are the interactions largely competitive, as groups of organisms vie
for scarce resources? How many are helpful, where one organism synthesizes a
resource that another needs? How important are these interactions for food webs,
for the growth of algae in freshwater, and for the cycling of nutrients in the
environment? This research focuses on Cladophora glomerata, a green freshwater
alga that occurs in temperate lakes and rivers worldwide, and specifically on
its microbiome, the hundreds of micro-organisms that live right on the surface
of Cladophora. Researchers will use chemical tracers that reveal how elements
like carbon and nitrogen move through the microbiome, because these elements are
important for supporting productivity. Researchers will also test how the
microbiome changes in response to nutrient and light, factors that drive the
ecology of freshwaters. This research will improve understanding of how
microbiomes support healthy ecosystems and the factors that can shift systems to
harmful algal blooms. Novel machine learning tools will be used to develop a
predictive framework for understanding how microbial species interact with one
another and affect macroscopic food webs (insects, fish, birds). In addition,
over ten students will be trained and educational materials including videos,
written stories and artwork geared towards general audiences will be created.
The training program emphasizes teaching researchers, at all career stages, and
how to communicate their science through visual, written and oral
storytelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the green macro-
alga, Cladophora, as a model system for understanding processes governing
microbiomes. This research will advance microbiome science by combining
hypothesis-driven ecological theory with the data-driven power of machine
learning. Researchers will integrate ‘omics’ data with state-of-the-art stable
isotope techniques, such as quantitative stable isotope probing, qSIP, which
measures growth and mortality rates of individual microbial species using stable
isotopes of 18O labeled water; qSIP and Chip-SIP using 13C and 15N, which
quantifies taxon-specific C and N assimilation by measuring the isotopic
composition of nucleic acids; and NanoSIMS, which analyzes spatial and temporal
patterns of C and N movement through the microbiome and its host. Experiments
will be performed to study (1) shifts in the microbiome over a well-documented
successional sequence, (2) changes in productivity in response to nutrient
addition, and (3) responses to light. Interdisciplinary approaches will develop
new science in biology and machine learning through data matrices that span
beyond the commonly used species co-occurrence matrices. Additional features
that will be added include taxon-specific growth and mortality rates, carbon and
nitrogen uptake, metabolism, and phylogeny. Adding these will improve our
ability to understand microbial interactions in complex microbiomes. Using
machine learning researchers will build and train models assimilating these
multiple, simultaneous matrices of data (together, a tensor). This approach will
advance efforts to generate interaction terms that reflect the importance of the
key interactions (competition, mutualism, facilitation, parasitism, or
predation) that structure ecological communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Division of Chemistry (CHE) in the Mathematics and
Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate and by the Division of Environmental Biology
(DEB) in the Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.