* 2125430
* SCC-PG: Using Innovations in Sensing, Data Analytics, and Community Engagement to Address Opioid Overdose Crisis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Sherif Abdelwahed, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 148,781.00

Opioid overdose is now the leading cause of death for those under 50 in the USA.
Cities have followed different strategies to address this problem through
various education/training programs. However, the growing scale of the opioid
overdose crisis in the USA indicates that more effective data-driven approaches
are needed. Opioid abuse and overdose have been identified as a leading method
of premature death in the Richmond Region, Virginia. Inadequate data is a major
issue for city officials, which prevents them from investigating the scale of
the opioid epidemic. Since locality’s economic competitiveness and their ability
to recruit businesses and labor are dependent on the image they portray, the
data sharing and further analytics in opioid overdoses have seen limited
improvement. To this end, this planning project proposes to build a team of
researchers and local stakeholders - including those in the leadership roles in
all cities and counties in the Richmond Region. The team will work towards a
data-driven understanding of the problem and community-involved solutions to
address the issue. As responses to the opioid problem are common to other metro
regions in the U.S., we hope to scale the model to be exercised in other
regions. This project aims to harness the power of data analytics and smart
technologies to develop creative solutions for efficient decision-making and
planning to improve public health and living standards. Direct broader impacts
include evidence-based factors that enhance and impair community responses to
the opioid epidemic that can be discussed and refined with community members to
drive change, and accordingly, reduce opioid overdose and health inequities
across the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From the technical perspectives, this
project will investigate novel data-driven approaches to treatment policies that
can be supported by the community. The intellectual merit of this work includes:
(1) developing a fundamental understanding of challenges facing communities due
to opioid epidemics, (2) developing a better understanding of the relationship
between governance, smart cities, and social innovation, particularly for
addressing the opioid problem, (3) collecting relevant types of drug use data in
the community, (4) deriving prediction models based on the available data from
different sources, and (5) developing smart sensing solutions to accurately
monitor and assess the state of drug abuse. Accordingly, this project aims to
establish interdisciplinary efforts to develop a data-driven intervention in
addressing the opioid overdose crisis, in coordination with community
representatives to identify and assess applicable approaches. The team will
investigate several predictive models for forecasting drug use/overdoses by
considering diverse data on drug-related incidents. The project will also
investigate Explainable Machine Learning techniques that will be coupled with
developed data-driven models in order to provide estimations of drug use with an
explanation of the important factors that justify the predictions made by the
model. This will help identify the root causes and the extent of their
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.