* 2125985
* SCC-IRG Track1: ADVANCED LEARNING FOR ENERGY RISK TRACKING (ALERT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Zoran Obradovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,498,793.00

This NSF S&amp;CC project aims to predict the State of Risk (SoR) of electricity
outage occurrence and develop risk management and mitigation strategies to
minimize the impact of outages. Currently, electric utilities are only able to
reactively respond to outages. Consumer are left in a passive role of struggling
to cope with the consequence without a preemptive option to manage the outage
impacts. The project brings a transformative change that will allow utilities to
predict outages, and then provide consumers with both individual and community
mitigation measures. This will be achieved by increasing the S&amp;CC awareness
of how to deal with the outage impacts equitably and effectively. We will deploy
advanced data analytics to train machine learning outage prediction algorithms
using weather and historical outage data. The intellectual merits of the project
include new risk prediction approaches, study of behavioral aspects of the
outage prediction, and experiments that measure the effectiveness of predictive
alert messages. Broader impacts include education and outreach efforts across
PreK-20 students, their teachers and parents, through public services of museums
and libraries by all-inclusive age-appropriate STEM programming. We will
communicate with the broader community of citizens through the invited talks and
videos at appropriate city offices in San Antonio, and at the headquarters of
one of the major retail providers of electricity in Philadelphia. The emphasis
on inclusive workforce development is broadly applicable and highly impactful to
advance the S&amp;CC human resource needs and resilience plans.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the spatiotemporal prediction of the SoR, ALERT
will perform integrative research by merging methodologies from several
disciplines: a) Advanced Data Analytics (ADA); b) Social, Behavioral, and
Economic Sciences (SBE); and c) Smart Grid Fundamentals (SGF). The project
activity will integrate ADA and SGF data and physical power system models,
respectively, and then design SBE interventions based on the survey and
experimental data to define SoR models and make mitigation decisions to reduce
outage risk. The innovation is in the physics-constrained and structured
learning-based prediction of the SoR using big data from historical utility
records, weather records, grid topology and vegetation
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.