* 2125483
* BSCER Investigator Initiated Development program. Justice-orientated Approaches for Data science Education (JADE)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Alexander Stokes, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,948.00

This capacity-building project, administered by the University of Hawaii, is
designed to develop the investigator’s knowledge and skills in STEM Education
research (SER) through participation in intensive professional growth activities
including mentoring by a team of experts in STEM Education research, workshops
in research methods and cultural competence, and participation in SER
professional conferences. In tandem with the project’s professional development
activities, the investigator will design and implement a SER study focused on
the use of justice-oriented approaches in data science education (DSE) to
increase participation of people from underrepresented groups in the study of
data science. The research findings will add to the body of knowledge on best
practices for broadening participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will engage in a comprehensive set of professional growth
activities that addresses gaps in SER knowledge identified through self-
assessment, including regular formative meetings with mentors throughout the
project’s two-year duration. The research study will test hypotheses regarding
the effects of justice-oriented data science training on undergraduate and
graduate student participants’ justice-orientation, as well as sense-of-
belonging, persistence, and success in DSE. Data will be collected via surveys,
interviews, focus groups and reflections and analyzed and interpreted using
qualitative and quantitative methods. The project will broaden participation in
STEM and inform best practices for DSE that support transdisciplinary engagement
and are inclusive of underrepresented groups. Research findings and intervention
products, adaptable for use in multiple contexts, will be widely disseminated.
Long-term societal benefits include the potential for improved economic mobility
and self-determination for diverse peoples and engagement with regional and
global justice challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.