* 2125460
* SCC-IRG Track 2: A Manufacturing-Driven Approach to Advancing Community in Northeast Ohio
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kenneth Loparo, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Smart and connected technologies have the potential to dramatically reshape the
manufacturing landscape, affecting not only the way products are manufactured
but also how the workforce is trained, providing new opportunities for
employment and improving the economic viability and sustainability of
communities where manufacturing companies reside. The Industrial Internet of
Things (IIoT) infrastructure and integration of technologies from AI and Machine
Learning is accelerating such changes, while capital investments to engage
Small-to-Midsized-Manufacturers (SMMs) with IIoT and Industry 4.0 (I4.0) have
remained a daunting task that impacts the economic viability of many
communities. This project represents a collaborative effort among academic
researchers in engineering, education, and management at two universities,
educators in a local community college, community advocates and stakeholders,
economic development partners, and local SMMs. The goal is to create a smart and
connected community in Northeast Ohio by forging a strategic alliance between
the community and SMMs that engage with IIoT technologies. Collectively,
research and development efforts will be directed to transforming participating
SMMs into “smart” and connected enterprises with enhanced adaptivity,
competitiveness, and resilience to new supply chain dynamics. This approach will
enhance the competitiveness of the local SMM and at the same time prepare a
workforce to meet the challenges of the introduced technology. Such
transformation will position the community for economic growth through a “smart
and connected” local industrial base and upskilled workforce. The blueprint of
this approach will also be transferrable to other
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative action plan consists of: (1)
use-inspired innovative research, (2) education, workforce training and
development, and (3) policy recommendations on community behavior and
organizational development. Since effective transformation of manufacturing data
to actionable information is key to successful implementation of I4.0
technologies, research on artificial intelligence (AI) for real-time operation
monitoring and asset tracking will be conducted to improve quality control and
productivity. Through process-embedded sensing, and edge- and cloud-computing, a
customized learning and intervention platform will be created to facilitate
digital transformation of the workforce from experience-based operation to data-
guided optimization. Research on transfer learning will facilitate knowledge
translation across machine equipment both within an SMM and to other SMMs across
the organizational boundaries to create “spill-over” learning effects that
promote the creation of a collaborative SMM network that assists each other in
times of need and opportunity. Collaborations between academia and community
developers will create pathways for curriculum development and internships that
facilitate workforce training and employment opportunities. Ultimately, the
collective action plan will promote research on both fundamental and practical
problems, and benefit education, workforce development, and economic advancement
in both Northeast Ohio and other regions across the country where SMMs play a
critical role in the wealth generation and wellbeing of the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.