* 2126069
* OCE-PRF: The landscape of hybridization and adaptation across reef depth in a coral community
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Jennifer Hoey, California Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 223,661.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Corals support some of the most
diverse habitats in the world and provide people with income, food, and
protection. However, corals are threatened by climate change, overfishing, and
pollution. Some corals are better than others at tolerating harsher conditions.
Corals also live at different depths that experience variation in temperature,
light, and water flow. Understanding how corals adapt to their local habitats
will help us understand how corals might survive into the future. Hybridization,
where genes are exchanged among populations or species, is an important way for
some organisms to adapt to changes in the environment. This process may be
important for corals to successfully adapt to changing environments, as well.
This research seeks to answer the question: Does hybridization help corals adapt
to local environmental conditions at different reef depths? This research will
help to identify the processes that are important for coral adaptation in a
changing world, aiding in the conservation of vulnerable coral reef systems. The
Fellow will participate in outreach events on the California Academy of Sciences
museum floor, mentor high school interns, and develop curricula to help share
this research with a broad audience. By training interns, scientists, and
educators in climate change communication, she will amplify essential public
messages about the ecological and societal impacts of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identification of underlying adaptive mechanisms is a
crucial first step towards understanding the capacity of species to adapt in a
rapidly changing world. Hybridization and introgression (hybridization followed
by back-crossing) may be particularly important for rapid evolution to changing
environmental conditions, but investigations into their roles in adaptation to
new environments has only begun. Hybridization, especially at range boundaries
where species overlap, may be a rapid means of increasing standing genetic
variation or introducing pre-adapted alleles into a population, with likely
consequences for phenotypes, speciation, and community composition. The goal of
this project is to develop a framework for predicting hybrid occurrence from
environmental and ecological factors while simultaneously identifying adaptive
loci and testing hybrid performance across replicated environmental gradients in
a coral community. Using a suite of observational, experimental, statistical,
and computational methods spanning molecular to community-levels, this research
will test for 1) hybridization, 2) adaptive introgression, and 3) genome-phenome
linkages in a genus of corals (Madracis spp.) in the Caribbean. This work will
increase our understanding of how hybridization and adaptation interact across
reef depths to influence coral health. This project also offers opportunities to
engage in outreach, grow networks of science and climate change communicators,
and train the next generation of STEM leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.