* 2126052
* CCSS: Online Learning for IoT Monitoring and Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 415,000.00

At the core of several emerging technological advances lies the notion of
Internet-of-Things (IoT). Conceptually, IoT is envisioned as an intelligent
network infrastructure with a huge number of ubiquitous smart devices present in
diverse application domains such as smart buildings, group and personalized
healthcare, as well as self-driving connected vehicles, to name a few. Today, a
number of IoT applications have already improved many aspects of daily life.
However, critical challenges need to be addressed before embracing the full
potential of IoT. This in turn calls for innovative machine learning approaches
that account for scalability, heterogeneity, adaptivity, and robustness to
unpredictable uncertainties -- what are the central challenges facing the
emerging IoT monitoring and management tasks. Novel algorithms and their
performance need to leverage recent advances in data science, optimization,
statistical signal processing, communications, and networking. In addition to
markedly influencing future IoT modules, insights gained from this project's
learning and inference will also cross-fertilize benefits to a gamut of
additional domains, including smart grids, smart cities, and self-driving
vehicles. At a broader scale, the developed technologies will provide valuable
tools for foundational science and engineering research, and advocate societal
embracing of the emergent IoT technologies. Broader impact will be further
effected by the integration of research with an educational plan designed to
train the new cadre of next-generation of IoT professionals, as well as foster
cross-pollination of academic research to industry needs, while promoting and
embracing diversity in Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
the core IoT challenges, this project puts forth foundational tools for real-
time interactive function learning using an ensemble of experts. Learning
algorithms will be developed with adaptivity and quantifiable performance even
in environments with unpredictable dynamics, but also with ability to scale in
terms of i) the huge number of ‘Things’ in IoT; ii) the high-dimensional feature
vectors involved in sophisticated learning tasks; and iii) the massive data
collected, processed, and exchanged over the IoT graph – what is desired for IoT
monitoring. Scalability, adaptivity, and robustness benefits in learning
nonlinear functions will be further permeated to interactive black-box Bayesian
optimization, and reinforcement learning with an ensemble of experts -- merits
that will boost performance in open- and closed-loop IoT
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.