* 2126639
* SBIR Phase I:  A Tool for In-situ Stress Measurement in Deep Downhole Environments
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Hamed Soroush, PETROLERN LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,963.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve safety and economics of subsurface
operations, such as drilling, stimulation, production, and injection, associated
with geological carbon sequestration and production of geothermal heat and
fossil fuels from subsurface rock formations. These operations can affect
personnel safety, loss of capital, significant damage to the environment, and
increase emission of greenhouse gases. To optimize subsurface operations,
knowledge of the state of stress in rock formations is essential. Failure to
construct reasonably accurate stress models costs the oil and gas industry
several billions of dollars annually. However, determination of in-situ stresses
is one of the major challenges in the subsurface engineering and currently no
technology directly measures these stressees in deep formations. This project
advances a tool to measure these stresses directly.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to design and develop a robust an innovative
downhole tool for direct measurement of all stress components and the stress
orientation in deep wells with any well trajectories. The objectives of the
Phase I research study include: 1) Develop analytical and numerical solutions to
accurately obtain far-field stresses from near-wellbore stresses. 2) Design and
render the tool and all its components for borehole sizes range 7” to 12 ¼”. 3)
Develop numerical modeling and simulation of different downhole conditions. 4)
Design the mechanical, hydraulic, and electrical components, materials, and
sensors/transducers and preparation for prototyping. The proposed tool has a
novel modular design for wireline, drill-pipe and coil tubing applicable to
vertical, deviated, and horizontal wells. This measurement can be repeated as
needed to determine the full stress tensor. The technology is automatically
operated from the surface. The exact position and orientation of the tool is
determined by an assembly and magnetometer,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.