* 2126154
* Vision and Change in Undergraduate General Education Biology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gordon Uno, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 836,111.00

The COVID-19 crisis, and the often contradictory and misleading science-related
information distributed during the pandemic, demonstrates the need for the
general public to understand basic biological concepts, how science is
conducted, and in what ways science is relevant and important to their lives. A
decade ago, the seminal publication, “Vision and Change: A Call to Action”
(AAAS, 2011), articulated that undergraduate biology education in the United
States needed to undergo a substantial overhaul to improve the quality of
undergraduate biology education for all students. Yet, it is unclear just how
deeply Vision and Change permeated the undergraduate biology community and what
its national impact has been on education reform across institutions and types
of courses. One area that is substantially underdeveloped is General Education
Biology courses, those that are referred to as the ‘non-majors’ courses.
Students who are not science majors, but who pass through introductory-level
life science courses as part of their undergraduate experience, constitute a
huge percentage of the future general public. These students, and the faculty
that facilitate their learning, will be the focus of this project. These non-
majors courses may be the only exposure to biology and biologists that many
undergraduate students will have.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
leverage the national effort, Improvement of General Education Life Science
courses (IGELS), that was organized in late 2020. IGELS is comprised of multiple
scientists and science educators who teach in, conduct research about, and/or
provide professional development for General Education Life Science (GELS)
instructors. The IGELS Steering Committee proposes to: 1) survey current
instructors of GELS courses across the U.S. to determine the level of their
knowledge and implementation of the V&amp;C principles; 2) use the collected
information to create a BioLifeSkills guide that can serve as a framework for
course revision and a template for tailored professional development and
mentoring activities for GELS faculty that reflect relevant aspects of V&amp;C;
3) expand the activities of the national IGELS network, a coalition of
individuals and groups to discuss and resolve issues related to GELS courses and
to assist faculty teaching GELS courses; and 4) modify useful existing
curricular resources and developing a framework of core skills and essential
concepts for GELS students to promote scientific literacy. This project will
impact several hundred instructors of introductory general education biology
courses and thousands of students, however, the groundwork for building
sustained professional development, producing a useful curriculum framework, and
facilitating future collaborations will greatly multiply the number of those who
benefit. IGELS will use its connections with a diverse community of faculty to
identify the best ways to promote evidence-based teaching and learning methods
for GELS courses that form an infrastructure of equity and inclusion. IGELS work
will focus on exemplary programs that improve the relevance of course materials,
increase student interest and retention, and promote metacognitive strategies
for all students to improve self-efficacy and learning. For GELS students with
an interest in science and biology but, for whatever reason, have not chosen
biology as a major, this project also may help them find their sole introduction
to biology as a first step in an alternative path into STEM-related careers.
This project is funded by the Program Description 21-7412, Vision and Change in
Undergraduate Biology Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.