* 2126018
* BCSER-IID: Undergraduate Knowledge of the Mathematics Graduate School Application Process (Knowledge-GAP)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Tim McEldowney, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 349,287.00

This project aims to illuminate how undergraduate student knowledge about the
graduate school application and admissions processes acts as a barrier to
earning advanced degrees in mathematics for students historically
underrepresented in STEM disciplines. The project will consist of a combination
of exploratory research and professional development activities to advance the
PI’s expertise in quantitative and qualitative research methods. The project
will survey undergraduate mathematics majors at colleges and universities across
the country, and professional development activities will include mentoring from
senior STEM education researchers, taking courses in research methods, and
attending relevant conferences and workshops. This project aims to position the
investigator to contribute knowledge about the STEM graduate school pipeline and
to explore the historic inequalities built within that
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to determine which
factors affect undergraduate students’ interest in and knowledge about
mathematics graduate school application and admissions processes. The project
also seeks to determine how best to support students interested in applying to
graduate programs in mathematics. The research will explore how undergraduate
students learn about the graduate school application process and what aspects of
their environment facilitate or hinder the acquisition of this knowledge. The
project aims to answer several broad research questions: (1) What percentage of
undergraduate mathematics majors are interested in going to graduate school in
mathematics? What do undergraduate mathematics majors know about the graduate
school application process? (2) What features of mathematics departments and
universities contribute to undergraduate knowledge about graduate mathematics
programs and their application process? (3) Do mathematics majors have access to
the resources needed to apply to graduate mathematics programs? (4) Do knowledge
of the graduate school application process and access to application resources
differ by socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and gender of the students? The
evidence expected to be produced by this research could be used to create or
enhance strategies for improving student access to knowledge about the graduate
school application process and could broaden participation of underrepresented
students in graduate mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.