* 2126319
* CC* Regional: A Purpose-built SoCal Science DMZ for Catalyzing Scientific Research Collaborations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Carl Kesselman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,777.00

The Los Nettos Regional Network is a long-standing regional research and
education (R&amp;E) network with a history of supporting science and engineering
research for its more than 30 members and associates in the greater Los Angeles
area. This project builds a friction-free regional Science DMZ network across
multiple Southern California college campuses, catalyzing collaborative research
capabilities at the institutions. The project establishes the network
infrastructure and software necessary to facilitate high speed transfers of
large-scale research data for regional and national scientific collaborations.
The campuses included in the network are Loyola Marymount University, Occidental
College, and The Claremont Colleges consortium, which consists of Claremont
Graduate University, Claremont McKenna College, Harvey Mudd College, Keck
Graduate Institute, Pitzer College, Pomona College, and Scripps College.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This purpose-built science network is specially customized
for each institution’s unique needs and follows the well-known Science DMZ
guidelines established by ESnet. The new network interconnects with state,
national, and international networks, such as CENIC’s California Research and
Education Network (CalREN), Internet2, and Pacific Wave. Many projects in
various science domains benefit from the significant network capacity increase
that this project supports. Coordinated activities at the regional level,
including technical training for administrators and researchers at each campus,
ensure uniform standards are maintained. This scalable R&amp;E network can be
expanded in the future for researchers and students at other smaller regional
institutions (e.g., Charles R. Drew University of Medicine and Science,
ArtCenter College of Design) as their need for collaboration
widens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.