* 2126919
* SBIR Phase I:  Digitizing The Pathologist In The Operating Room
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Jason Hawkes, SURGIVANCE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the quality and reproducibility of
cancer diagnosis and margin screening.Surgery currently represents the best
opportunity for curing invasive cancers but is limited by modern pathology
methods. Mohs surgery is the treatment of choice for skin cancer because it
results in the highest cure rates, but it often takes place in stages, extending
surgical procedures. The use of ex vivo confocal microscopy (XVM) is potentially
faster, less costly, and inherently both 3-D and digitized, with benefits
including: 1) enhanced accuracy, precision, and margin control via enriched 3D
information content and simplified specimen orientation maintenance, decreasing
error and improving functional outcomes; 2) decreased duration of open surgical
wounds potentially reducing the rate of complications; and (3) enhanced and
accelerated surgical workflows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to improve Mohs surgery and
other margin screening applications. Using confocal image processing software,
the proposed software will improve current pathology processing methods by
enabling rapid processing and re-coloring of XVM images, visualization without
the need for retraining, and automated detection of residual tumor at the
patientâ€™s bedside, all within minutes. The research described here will result
in the production of a fully functional and robust software product through the
following development projects: 1) Artificial intelligence (AI)-based software
for image preprocessing and colorization/enhancement, and 2) AI-based software
for automated identification of key morphological features and diagnosis of
basal cell and squamous cell carcinoma. The proposed technology will streamline
cancer specimen processing, ultimately improving patient
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.