* 2126918
* SBIR Phase I:  Pipeline for Analysis of Metabolomics Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Dawit Mengistu, OMICSCRAFT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is enhancing the role of metabolite (substances used by cells for
growth, reproduction and health) analysis in the growing area of systems biology
research. This is expected to lead to faster and less expensive biomarker and
drug discovery to allow for more accurate, reproducible, and faster clinical
trials, and to accelerate basic scientific research into many areas of cellular
and system-wide organismal studies. This will have a significant impact on the
bottom line for drug companies and for improving health and reducing health care
cost. The innovation will provide customers with a platform and expertise that
enable them to increase their ability to develop biomarkers and drugs faster by:
(1) allowing more metabolites to be involved in the discovery of new
relationships between diseases and metabolites, potentially opening up new areas
of basic research; (2) selecting disease-associated metabolites on the basis of
not only statistically significant changes in metabolite levels but also
correlations of interactions among metabolites in diseased vs. healthy cells;
and (3) evaluating the relationships between metabolites and diseases through
integration of metabolite analysis with other system-wide analytical methods
(i.e. gene expression, protein levels, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project seeks to develop an innovative cloud-based platform with an interactive
modular interface that allows users to easily build customized pipelines for
analysis of untargeted metabolomics data. The platform will empower the
opportunity to increase the number of annotated analytes and to integrate
metabolomics with other omics data, thereby enhancing the involvement of
metabolomics in systems biology-based biomarker and drug discovery studies.
Despite a large accumulation of metabolomics data acquired over the past several
years, effective use of these data for biomarker and drug discovery has been
very limited. These challenges are in part due to the lack of effective tools
that: (1) accurately determine the identity of disease-associated analytes; (2)
help investigate the rewiring and conserved interactions among metabolites in
the progression of disease; and (3) integrate multi-omics data to evaluate the
relationship between metabolites and diseases at the systems level. This project
will advance scientific knowledge by investigating and evaluating innovative
computational methods for metabolite annotation, differential analysis of
metabolite profiles, and multi-omics data integration. Furthermore, the project
will lead to a cloud-based platform that enables users to build their desired
data analysis workflow or pipeline by choosing from several innovative modules
to analyze metabolomics data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.