* 2126180
* Collaborative Research: Fundamental Study of Niobium Tungsten Oxide Anodes for High-Performance Aqueous Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dibakar Datta, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 125,000.00

Modern human society requires efficient, affordable and safe means for energy
storage. Today, rechargeable lithium–ion batteries dominate the energy storage
landscape from portable electronics to the rapidly expanding electric vehicles
and electricity (grid) storage applications. However, current lithium-ion
batteries suffer from safety and cost issues, primarily because of flammable,
moisture-sensitive and expensive organic solvents used in the electrolytes. This
project is aimed at replacing the organic solvent electrolyte with water, in a
manner that does not compromise on battery performance (i.e., volumetric and
gravimetric energy and power density). To accomplish this, the research team
proposes to explore new classes of complex oxide (niobium tungsten oxide)
materials that will be designed specifically for aqueous battery chemistries,
enabling breakthrough improvements in volumetric energy and power density for
the next generation of aqueous batteries. This work will contribute to low-cost,
high-performance and safe aqueous batteries that are critical for large-scale
energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of fundamental science and
engineering issues will be addressed in this project in order to enable the
successful development of aqueous lithium-ion batteries with niobium tungsten
oxide anodes. These include: (1) Benchmarking the chemical stability of niobium
tungsten oxide anodes in aqueous (water-in-salt) electrolytes and establishing
whether a protective coating is needed to improve stability; (2) Developing an
in-depth understanding of aqueous electrolyte lithiation and delithation
mechanism(s) in niobium tungsten oxide anodes; (3) Studying the interfacial
chemistry and solid electrolyte interface that develops during battery
operation; and (4) Compositional engineering (i.e., alloying and doping) of
niobium tungsten oxide compounds to improve their gravimetric and rate
performance. In this project, each of the above tasks will be addressed using a
coupled experimental and computational approach, so that a deep and in-depth
fundamental understanding of the underlying science can be achieved. Success
will be assessed by an ability to optimize the niobium tungsten oxide
composition and increase the operating voltage window of the aqueous battery,
leading to a substantial increase in volumetric and gravimetric energy density.
Success will also be determined by the team’s ability to enhance the high-rate
performance of niobium tungsten oxides in an aqueous setting, leading to
significant improvement in fast charging capability. Finally, the niobium
tungsten oxide electrodes will be optimized and engineered to cycle in a stable
and safe manner over thousands of charge-discharge steps with high coulombic
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.