* 2126882
* STTR Phase II:  A Design-Driven Educational Robotics Framework
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Anurag Purwar, Mechanismic Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,040,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II
project is in teaching K-12 and college students STEM concepts in the fun-filled
context of designing, building, and programming machines and robots and
preparing them for the future technology-driven jobs. This project seeks to make
robotics education affordable, equitable, and inclusive for students at all
grade levels. By taking a multi-disciplinary and cross-curricula approach, the
product developed through this project engages students, especially women and
minorities from diverse backgrounds, effectively in STEM disciplines and helps
them make suitable career choices. The ultimate goals of this project are
aligned with the NSF's mandate to support development of a strong STEM workforce
and help fill the 2.5 million STEM jobs that are vacant according to the current
US Department of Labor Statistics. The technological innovations emerging from
this project would result in a computational tool for synthesis of robot
motions, which can be used broadly in industrial automation and invention of
machines and robots. The proposed design-driven educational robotics product has
the potential to improve engagement with science and technology and positively
impact the U.S. educational robotics market, which is expected to grow to $2.7
billion by 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
Phase II project aims to bring together rigid body kinematics, machine learning,
and engineering design to create a new product for design-driven robotics
education for K-12 schools, freshman college programs, and STEM camps. The
leading commercially available educational robotic systems emphasize 1)
instruction-driven prototyping of robot structures using many specialized parts,
and 2) programming them without providing any intuition behind the design
process or guidance to creating mechanism design concepts for the realization of
the motion of the robots. Driven by a need to keep pace with the evolving
techno- and socio-economic requirements, new science standards, and remain
competitive, schools and camps are increasingly adopting STEM and Robotics
programs and products. This product would fill that void that currently exists
in the educational market. If successful, this project would result in a state-
of-the-art motion design software, a novel hardware kit, and standards-aligned
curriculum and learning resources for schools and colleges. The software based
on the machine learning in mechanism design research will allow creation of
robot assemblies and their motions before constructing their corresponding
physical models and provide students necessary skills and experience in the
design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.