* 2126041
* I-Corps:  Optimized mm-Wave Transistors for 5G Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Samir El-Ghazaly, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a transistor for better heat dissipation capability for high-
frequency semiconductor devices. In general, the demand for millimeter (mm)-wave
transistors is steadily increasing. In these devices, electromagnetic wave
propagation effects and heat dissipation are among the most limiting factors for
production. The proposed technologies in this project are applied to the design
and fabrication of optimized mm-wave transistors. These transistors demonstrate
superior performance compared to currently available technologies. In addition,
the devices have a smaller footprint compared to conventional transistors
performing the same functionality. The new designs result in more devices per
wafer, and each individual device may be capable of producing higher power and
operating over a wider bandwidth. Such performance enhancements may allow
savings in cost per component. Moreover, the new transistors may have
characteristics enabling them to meet more stringent performance specifications.
Subsequently, new systems with advanced functionalities may be designed that
will open new market areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of a fabrication technology that is applicable to high-
frequency semiconductor devices. The proposed technology describes novel
transistor electrode designs to match the phase velocity of the propagating
waves on the input and output electrodes. This enables relaxation of the current
limitations on the electrode width, which reduces the number of fingers needed
to meet the desired device gain, output power, and other performance parameters.
The competitive advantage of the proposed technology is to allow fabricating
wider transistors, which provides more radio frequency power. The thermal
management issues and their associated challenges in mm-wave transistors also
are addressed in this project. The proposed technology modifies the substrates
enabling them to act as better heat absorbers by enhancing their overall thermal
conductance. The novelty in this technology is founded on improvements in
thermal properties of the die to extract the heat generated at the surface
and/or in the active layer at the junctions, offering enhanced capabilities for
heat removal. Results from research on the analysis of the transistor
performances demonstrate the promise of this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.