* 2126414
* Collaborative Research: Linguistic Production, Perception, and Identity in the Career Mobility of Black Faculty in Linguistics and the Language Sciences
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Christine Mallinson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 125,016.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methodological study
examines how Black faculty in the language sciences and related areas
linguistically navigate their professional experiences. Black faculty are
skilled at navigating between varieties of English, with strong perceptual
linguistic abilities and linguistic flexibility. At the same time, linguistic
inequalities may cause Black faculty to experience the structural realities of
racism through the continuous evaluation of their language. These findings will
yield insight into how language discrimination plays a role in the systemic
underrepresentation of Black scholars in academia and how language plays a role
in those processes. The study also examines professional inequalities for Black
scholars in the language sciences and related areas to provide precise data that
language researchers can use to broaden participation in linguistics departments
and programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study uses a community-based
participatory approach that includes ten junior and mid-career scholars from
Minority Serving (MSIs) and Predominantly White Institutions (PWIs) as research
partners. The study uses interviews, focus groups, and survey to reach
additional 100 Black faculty. The main questions that the study asks are: How
and when do Black faculty in linguistics and the language sciences use Black
language practices in higher education? How has their linguistic use affected
their academic participation and career mobility? The study tests and refines
the linguistic model of language subordination by measuring the impacts of both
structural and internalized racism on language choice. The study builds on the
Co-PI’s prior work that examined the linguistic choices of Black undergraduates
by analyzing how students variably express racial identity while navigating
linguistic expectations in academic settings. This study will take a similar
approach, incrementally extending theoretical and empirical models to address
these dynamics facing Black faculty, adding much-needed nuance to the model
regarding Black scholars while testing the applicability of linguistic models
used in education to adult professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.