* 2126079
* I-Corps: Corneal epithelial wound healing therapeutic
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Vinay Aakalu, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a corneal wound healing agent for corneal abrasions and
refractive eye surgery. Over 800,000 people per year undergo refractive eye
surgery procedures. The majority of these treatments are either Laser-Assisted
In Situ Keratomileusis (LASIK) or photo refractive keratectomy (PRK). LASIK
wound healing times are shorter with less post-operative pain and higher patient
satisfaction in the short-term as a result. However, LASIK has risks of abnormal
thinning of the cornea or flap dislocation and has a higher fixed cost than PRK.
Refractive keratectomy surgeons are more apt to perform PRK if the post-
operative course were more appealing to patients. Additionally, military
personnel have a high rate of refractive surgery (35,000/year) because contact
lenses are typically not permitted in active duty and glasses may cause
vulnerability and logistical issues. PRK accounts for 85% of military refractive
procedures. Corneal abrasions are common (more than 1 million per year) and
account for 271,750 emergency medical visits per year. Corneal abrasions may
lead to complications such as corneal ulcers, vision loss, and chronic wounds. A
new therapeutic agent for acute corneal wounds could impact the clinical care of
each of these patient populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a new therapeutic to improve the care of patients
with acute corneal epithelial wounds from injury or from surgery. Corneal
epithelial wounds are common conditions that affect more than 1 million patients
a year. Common acute ocular surface wounds include corneal abrasions and post-
surgical refractive surgery or corneal cross-linking related wounds. The
proposed technology is a corneal wound healing agent and is based on the
discovery of a novel peptide that may accelerate healing of corneal wounds by up
to 50% as shown in standard animal models. Current treatments are focused on
supportive care and prevention of complications such as infection. There is a
need for new therapies to accelerate wound healing and support quicker recovery.
The proposed technology may reduce pain, improve vision, and reduce the risk of
infection during the healing process of corneal epithelial
wounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.