* 2126334
* RCN: Reimagining a Sustainable Data Network to Accelerate Agricultural Research and Discovery
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Eva Huala, Phoenix Bioinformatics Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The AgBioData Research Coordination Network (RCN) will accelerate research in
agricultural science by increasing the accessibility and reuse of large- scale
biological data. In the face of increasing human populations, global climate
change and other challenges, there is a critical need to discover new ways to
increase agricultural yields while reducing environmental impacts. Such advances
in agricultural science are increasingly led by data-driven approaches, which
rely on data that are properly stored and made available to the research
community through online resources. With NSF support, this RCN will leverage
grass roots efforts of the AgBioData Consortium (www.agbiodata.org) to expand
the network of database experts and biocurators to include research scientists,
funders, and data publishers to establish and disseminate standards, best
practices, and recommendations for agricultural data management. The training
component will increase participation of a broadly representative constituency,
including those traditionally underrepresented in the sciences and junior
researchers, and will prepare them to be leaders in agricultural data
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AgBioData RCN will focus on increasing the
value of Big Scientific Data through the FAIR (findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable) model. Annual meetings will bring together multi-
disciplinary scientists from all the major U.S. agricultural genomic, genetic,
and breeding (GGB) databases and allied resources, accelerating synergistic
efforts to make the huge amount of data curated by AgBioData databases FAIR.
This will facilitate shortened data processing/curation times, simplified data
management, and more standardized data handling between databases, making it
easier for researchers to find and use data. The larger network of all data
stakeholders will work together to identify and prioritize the most pressing
data and metadata standardization needs and to develop and implement processes
to solve them. Working groups will be created to focus on key community data
issues, including unified nomenclature, metadata standards, data federation, and
recommendations for emerging data types. The network will directly support data-
generating scientists by developing clearly defined FAIR data management guides
with a framework on how to maximize data visibility and data reuse for common
types of biological data and a foundational FAIR data management educational
curriculum appropriate for academic courses or short training modules. Lastly, a
sustainability review and report will provide a roadmap for the future of GGB
databases. The AgBioData Consortium is a model for how database managers,
researchers, educators, and publishers can work together to be more resource-
efficient and how, as central resources for the communities they serve, they can
use a collective voice to benefit all scientists, both domestically and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program of the Division of Integrative Organismal Biology and the
Capacity: Cyberinfrastructure program of the Division of Biological
Infrastructure in NSF's Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.