* 2126991
* SBIR Phase II:  Thermo-optic Rooftop Modulation Using Thermal Panes for Building Energy Decarbonization
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mark Miles, Mark Miles Consulting Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 781,738.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project may enable the generation of as much as 65% of
a building’s energy needs from renewable heating and cooling, reducing
consumption by 13 Quads and saving consumers potentially billions of dollars.
Buildings account for 28% of all carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions worldwide and at
least 2/3 of these structures will still exist in the year 2040. Achieving
significant energy coset reductions will require a retrofit solution that is
competitive with natural gas and grid-powered heating and heating, ventilation,
and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. Such a retrofit must also be easily
deployed in a wide variety of building types and architectures. The technology
under development is a roof-mounted, panelized array that provides solar heat
during the day and radiatively cools at night. The technology may be able to
supply building energy resources throughout the year, a disruptive capability
for a rooftop clean energy solution. The low cost and renewable nature of this
resource may also insure that building owners and residents have access to
carbon-free energy that is less expensive, less volatile, and more resilient in
the face of interruptions to energy supplied from conventional gas and grid
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project seeks to validate a
panelized rooftop technology to renewably generate heating and cooling resources
for buildings. Dominant solutions combust fuel for heat and use grid electricity
to power vapor compression for cooling. The proposed solution describes an array
of thermal panes that convert a roof into an active environmental interface that
continually optimizes the extraction and rejection of heat via absorptive,
radiative, and convective processes. The technology continually operates in
response to building energy needs. By modulating pane thermo-optic properties
the solution enables fluid flow to alter the internal optical and heat transfer
configuration. Evaluation of the technology will begin with manufacturing
prototypes that incorporate novel thermal bonding techniques for integrating
foamed polyiso-, fluoro-, and poly-olefin polymers. A solar simulator will
assess efficiency and output temperatures, an iterative process to explore the
role of internal fluid flows, visble and infrared radiation paths, and thermal
loss mechanisms. An array will be subsequently deployed on a rooftop and coupled
to the building energy system. Data will be collected to assess the impact on
energy consumption and overall heating/cooling while developing control
algorithms for pane modulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.