* 2126302
* ISS: Quantifying the Effect of Unloading on Extracellular Matrix Remodeling in the Musculoskeletal System
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Virginia Ferguson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2024
* USD 407,997.00

This project will study the mechanisms that lead to tissue degradation in
microgravity. Exposure to spaceflight or reduced mechanical loading on Earth
induces marked bone loss, muscle atrophy, and degradation of soft tissues.
Despite advances in exercise and pharmacologic countermeasures designed to
reduce musculoskeletal deterioration on Earth and in spaceflight, the protection
is incomplete and response to these interventions are variable. Many studies
have focused on the molecular and cellular mechanisms that underlie atrophy and
subsequent recovery. However, little attention has been given to the
extracellular matrix (ECM), the material in which cells reside. The ECM is a
complex network that varies in composition between specific tissues depending on
the mechanical and functional demands. Changes to the ECM can permanently alter
tissue material properties, prevent resident cells from re-establishing
homeostasis, and affect functionality. There is a need to better understand the
fundamental changes that occur in ECM composition due to microgravity that
compromise tissue functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, temporal
changes in ECM proteins in response to, and after recovery from, microgravity
will be investigated to test the following hypothesis: disuse of the
musculoskeletal system irreversibly affects the ECM by reducing protein turnover
and increasing enzymatic and non-enzymatic cross-links, leading to the
incomplete restoration of functionality after a return to 1g. Unlike gene
expression that significantly varies within minutes, a common measure to assess
for the physiological effects of microgravity, the proteome changes over hours
to days, and provides a more stable indicator of physiology that can withstand
reentry, landing, and transport of mice from the ISS. Metabolic labeling and
proteomic methods will be combined to track ECM turnover in vivo by providing
mice with non-canonical amino acids (ncAAs) that are incorporated into proteins
using endogenous cellular machinery. ncAAs possess bioorthogonal handles that
enable the enrichment of newly synthesized proteins through click reactions with
complementary chemical groups. The murine proteome will be labeled with ncAAs at
different timepoints after the onset of microgravity to provide a robust “time-
stamp” of proteins formed in all tissues in the body in response to unloading.
The study will first identify the optimal parameters to label newly synthesized
ECM proteins on Earth and the ISS, then test response of the musculoskeletal ECM
to two different unloading paradigms: hindlimb suspension on Earth and
spaceflight on the International Space Station. Concomitant study of three
musculoskeletal tissues: bone, tendon, and skeletal muscle, and the use of mass
spectrometry, will reveal biomarkers and pathways that are important to disuse
atrophy and subsequently recovery across musculoskeletal tissues. In addition,
the study will provide an unprecedented resource for CASIS to disseminate ncAA-
labeled tissues through established tissue-sharing mechanisms that will benefit
a wide range of secondary science investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.