* 2126857
* SBIR Phase I:  Matrix product state-based fermionic quantum emulator
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Toru Shiozaki, QUANTUM SIMULATION TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to enable the efficient emulation on classical computers of
simulations carried out on quantum computing hardware. The proposed
emulator technology is expected to address problems an order of magnitude larger
than is possible at present using classical computing hardware. The emulator
will be specifically designed for electronic structure calculations of molecules
and materials. The successful completion of this project will disrupt the
research and development associated with the use of quantum computing in the
pharmaceutical and materials spaces by enabling faster assessment and
development of quantum algorithms. Since it is widely accepted that these are
impactful early applications of emerging quantum computing platforms, there is a
paramount need for creating a user- and developer-friendly software stack
specifically tailored for such simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will support the development
of a quantum emulator on the basis of the so-called matrix-product-state (MPS)
representation of fermionic wave functions. The innovation results from the fact
that the proposed emulator will be specifically designed for fermions and
therefore can take advantage of the physical symmetries inherent in these
systems. The first-principles MPS wavefunction ansatz has been developed in the
quantum chemistry community in the context of the ab initio density matrix
renormalization group (DMRG) over the past two decades, and will be generalized
such that the same APIs as used for the standard quantum emulator will be
exposed to users. The proposed new software is expected to allow for emulation
of quantum simulations involving 100 spin orbitals/50 electrons, or more, on
commodity classical computing hardware, which is an order of magnitude larger
than is possible at present. In this SBIR Phase I project, a Python prototype
and associated command-line tools will be completed to demonstrate the
technology and commercial viability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.