* 2126852
* SBIR Phase II:  High Performance Millimeter-Wave Radiofrequency (RF) Front-End Technology for Multi-Gigabit Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Armin Jam, SKYGIG, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Parvathi Chundi
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a platform enabling a wide range of high-
throughput wireless communications for the next generation of broadband
multigigabit connectivity. More specifically, the technology seeks to solve some
of the key underlying challenges of millimeter-wave (mmWave or high band 5G)
radios and networks and a wide set of 5G/6G wireless applications, including
fixed and mobile wireless access. The project is an enabler of many applications
including automotive, manufacturing, and healthcare to smart city Internet of
Things (IoT) and smart home. Many of the more advanced 5G/6G wireless use cases
focus on connecting previously unconnected or under-connected communities and
industries. As a building block of 5G/6G wireless technologies, the proposed
advanced wireless technology may enable rapid and robust roll-out of the next
generation network and play a role in increasing the pace of 5G technology
penetration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project aims to develop a high gain beamforming antenna system, as the core
of a millimeter-wave (mmWave) radio frequency (RF) front-end technology for the
next generation of multi-gigabit applications. With 10x higher availability of
bandwidth compared to the legacy sub-6 GHz spectrum, mmWave enables faster
connection speeds and is of significant focus in the telecommunication industry.
These applications have recently motivated Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and other international counterparts to open several frequency bands at
mmWave spectrum for communication applications including 5G cellular, wireless
infrastructure, etc. Despite these advantages, the existing commercially
available mmWave front-end technologies are limited in their performance and are
not suitable for the emerging fixed and mobile access use cases of 5G mmWave. To
address this need, this project proposes a novel beamforming mmWave technology
that supports an order of magnitude higher aggregated throughput compared to the
existing mmWave wireless solutions and can serve as an enabler to a number of
data-intensive applications. Integrated as a wireless solution for Fixed
Wireless Access (FWA), this technology offers significant cost savings and
revenue for network and service operators and providers. This project builds on
the technical achievements of the Phase I effort and focuses on design
implementation and prototyping of the high performance mmWave antenna
technology. This technology provides a combination of power-efficient
beamforming with high-gain multi-gigabit throughputs and is based on a novel
architecture along with high-performance antenna systems and sub-systems that
are fundamentally different from the existing state-of-the-art mmWave wireless
technologies. To enable realization of this technology, the team is applying a
set of unique design methodologies and technologies to tackle the challenges of
the proposed complex mmWave front-end technology. The result is an ultra-high
gain mmWave beamforming system that closes the fundamental technology gap in the
mmWave wireless communication industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.