* 2126643
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Enabling Efficient 3D Perception: An Architecture-Algorithm Co-Design Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Guoyu Lu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 09/30/2024
* USD 214,946.00

This research project designs software-hardware collaborative mechanisms to
boost the execution efficiency of 3D perception (point cloud) algorithms by an
order of magnitude. Achieving this goal requires designing fundamentally new
algorithmic primitives, offline and run-time systems, and hardware architectures
that tame the irregular computation and memory patterns in 3D perception
algorithms. This research unlocks next-generation software innovation in
emerging domains driven by 3D perception, such as autonomous driving,
Augmented/Virtual Reality, and precision agriculture. The research agenda is
complemented by an educational/outreach agenda. The PIs are (1) offering summer
“introduction to computing” courses to high school students from the Rochester
Central School District, (2) engaging students in RIT’s National Technical
Institute for the Deaf program through experiencing 3D sensing and research
activities, (3) introducing new courses/modules in both UR and RIT on 3D
perception, both on algorithms and hardware systems, and (4) offering
undergraduate students inclusive opportunities for hands-on experience in
emerging application domains and hardware
acceleration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses the
fundamental mismatch between the irregularities in point-cloud algorithms and
today’s hardware architectures, which are primarily optimized for 2D image- and
video-processing algorithms that are regular stencil pipelines operating on
structured data. The key intellectual merit is the pursuit of new algorithms and
system architectures that reduce/eliminate irregular computation and memory
accesses in 3D perception. The technical contribution is three-fold: 1)
efficient, yet generally applicable, hardware building blocks required to
accelerate point cloud algorithms, 2) run-time systems that dynamically adapt to
operating constraints (e.g., hardware resources, performance, energy) in an
application-aware and data-aware manner, and 3) a new class of efficient-by-
construction 3D perception algorithms that leverage the small data volume in
single-beam point clouds. The algorithm-hardware co-designed system not only
accelerates current 3D perception algorithms, but also provides a computing
substrate so that 3D perception can be pervasively used as a building block in
future application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.