* 2126021
* BCSER: Investigating the Approaches for Improving Computer Science Pathways at Native American Tribal Schools
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Ashish Amresh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 349,651.00

Advancing participation in computer science is significant for meeting NSF’s
goals and benefits the nation. Arizona State University aims to improve pathways
in computer science for Native American tribal school students through co-
developed culturally relevant computer science programming. Teachers in tribal
high schools on the Navajo Nation will use real-world coding exercises that
focus on communities, nature, and the arts to provide a richer understanding of
computing and its applications. The project aims to evaluate various
instructional prototypes delivered in a series of high school computer science
courses. The project also builds research capacity in the PI through training in
education research design and analyses and experience conducting research with
tribal nations. Through advancing knowledge of Native American students in STEM,
this project supports the development of a diverse and skilled workforce in
computer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to conduct
iterative design-based research through testing co-developed instructional
prototypes using a contextualized representative framework. The research aims to
build communities of practice that include representatives from school district
administrators, researchers, and community members. Grounded in epistemic
learning, constructivist theory, and situated learning theory, the scope of the
project is to broaden the acceptability of computer science in Native American
classrooms and make it meaningful for both teachers and students. Both student
and teacher perspectives will be gauged using mixed methods approaches including
surveys, curriculum-embedded assessments, work samples, focus groups, and
competence assessments. The project aims to address the ways in which culture,
context, and coding in computer science education support increases in quantity
and quality of computer science learning experiences, interest, and achievement
in computer science for Native American students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM
Education Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build
individuals’ capacity to carry out high quality fundamental STEM education
research in STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.