* 2126016
* BCSER - PVEST: A Dynamic Framework for Investigating STEM Interest, Attitude and Identity Among African American Middle School Students
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* John Fife, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 346,557.00

Interest in STEM is often shaped in middle school and understanding the STEM
attitude and interest of African American middle school students would be
significant in reducing barriers to STEM careers. Virginia State University aims
to advance knowledge on the impacts of holistic contextual factors, such as
race/ethnicity, school quality, family dynamics, gender, social supports, daily
danger exposure, social status, and interpersonal competence, on STEM interest
and attitudes. The project builds capacity through training and experience
applying psychological theory to STEM education. Outcomes of the project aim to
contribute to the development of validated interventions that increase STEM
identity and resilience among students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to use the Phenomenological
Variant of Ecological Systems Theory (PVEST) to investigate the role of risk
contributors, stress engagement, and reactive coping styles on STEM interest.
PVEST provides a holistic, culturally sensitive framework for understanding the
development of competence under non-ideal circumstances. The primary research
question investigates whether multiple contextual variables adequately predict
STEM interest and attitudes among African American middle school students. The
project aims to deploy a variety of assessments to examine cognitive-emotional
regulation, perceptions of neighborhood risk and social supports, life
experiences with racism, and attitudes toward STEM subjects. The project is
supported through the EHR Core Research: Building Capacity in STEM Education
Research (ECR: BCSER) competition that is designed to build individualsâ€™
capacity to carry out high-quality fundamental STEM education research in STEM
learning and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and
STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.