* 2126896
* SBIR Phase II: Tailored Carbon Fiber Technology for High Volume Industrial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Connie Jackson, CROSSLINK COMPOSITES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2023
* USD 987,861.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR ) Phase II project will be to address the customized needs of
automotive applications with tailored high performance-low cost carbon fiber
(HP-LCCF) products that are not currently commercially available. The broader
impact of HP-LCCF technology is to enable hydrogen fuel cell vehicle
technologies to help mitigate the climate change linked emissions caused by
fossil fuel powered vehicles. Volume projections of HP-LCCF for this application
are expected to ramp up significantly over the ten years. After successful entry
into the automotive market, the focus will be expanded to address needs in the
wind energy market and with a tailored HP-LCCF product to enable longer blades
for larger and more efficient wind turbines. This technology will help spur
global adoption of clean, renewable energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops a process
where heavy tow carbon fiber is subdivided using an electromechanical splitting
process that can maintain an acceptable range of regular tow carbon fiber linear
densities. Subsequent tailoring trials will verify the capability to achieve and
maintain the linear density targets provided by the automotive industry partners
who will, in turn, perform downstream manufacturability trials. Subdividing the
heavy tows enables a seamless commercial entry into customers' downstream
composite manufacturing processes without an inherent, potentially fatal heavy
tow defect. Such defects are typically non-uniform intra-band tension caused by
the transverse catenary forces across the tow band. Achieving high band linear
density and variable intra-band tension are significant barriers for the
commercial adoption of heavy tow high performance, low cost carbon fibers (HP-
LCCF). The process developed here may eliminate such issues and achieve
commercially relevant HP-LCCF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.