* 2126170
* Collaborative Research: ISS: Real-time Sensing of Extracellular Matrix Remodeling during Fibroblast Phenotype Switching and Vascular Network Formation in Wound Healing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Shayn Peirce-Cottler, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Blood vessel formation and extracellular matrix (ECM) remodeling are
intersecting processes in wound healing. The extent to which blood vessel
formation and ECM remodeling are coordinated determines if wounds regenerate to
functional tissue or form scars. The research objective is to understand the
effects of microgravity on these wound healing processes in terms of the dynamic
changes in gene and protein expression, structural changes in blood vessel
formation, and ECM mechanical properties. This will be accomplished using a
sensor-integrated tissue culture model that mimics a wound healing environment.
This project advances a tissue characterization platform for both terrestrial-
and space-based research. These experimental tools may also support the
development of future therapeutics that target ECM remodeling and blood vessel
formation for functional tissue regeneration during wound healing. The
integrated educational objective is to create an interactive virtual educational
platform for high-school and undergraduate biology students to improve interest
and competency in engineering concepts and space-based biology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM)
remodeling are critical, intersecting processes in wound healing. The extent to
which angiogenesis and ECM remodeling are spatially and temporally coordinated
determines if wound healing leads to functional tissue regeneration or scar
formation. The research objective of this project is to understand the effects
of microgravity on wound healing processes in terms of the dynamic changes in
fibroblast and endothelial cell (EC) gene and protein expression, structural
changes in capillary networks during angiogenesis, and ECM mechanical
properties. This will be accomplished using a sensor-integrated 3D co-culture
model that mimics a wound healing environment via exogenous transforming growth
factor beta stimulation. Hence, this project will leverage a new experimental
platform to explore multi-scale interrelationships among gene and protein
expression, endothelial network formation, and ECM mechanical properties in
real-time. This project also generates dynamic profiles of vascular network
formation and early wound repair in a novel in vitro wound healing environment
that incorporates fibroblast-to-myofibroblast phenotypic transitions resulting
from transforming growth factor beta stimulation. A significant advance
contributed by this work will be the measurement of real-time ECM stiffening
profiles resulting from key myofibroblast behaviors, including collagen
production and contraction. Furthermore, this work provides new data regarding
the impact of microgravity on fibroblast phenotypic switching, ECM stiffening,
and vascular network formation using a 3D co-culture system. In summary, this
project advances knowledge regarding the effects of microgravity on tissue
remodeling processes during wound healing using autonomous tissue property
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.