* 2126443
* A New Way of Generating Electromagnetic Wave in RF-Challenged Environments for Navigation and Communication
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Majid Manteghi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The use of electromagnetic (EM) waves has revolutionized our lives by allowing
us to communicate with people from nearly anywhere on the planet, pinpoint our
location with incredible accuracy, and navigate unfamiliar roads. Modern
lifestyles would not be possible without these technologies. However, because of
losses occurring at higher frequencies, the use of EM waves has mainly been
limited to terrestrial wireless communications, navigation, and location
finding. Extremely low frequency and very low frequency ELF/VLF EM waves (300 Hz
30 kHz) are of interest due to their low propagation loss in RF challenged
environments (underwater, underground, and mud). However, current ELF/VLF EM
wave generators are not suitable for applications, such as portable
communication and navigation systems due to their large size and high power
requirements. This project aims to provide a new method to generate ELF/VLF
waves with orders of magnitude smaller dimensions and power requirements. The
findings of this study, if successful, will considerably increase knowledge and
understanding in the field of low-frequency EM wave generation and will likely
have broad impacts on environmental monitoring, aquatic eco-system analysis,
ocean accident remediation, homeland security, oil and gas exploration, and
aquaculture. Advances from the research topics will be disseminated widely
through academic courses on antennas and EM wave propagation and through
undergraduate research opportunities. The broadening of participation will be
achieved by explicitly working with underrepresented students through ongoing
programs at Virginia Tech. Besides, educational laboratory activities and
classroom modules, developed in partnership with the C-Tech2 program at Virginia
Tech, the PI will expose high school and middle school underrepresented students
to basic research and underlying ELF/VLF wave generation
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to design,
develop, and test small and energy-efficient ELF/VLF EM wave generators by
leveraging the strong magnetic flux of a permanent magnet. The strong magnetic
flux from a permanent magnet will be used to convert into an EM wave using a
time-variant reluctance shield. Based on the PIâ€™s proof of concept design the
proposed research will also focus on miniaturization and power consumption
reduction for the EM wave generator. The outcomes of this project will include
the development of new analysis and design methods for a permanent magnet-based
EM wave generation, system analysis including link budget, experimental
prototype development, and testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.