* 2126430
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Biocontainment/Biosafety Platform Using Synthetic Auxotrophs
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Gabriel Lopez, Synvivia
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,910.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a novel system that will increase the safety and
productivity of genetically modified organisms (GMOs). GMOs enablie novel live
therapeutics, agricultural products, and bio-based consumer products. However, a
key challenge is the lack of available tools to easily control the behavior of
GMOs. This proposal will develop a technology that can be used to ensure
containment of GMOs by tying their survival to the presence of specific control
chemicals. The core technology is based on cells that have been engineered to
alter their behavior in response to specific chemical signals, and the goal of
this project is to expand the portfolio of proteins (and thus behaviors) that
can be controlled by chemical inputs. This addresses concern surrounding the use
and possible escape of GMOs that may have unknown consequences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will establish a portfolio of
chemically-controlled essential genes. This will be accomplished by protein
engineering and simultaneously constructing 12,000 protein libraries spanning
200 different essential genes. Using targeted genome integration, this library
of libraries will be integrated into the genome of Escherichia coli. Phenotypic
characterization of the library using positive and negative (chemical)
selections followed by next-generation DNA sequencing will be used to uncover
the function (lethal, viable, or conditional) of individual protein designs.
This dataset will illuminate the relationship between structure, sequence, and
function for design of chemically-controlled proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.