* 2126355
* Constraining nitrogen sources and recycling efficiency in hot subduction zones using fluid inclusions in mineral separates from mafic lavas
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Michael Hudak, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2023
* USD 376,961.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates nitrogen
recycling between Earth’s surface and the mantle through subduction and
volcanism. The research and public service will be conducted at the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI). Subduction zones play a critical role in
global geochemical cycles, especially for volatile elements such as hydrogen,
carbon, sulfur, chlorine, and nitrogen (N) that largely return to the surface
through volcanic degassing. While nitrogen is the most abundant gas in Earth’s
atmosphere, the extent to which it can return to the deep mantle through
subduction and, the factors that control deep N sequestration, remain unknown.
For this project, the researcher will 1) quantify nitrogen outputs from dozens
of volcanoes in the Central America Volcanic Arc (CAVA) and the Southern
Volcanic Zone (SVZ) of the Chilean Andes, and 2) identify the sources of N in
arc magmas. This work involves determining N concentrations and isotope ratios
in small inclusions of fluids that are trapped in crystals before N has been
degassed to Earth’s surface. During his tenure at WHOI, the PI will partner with
New Heights Charter School (Grades 6-12) in Brockton, MA to develop teaching
materials and demonstrations related to subduction and volcanism that can be
directly incorporated into the Massachusetts state standards for physical
sciences. He will also mentor summer undergraduate students through the REU
program at WHOI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volatile recycling through subduction
zones and volcanic arcs modifies Earth’s atmospheric composition and helps to
maintain a stable climate and a habitable planet over geologic time. However, a
global perspective on the deep N cycle is only beginning to emerge. Whether the
mantle is a net source (via volcanism) or a net sink (via subduction) of N
remains a subject of debate and may be largely governed by the thermal evolution
of the subducting slab. The researcher will use samples that in hand to produce
two comprehensive, along-arc N and δ15N data sets, examining fluid inclusions in
mineral separates from mafic arc lavas along the CAVA and the SVZ. Because these
systems are thermally similar but have distinct N sources and subduction
dynamics, these data allow for the isolation of geologic controls on N recycling
through subduction zones and volcanic arcs. Ratios of N2/3He and N2/Ar will
constrain N fluxes along these arc segments while δ15N will allow for source
discrimination. This project leverages the unique analytical capacity of a Nu
Noblesse HR noble gas mass spectrometer connected to a dedicated sample crushing
and N purification line at WHOI, avoiding sample contamination from the modern
atmosphere, and providing the highest precision subduction zone N data currently
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.