* 2126193
* OCE-PRF: Vertical transport of buoyant, non-spherical particles in the wind-mixed ocean surface boundary layer
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Lucia Baker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 296,508.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particles at the ocean surface are
plentiful: microorganisms, ice crystals, debris, microplastics. Although many
are buoyant, these particles do not passively float on the surface of the water;
they are continually mixed within the upper regions of the ocean by the
turbulence that results from wind blowing over the water surface. Unlike small,
spherical particles, these non-spherical and sometimes large particles do not
perfectly follow the fluid flow due to their size and shape, and their
interaction with turbulence at the ocean surface is not well understood. The PI
will conduct an experimental and analytical investigation to study how buoyant,
non-spherical particles move, rotate, and disperse during wind-mixing at the
surface of the ocean. Knowledge of how these particles behave will have far-
reaching applications in ocean science, from ocean optics to plankton biology to
sea ice dynamics. In particular, understanding the transport of non-spherical
microplastic particles is critical for quantifying both the scale of
microplastic pollution and its risks to human health and the environment. The
results of this project will inform future policy, health guidelines, consumer
behavior, and microplastic removal efforts. In addition, the PI will work to
broaden participation in science within the local community through mentoring at
the university level and involvement in extracurricular activities at the high
school level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will measure vertical transport and
dispersion of non-spherical particles in a laboratory wind-mixed surface
boundary layer using particle shadow tracking techniques. Experiments will be
performed for a range of particle geometries and wind speeds relevant to the
ocean surface layer. These measurements will then be used to develop an
analytical model of particle spatial distribution over the water column. The
project addresses a major gap in the current understanding of how particle shape
and inertia affect particle transport in the wind-driven ocean surface layer.
The Stokes number, a key parameter which quantifies how responsive a particle is
to turbulent fluid motions, of particles in the ocean spans from zero to O(1),
but most studies to date have focused only on particles with a Stokes number of
zero, which perfectly trace the fluid flow. In addition to the Stokes number,
other parameters that define the fluid-particle dynamics include the
floatability parameter, the aspect ratio between the dimensions of non-spherical
particles, and the particle Reynolds number. Non-spherical particle transport in
the surface boundary layer spans a wide parameter space; however, systematic
experimental studies throughout this parameter space have not yet been done. A
complicating factor is that particle transport by turbulence is an inherently
Lagrangian process, i.e., the relevant frame of reference is one that follows
each particle along its trajectory. Lagrangian measurements which track
particles in space and time are difficult to obtain in situ, and studies often
describe particle transport and vertical concentration fields in an Eulerian
frame of reference, i.e., within a stationary coordinate system. This project
will systematically explore the parameter space of non-spherical, non-tracer
particles in wind-driven turbulence and will obtain both Eulerian and Lagrangian
statistics of particle concentration, depth, and orientation. The results will
provide insights into the physical processes governing a wide range of ocean
transport phenomena, including that of microplastic
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.