* 2126498
* Electrohydrodynamic interactions of drops
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Petia Vlahovska, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 344,833.00

What do thunderstorms, ink-jet printing, lab-on-a-chip, and crude oil
demulsification have in common? Droplets and electric fields. An electric field
causes drops to attract, repel, or move around each other in a complex path.
Control over these motions is crucial for the optimal performance of the
technological processes that use electric fields for droplet manipulation, yet
knowledge of many-drop electrohydrodynamics is limited. This project will
explore drop interactions in electric field using a combination of theory,
simulations, and experiments. Novel computational models will be developed to
model drop motions and fluid flow in three-dimensions and account for important
physical phenomena such surfactant and charge convection along the droplet
interface. The research outcomes will advance fundamental knowledge and impact
the various technologies that utilize electric fields to manipulate droplets.
The project involves international collaboration that will provide opportunities
for training students as globally engaged engineers. The visually appealing
nature of the droplet behavior in electric fields will be used in outreach
activities to excite students and the general public about fluid dynamics and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of fluids and
electric fields is at the heart of natural phenomena such as disintegration of
raindrops in thunderstorms and many applications such as ink-jet printing,
microfluidics, crude oil demulsification, and electrosprays. Many of these
processes involve droplets and there has been a long-standing interest in
understanding drop electrohydrodynamics. While an isolated drop in applied
electric fields has been extensively studied, the behavior of many drops is
largely unexplored. Even the pair-wise drop interactions have received scant
attention and existing models are limited to axisymmetric and two-dimensional
geometries. In three dimensions, the electrohydrodynamic interactions can be
quite complex and non-trivial. For example, in an applied uniform electric
field, instead of chaining along the field direction, drops can initially
attract in the direction of the field and move towards each other, but then
separate in the transverse direction. To understand the underlying mechanisms,
the PI will carry out a theoretical and computational study complemented with
experiments that systematically explores the dynamics of a drop pair in an
applied uniform electric field. For the first time, the dynamics of two
dissimilar drops will be studied at arbitrary separation and orientation of
their line-of-centers relative to the applied field direction. New analytical
models and accurate numerical simulation using the Boundary Integral Method will
be developed to account for charge convection and surfactant redistribution. The
project integrates asymptotic theories, numerical simulations and experiments,
which will lead to both a much deeper understanding of the underlying fluid
dynamics as well as the discovery of new behaviors and engineering opportunities
relevant to technologies such as lab-on-a-chip. The proposed research is
interdisciplinary, integrating knowledge from the fields of fluid dynamics and
applied math, and involves an international collaboration. This will be very
beneficial for the education and training of the students associated with the
project. The visually appealing nature of the droplet behavior in electric
fields will be used in outreach activities to excite students and the general
public about fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.