* 2126748
* SBIR Phase I:  Platform for rapid assessment of hydrolytic enzyme activity to optimize their design and use
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Nathaniel Kallmyer, ZYMOSENSE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to accelerate and improve the development and optimization of
enzyme products. This project will develop a platform that reduces costs and
delays associated with research. These enzyme products will improve the cost,
safety, and sustainability in a range of applications, such as biomass
processing, animal nutrition, solid and liquid waste management, household and
industrial cleaners, and enzyme replacement therapies. This solution will
support the growth of the $10 billion enzyme market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will advance a fluorescence-based enzyme activity-sensing
platform, by reducing barriers to development of new industrial biocatalysts,
enabling the rapid design of hydrolytic enzymes for industrial and specialty
markets through the development of modular enzyme activity probes. The technical
hurdles addressed by the proposed research and development are (1) determining
performance metrics (limits of detection, speed, accuracy) relative to existing
characterization techniques, (2) determining effects of sensor preparation
methods on sensor performance, and (3) developing a robust reader for field use.
The goals of the proposed research and development are to (1) provide parity
data to current assays for end-users to engender confidence in our approach, (2)
standardize production protocol, and (3) provide hand-held reader that is
inexpensive (&lt;$3000) and can withstand rough handling in field. At a high
level, these goals will be achieved by (1) testing our sensors on a panel of
candidate enzymes that have rigorous characterization already (to establish
performance metrics), (2) using designed experiments to screen process space of
sensor preparation and model effect on sensor performance attributes, and (3)
using a design-build-test engineering framework to test reader components and
layout.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.