* 2126327
* CC* Integration-Large: Democratizing Networking Research in the Era of AI/ML
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Trinabh Gupta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,913.00

The emerging area of self-driving networks provides network administrators at
campus networks to automate most network-management tasks. Such an automation
ensures that the network remains performant and reliable amidst various
disruptions, while requiring minimal interventions from the network
administrators. However, making significant contributions to self-driving
network research requires developing artificial intelligence (AI) and machine
learning (ML)-based tools and demonstrating that they work in practice.
Unfortunately, in stark contrast to their counterparts in industry, most
academic researchers have neither access to the proper data for developing
learning-based tools nor have properly instrumented testbeds for road-testing
the resulting tools in realistic settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project brings together investigators from the University of
California-Santa Barbara, University of Chicago, and NIKSUN Inc., to investigate
how to use campus networks to overcome barriers to self-driving network
research. First, it will deploy packet-processing pipelines at two campus
networks to collect the proper network data at scale without compromising user
privacy. It will then strategically place programmable network devices at campus
networks to safely road-test newly developed learning models in production
settings. Finally, it will illustrate the capabilities enabled by these newly-
instrumented campus networks for developing, evaluating, and road-testing new
learning models with different use cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
intended to seed a community effort that uses campus networks as vehicles for
democratizing self-driving networks research, improving its transparency through
reproducibility, and ensuring its success in practice by establishing trust. As
such, it promises to be transformative not only for the network community as a
whole but also for different campus network stakeholders (e.g., campus IT).
Fully leveraging these campus networks' dual role as data source and testbed and
seamlessly integrating it into the university's engineering curriculum suggests
radically new approaches to teaching, training, and educating engineering
students in the era of AI and ML.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project information
will be maintained at: https://democratize-
netai.cs.ucsb.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.