* 2126116
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Advanced Network For Research at UNC Charlotte
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Daniel Janies, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 497,187.00

A diverse team of faculty researchers, research computing, and networking
experts from across UNC Charlotte are collaborating to develop and deploy an
advanced network for research across the campus. This network dramatically
improves digital communication between researchers, scientific instrumentation,
visualization workstations, high performance computing (HPC) infrastructure and
external collaborators. Access to the advanced network enables higher speed to
existing research workflows and allows for new research processes previously
unavailable to the team. For example, massive datasets from multiple DNA
sequencing instruments are streamed to powerful HPC clusters thus removing data
analysis bottlenecks. Research applying motion analysis and artificial
intelligence to Future of Work research, natural language processing and cyber
physical systems are also supported. Applications include fluid dynamics
simulation of airflow, which carries infectious microbes, in public
transportation. Research collaborations between UNC Charlotte and other
universities is enhanced by speeding acquisition and sharing of research
results. Students from varied backgrounds, including UNC Charlotte’s large
cohorts from underrepresented groups and first generation college students will
work with this state-of-the-art cyberinfrastructure in their coursework and
research projects.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The design is a campus wide 100Gb
fibre-based network with Science DMZ including a Data Transfer Node enabling
data flows separate from the day-to-day traffic of University business. The
network is implemented as a spine-leaf architecture with two spines (64x100GbE)
interconnected to each other with 100Gb links by MLAG. One spine is placed in
the HPC Data Center and the other is placed in a separate campus Data Center.
The network has 6 Leafs (32x100 GbE) supporting connectivity between buildings
housing academic departments and HPC infrastructure. Performance is monitored
and tuned with PerfSonar nodes. Security is monitored through Zeek (40Gb/s)
nodes. The network and Science DMZ are tuned and optimized in collaboration
between researchers and network architects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.