* 2126901
* SBIR Phase I:  Secure and Scalable Collaboration Platform for Effective Detection of Money Laundering and Fraudulent Transactions
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2022
* Mohammad Sadegh Riazi, CIPHERMODE LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to reduce financial fraud by closing the gap between current secure
computation technologies and the technical requirements of modern anti-money
laundering. Banks and financial institutions have a strong interest in creating
a secure data exchange mechanism. In 2020 alone, the global fraud and anti-money
laundering compliance costs exceeded $181 Billion. Audit and transaction
monitoring accounted for 19% of this total expenditure. A single-digit
percentage improvement in these two categories represents a market opportunity
worth hundreds of millions of dollars. A major benefit of the proposed platform
is that the complex financial dynamics of organized crime can be targeted and
reduced. In addition to anti-money laundering and fraud detection, the secure
computation framework generated by this proposal, i.e., a scalable and fast
secure data exchange platform, can be applied to areas such as healthcare, the
insurance industry, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to create a systematic
solution to overcome the current limitations in fighting fraudulent bank
transactions. The main roadblock for effective detection of fraud and money
laundering is the lack of a comprehensive view of client data. Currently, each
bank has limited information about the client's financial activity and cannot
benefit from a holistic view of the client’s profile in other banks. Naive
solutions, such as creating a central data exchange entity, have been rendered
impractical due to critical data security and privacy concerns. In this project,
the team proposes a new methodology to address this challenge by leveraging
advanced Secure Multiparty Computation (SMPC). Unlike anonymization approaches
that hide a specific part of customers’ data, secure computation protocols
guarantee data confidentiality even during a joint computation. In the past,
SMPC has been impractical due to enormous computational and communication costs.
However, the company has made both theoretical and practical breakthroughs that
make SMPC more feasible for effective detection of fraud and money laundering.
Further research and development is needed to make the solution truly applicable
to real-world anti-money laundering scenarios, and thereby produce a technology
that can drastically improve fraud detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.