* 2126976
* Collaborative Research: Interaction of sensory and response processes in decision making
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jeffrey Rouder, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 356,874.00

Perceptual decision-making, the act of quickly drawing inferences from sensory
information and making appropriate responses, is a critical foundation of human
behavior. The timing and the interaction between sensory and response processes
in decision making are the focus of this collaborative research program.
Neuroscience data has revealed that response planning may be engaged before
perceptual processing finishes suggesting that the interaction of perception and
action may be a critical aspect of making decisions. To investigate this, we
develop novel experiments that use human electroencephalography (EEG) to measure
the time course of perception, attention, and motor processes. We incorporate
students from communities that have historically been underserved by higher
education STEM programs directly into this research through courses, all-day
science events, and a three-week summer school. There is a tight correspondence
where curricula in the educational activities enable these students to carry out
novel research throughout the project period supported by researchers. Graduate
students play a critical role in the development and implementation of these
student projects. These educational programs will be made available to other
institutions that seek to enhance STEM education through research training in
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All of the experiments make use of
innovations in single-trial EEG methods for measuring the dynamics of perceptual
and motor activity while participants make decisions about stimuli placed in
varying contexts. Novel experimental methods are used to track and manipulate
the time-course of attentional control of the flow of sensory information in the
brain. A new area of perceptual neuroscience will be developed with unique
tactile perception and decision making experiments. The summer school curriculum
focuses on students proposing, programming, running, analyzing, and presenting
their own research. The curriculum incorporates programming skills, matrix
algebra and signal processing skills, and statistical methods. The goal is for
the students to design, control, and analyze human neuroscience experiments.
Interactions with graduate students and faculty mentors will enable students to
realize their projects and develop their ambitions to pursue science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.