* 2126966
* SBIR Phase II:  Ground-Loop Heat Exchanger Solution for Low Cost Ground-Source Heat Pumps
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Stewart Bible, ITERATIVE METHODS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2025
* USD 977,576.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is that it will significantly lower the initial cost of
residential and commercial ground-source heat pump (GSHP) systems used in space
heating and cooling applications. GSHPs are inherently more energy efficient
than most heating and cooling technologies. This technology will accelerate
electrification of the US economy, lessen the nation’s dependence on fossil
fuels, reduce peak electricity demand, and lower emissions of greenhouse gases
such as CO2. GSHPs operate quietly and reliably, provide humidity control, and
can provide both heating and cooling, greatly increasing the comfort of building
environments and quality of life. GSHPs can also reduce and levelize utility
bills in low-income housing and enhance the ability to provide energy assistance
programs to those in need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
proposes to further develop a novel technology that will overcome barriers in
the applicability, desirability and cost-competitiveness of GSHP systems. The
project’s chief technical objectives are to improve tools and knowhow relating
to the application of the proposed novel in-ground heat exchanger technology and
to demonstrate the feasibility and performance of this technology in real-world
applications in targeted geographical markets. Specifically, the project will
further refine the computational modeling tools used to size heat exchanger
systems; and develop and integrate sophisticated geospatial data sets that these
models will use/ This will result in more accurate and more rapid heat exchanger
sizing on a site-specific basis. Next, the project will validate these tools
through extended testing and data collection on a prototype system installed on
a home system. Finally, this project will apply these tools during the
deployment of three commercial systems in targeted geographic markets and
collect additional data regarding their performance over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.