* 2126082
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Engineering Student Success Initiatives
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jerrod Henderson, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The National Science Board reports that, since 2000, the portion of engineering
degrees awarded to underrepresented students has improved very little or not at
all. For example, in 2000, 8.6%, 7.3%, and 0.7% of engineering degrees were
awarded to African Americans, Latinx, and Native American students,
respectively. In 2015, 8.7%, 12.8%, and 0.5% of degrees were awarded to those
same student groups. Recent statistics on engineering education shows that
underrepresented students are more likely to attend Minority-Serving
Institutions (MSI). Yet, most of the research on engineering education comes
from Predominantly-White Institutions (PWIs), which may limit the
generalizability of findings for underrepresented students and more diverse
institutions. Furthermore, research often is done in silos with insufficient
interdisciplinary collaboration. If we are going to move the needle on
broadening participation in engineering and engineering workforce
development—our targeted societal impact—we need a convergent approach led by
stakeholders at the forefront of supporting a diverse engineering
future—MSIs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Employing asset-based approaches such as
Community Cultural Wealth (CCW) for all aspects of research, management, and
development, we will develop an MSI-led Engineering Research Center (ERC) that
focuses on Engineering Student Success founded on Engineering Education
frameworks. This ERC will become a leader in the development of engineering
student success research and will be uniquely positioned to translate findings
into policies and practices that address the success (defined as recruitment,
retention, and graduation) of underrepresented engineering students, at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. This ERC will bring together a core team of
interdisciplinary researchers from across MSIs in the Greater Houston area and
beyond. The aim for the development and execution of this ERC is to become a
model of MSI engagement and collaboration. The ERC proposal that will result
from the planning grant will pursue research and development work that focuses
on a) research relating to underrepresented student success, b) interventions
designed to strengthen engineering workforce pathways (i.e., K-12, community
college, and four-year institutions), c) rigorous and culturally responsive
project evaluation, and d) dissemination of engineering education research to
the academic community, practitioners, and policymakers. This planning grant
will leverage the proximity of engaged institutions to build a community of
researchers and advocates centered on similar challenges and research interests.
The subsequent ERC will support the production of high-impact, convergent
research focused on student success and broadening participation in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.