* 2126248
* CC* Regional: LEARN Extending &amp; Accelerating Participation in Science (Texas LEAPS)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Akbar Kara, LEARN: Lonestar Education and Research Network
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 890,486.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher education institutions at
all levels rely on Cyberinfrastructure (CI) to provide environments for teaching
and learning. For smaller institutions, having access to advanced CI can enrich
the opportunities for teaching and learning, while presenting new opportunities
for programs that rely on external information and service resources. The
counterpoint is that sophisticated technology and the expertise to manage that
technology are challenges for small colleges; however, these challenges in part
can be met by state, regional and national organizations specializing in these
technologies that can assist small colleges to access state-of-the-art
technology and expertise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lonestar Education and Research
Network (LEARN) is further developing and expanding its model program (LEARN
Smaller Institution CI Program) for regional network connectivity for small
campuses in Texas. A set of three campuses – Texarkana College, Trinity Valley
Community College, and Texas Lutheran University - are taking part in this
project to receive: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; • Advanced network services and
gigabit connectivity, &lt;br/&gt; • Expertise to manage these technologies,
&lt;br/&gt; • Training and assistance to effectively adopt and use the
technologies, and &lt;br/&gt; • A community of similarly engaged scholars and
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.