* 2126275
* Distributed Nanocrystal Arrays for Quantum Electronics and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Raj Singh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

Title: Distributed Nanocrystal Arrays for Quantum Electronics and
Sensing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award is to explore
fundamental science and engineering for processing diamond crystals for
applications in quantum computing, encryption, biolabeling and transduction, and
magnetic field sensing. Especially, diamond containing nitrogen impurity creates
nitrogen-vacancy (NV) defect centers, which can be controlled by microwave,
laser signal and electric field for use in quantum electronics, medicine,
national security, and defense. Some of these applications require small size
diamond crystals containing preferably only one type of defects that are
arranged into isolated diamond crystal arrays for greatest sensitivity,
individual addressability and applicability. The objectives are to process
isolated diamond crystal arrays with these attributes for demonstrating
selective addressability, ease in read-write capability, and enhanced signals
from associated quantum phenomena for quantum electronics and magnetic field
sensing. In addition, the project provides education and training to graduate
and undergraduate students towards workforce development and careers in academia
or industry. The research findings are disseminated to the scientific community
and expected to have significant impacts on several national initiatives such as
advanced nanotechnology, quantum information sciences, optoelectronics,
medicine, and national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific and
technical aims of the research program are aimed to (1) develop a fundamental
research on processing of isolated diamond crystal arrays of high crystal
quality containing oriented NV centers created through understanding of the
roles of in situ doping by nitrogen, diamond nucleation and growth mechanisms,
substrate orientation, and applied electric and magnetic field during processing
using Microwave Plasma Enhanced Chemical Vapor Deposition (MPECV, (2)
characterize quantitatively the spin state addressability based on changes to
optical emission upon exposure of crystals to microwave and laser light, and (3)
study the quantum phenomena and magnetic field sensing using NV centers in
isolated diamond crystal arrays. These efforts are expected to significantly
contribute towards advancement of future quantum-based computers and solid-state
magnetic field sensors. The proposed research is also expected to widely
contribute to several STEM disciplines encompassing engineering, medicine ,
physics and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.