* 2126612
* OCE-PRF: Drivers of phenotypic diversity and adaptation in asexually propagating coral populations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Karina Scavo, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 317,793.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this era of rapid environmental
change and degradation, the survival of marine organisms will depend largely
upon their ability to tolerate increasing environmental stress. However, the
processes that drive resilience (e.g., the relative contribution of genetic
versus environmental factors) remain largely a mystery. Corals are a major focus
of current studies on organismal resilience because they are undergoing a
worldwide decline, and they are so important for both the health of the oceans
and the welfare of coastal communities. Corals often occupy and build habitats
through asexual reproduction (production of clones), and it is widely assumed
that such asexual populations may lack sufficient genetic diversity to respond
to diverse environmental stressors. However, few previous studies have
quantified the effects of asexual reproduction on the ability of corals to
respond to environmental change. This research explores the different mechanisms
that contribute to differences in coral stress response among two predominately
clonal populations of the Caribbean thin finger coral (Porites divaricata)
dwelling in distinct habitat types (mangroves vs. reef). This research will
illuminate the drivers of organismal resilience, potentially impacting ongoing
coral conservation and restoration efforts. It will also broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by encouraging active participation by
local community members, students and scientists at the University of Belize, as
well as providing unique training opportunities for next-generation scientists
at the interface of field marine ecology and genomics. Importantly, these
results will be communicated to a wide audience through diverse venues,
including technical reports and management recommendations provided for
government agencies and non-profit Belizean conservation organizations, popular
articles and curricular materials for the community at large, and peer-reviewed
manuscripts and presentations targeted to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among conservation biologists and ecologists,
there is an urgent effort underway to understand the causes of diversity in
traits impacting organismal survival and reproduction. If we are to understand
how natural populations will respond to environmental change, it is critical to
understand how genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors impact resilience.
Such studies have advanced significantly in many plant species, but they are
only just beginning to be applied to animals like corals. As in many plants, the
model species used here— Caribbean thin finger coral (Porites
divaricata)–reproduces primarily asexually, allowing us to compare the
performance of clones in different environments and isolate the effects of
genotype, epigenetics (namely DNA methylation), environment, and somatic
mutations on variation in stress-related coral traits. Specially, combining
fully-crossed reciprocally transplanted coral ramets across mangrove and reef
sites with genomic and methylation sequencing data, this research will evaluate
1) the role of intra-genet variation accumulated during asexual reproduction in
facilitating adaptation in the mangrove population, relative to roles of
between-genet variation and phenotypic plasticity, 2) assess the role of new DNA
methylation states, and 3) measure the rate of accumulation of new DNA
methylation marks and base-changes during asexual reproduction. Results from
this research effort will advance our understanding of the role of mechanisms
like DNA methylation and somatic mutations in driving phenotypic variation in
critical stress-response traits and how these mutations accumulate over time,
provide insight into how such mechanisms are generated and inherited across
asexual generations, build upon the sparse understanding of the role of novel
habitat types, i.e. mangroves, in coral ecology and evolution; and generate
novel molecular resources including the first reference genome assembly for the
non-model coral, P. divaricata.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.