* 2126964
* SBIR Phase I:  Vision care station for on-demand rapid examination of visual performance.
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Matthias Hofmann, 123 SEE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/28/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to significantly improve access to vision
care for all Americans via a low-cost vision exam kiosk for supermarkets and
pharmacies. A key technical component for reaching commercialization and
scalability is the development of a contactless and autonomous eye scanner that
accurately measures prescription numbers in under 10 seconds. The kiosk enables
retailers that Americans already visit on average 20-30 times per year to offer
instant vision exams and reports, eye prescriptions reviewed remotely by
physicians, and access to high quality but affordable corrective eyewear. With
175 million Americans benefiting from vision correction, this solution could
profoundly impact vision care across all communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project investigates the
feasibility of a novel contactless eye refractor for use in a self-serve and
autonomous vision care station for pharmacies and supermarkets. Eye scanning is
done via the photo-refractive principle enabling autonomous ocular refraction in
mere seconds. A key issue with leading photo-refractor configurations is the
resulting drift stemming from gaze misalignment. Instead of refracting single
positions in the visual field, the proposed novel configuration refracts the
central and peripheral visual field simultaneously, thus guaranteeing the
measurement of foveal refractive error. This novel configuration will use
commonly available low-cost components and can be manufactured at a fraction of
the cost of commercially autorefractors. A software model of the system will be
used to efficiently optimize the configuration, after which the design will be
built and tested. A physical model eye will be developed and used for testing to
confirm the accuracy at a multitude of gaze angles and to confirm result-
decoupling of gaze alignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.