* 2126662
* OCE-PRF: Constraints on sea-level change over four glacial cycles through uranium-series dating of submerged Bahamian cave deposits
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Peter Chutcharavan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 299,181.00

In recent geologic history, the Earth’s climate has fluctuated between ice ages
and warm periods such as the present. These ice age cycles occur on roughly
100,000 year timescales and are marked by 100 meter-scale changes in global sea
level in response to the growth and retreat of large continental ice sheets. The
timing, duration, and magnitude of ice age sea-level fluctuations is largely
controlled by changes in Earth’s surface temperature due to variations in the
Earth’s orbit around the sun and the amount of planet-warming greenhouse gases
in the atmosphere. Our understanding of the complex interactions between Earth’s
orbit and greenhouse gases that drive sea-level change remains incomplete.
Coastal cave deposits called speleothems provide rare, but valuable constraints
on past sea-level change. Speleothems provide an upper limit on the position of
the ocean surface, as they form from cavern dripwaters and cannot grow when
submerged below sea level and can be precisely dated using U-Th dating or
geochronology. For this project, the researcher will produce a novel,
speleothem-based sea level record extending back ~400,000 years, covering the
last four glacial cycles. This project will improve our understanding of the
fundamental physical processes that drive sea-level change during ice age cycles
and, by extension, the sea-level rise in a warming world. This is a timely
topic, as “what are the rates, mechanisms, impacts and geographic variability of
sea level change?” has been highlighted as one of the eight priority science
questions by the National Academy of Sciences’ 2015-2025 Decadal Survey of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will leverage an extraordinary
collection of speleothems recovered from presently-submerged Bahamian coastal
caves (blue holes) during the late 1980s/early 1990s at depths ranging from 4 to
77 m below present sea level. Such records are exceedingly rare, requiring many
years of expensive and risky fieldwork and coordination with experience cave
divers. In pursuing the project, the PI will have access to (1) the entire
Bahamas collection (~117 speleothems), many of which remain undated, (2) state-
of-the-art U-series analytical facilities and (3) cutting-edge microanalytical
facilities available at University of Minnesota – Twin Cities (e.g., micro
computed tomography [CT], electron probe microanalysis [EPMA]) to assess the
physical, chemical and petrologic characteristics of growth hiatus boundaries,
which is crucial for determining the precise timing of cave inundation due to
sea-level rise. Finally, the results will be evaluated using GIA modelling to
place the data in the broader context of global mean sea level. Taken together,
this approach will greatly enhance the quality of sea-level information that can
be extracted from speleothem-based archives, providing critical constraints on
the timing and duration of late Pleistocene sea level change.&lt;br/&gt;Results
will be useful to the broader Ocean Sciences community to produce robust sea-
level projections to help policymakers, stakeholders and the general public in
coastal communities adapt to future sea-level rise. Potential avenues for
disseminating project results to the general public include outreach efforts
such as the Skype a Scientist program, where the PI has an active record of
participation. The PI will also partner with NOAA’s Science on a Sphere program
to develop data visualizations that effectively convey key concepts of late
Pleistocene sea-level change to a non-specialist audience. The PI is also
committed to broadening participation in the Ocean Sciences and will partner
with the hosting institution to foster an inclusive work environment and also
encourage increased STEM participation from historically underrepresented groups
through ongoing K-12 outreach initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.