* 2126568
* OCE-PRF: Development and Application of the Foraminiferal Iodine/Calcium Paleoredox Proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Janet Burke, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 12/31/2023
* USD 304,714.00

Development and Application of the Foraminiferal I/Ca Paleoredox
Proxy&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The amount of dissolved oxygen in seawater varies
and is linked to the distribution of life in the oceans. Expansion of marine
oxygen deficient zones (ODZs), where oxygen reaches levels low enough to limit
habitability, are an expected result of climate change. As we work to predict
how this will affect future oceans, studying marine oxygenation over past
climate change events is increasingly valuable. The Miocene Climatic Optimum
(MCO), which occurred ~15-17 million years ago, is such an event, during which
the Earth’s temperature warmed up to 3C on average and atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels rose to an estimated 400-500ppm. Multiple lines of evidence
suggest that severe ODZs around the globe intensified during the MCO, but direct
evidence is lacking. We will use experiments to validate and apply the
foraminiferal iodine-to-calcium (I/Ca) proxy—which uses the iodine content of
microscopic fossils to estimate marine oxygen concentrations—to sediments from
the MCO in the Eastern Tropical Pacific to study the intensity of low oxygen in
the region during the MCO and improve predictions of ODZ changes in future
climate change scenarios. This project combines laboratory experiments, field
work, and analytical procedures that will incorporate International Ocean
Discovery Program archives as well as training and research experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students (including specific plans for mentoring
Latinx undergraduate STEM majors). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort consists of
three discrete but interrelated projects to test, ground-truth, and apply the
foraminiferal I/Ca proxy. The foraminifera I/Ca proxy is a method for
reconstructing oxygen concentrations in ancient oceans based on the iodine
concentrations of microscopic shells of protists called foraminifera. This proxy
works because the levels of the iodine species (iodate) which can be
incorporated into foraminiferal shells is linked to the oxygen content of the
water they live in. Although this proxy has already been described and utilized
in studies to reconstruct marine oxygen concentrations over multiple periods of
global change, it has not yet been experimentally verified using controlled
laboratory conditions or systematically screened for an impact of diagenesis
(alteration of the fossil material that occurs after it is deposited in the
sediments). To this end, we will: (1) conduct experiments on benthic and
planktonic foraminifera to document the uptake of iodate into foraminiferal
calcite, testing for systematic offsets from predicted rates that exist in some
proxies. These experiments include plans for a novel radiotracer approach using
iodine-129, a rare isotope of iodine which can be used to track ambient iodine
uptake into the test in culture. (2) Compare the I/Ca values of foraminiferal
specimens from neighboring assemblages from the Pacific Ocean that have very
different preservation states to test for an effect of diagenesis on
foraminiferal I/Ca. (3) Apply the foraminiferal I/Ca proxy to reconstruct the
redox dynamics of the Eastern Tropical Pacific region during the MCO by
measuring planktonic and benthic foraminifera I/Ca along with stable carbon and
oxygen isotopes in two key localities off the coasts of Mexico and Peru. Through
this work we will strengthen an increasingly popular proxy system that can be
applied to study many different regional and global paleoclimate events and
constrain links between elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide and marine ODZs
relevant to today during an analogous interval in Earth’s
history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.