* 2126167
* Ecogeomorphological consequences of climate and human-driven mangrove expansion into salt marshes
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tracy Quirk, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 482,921.00

Mangroves – woody plants generally found on tropical coasts – are expanding
northward due to warmer winter temperatures. Along the northern Gulf of Mexico
coast, and especially in southern Louisiana, mangroves are starting to replace
coastal marsh grasses. This could have a positive outcome as mangroves may be
more effective than marsh grasses at stabilizing sediment and reducing the
extremely rapid rate of marsh loss in the region (known as Louisiana’s Coastal
Crisis). Because of the potential positive impact of mangrove colonization, some
stakeholders in Louisiana have started planting mangroves through a grass-roots
initiative called the Saint Bernard Parish Black Mangrove Planting Project. For
this project the investigators will i) quantify the effectiveness of mangroves
at reducing marsh edge erosion by wave attack, ii) identify techniques that
promote the survival of planted mangroves, and iii) predict future mangrove
distribution. This information will directly benefit coastal managers in Saint
Bernard Parish, in coastal Louisiana, and in the northern Gulf of Mexico.
Stakeholders will be involved through a formalized advisory board, and the
results of this project will be communicated through townhall meetings. The
investigators will work with the local high school and expand their
environmental science curriculum. They will also start a citizen-science
mangrove-expansion-monitor-program through a mobile phone application, aimed at
informing the general public about plant ecology and coastal erosion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a combination of remote sensing analysis and
field-based research, the investigators propose to quantify the unconstrained
ecological engineering potential of mangroves to reduce marsh edge erosion
rates, specifically, and change sediment and soil building dynamics along the
shoreline, more broadly. They will identify the conditions that promote mangrove
expansion at the fine scale, which is hypothesized to be linked to sediment
released by marsh edge retreat, and quantify the ecogeomorphic changes that
occur with a vegetation shift from marsh grass to mangrove. Field manipulation
experiments will test the best strategies for planted mangrove survivorship and
growth (e.g., sediment addition and vegetation removal). A numerical model will
be developed to test hypothesis on feedbacks between marsh edge erosion,
vertical accretion, and mangrove colonization. They will use a newly developed
model as a decision-support tool to produce probabilistic predictions of marsh
erosion and mangrove distribution under various climatic (SLR and winter
freezes) and management (planting frequency and location) scenarios. Despite the
project being focused on Louisiana, the issue of mangrove expansion is relevant
for low latitude coastal areas globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.