* 2126427
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Capabilities: Repurposing FAIR-Compliant Earth Science Data Repositories
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Anthony Koppers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 847,422.00

There is a noticeable sparsity of data on the internet that can characterized as
being easily findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). This
project seeks to leverage reusable components developed for the Magnetics
Information Consortium (MagIC) that follow the above FAIR data principles and
that are repurposed in the Framework for Integrated Earth Science and Technology
Applications (FIESTA). Using this new FIESTA technology, we will build two new
online data repositories: (1) KARAR: hosting analytical data and geological age
information collected using the K/Ar and 40Ar/39Ar techniques for the age dating
of rocks and minerals; and (2) GCPDR: hosting multi-sensor data collected at
close intervals in sediment/rock cores that provide information on the physical
and magnetic properties of sediments and rocks. Information to be drawn from the
KARAR serves a critical need for almost every geoscientist enabling them to
discover and assess the quality of the best and most current geochronological
information from a variety of different methods and sources. Information in the
GCPDR provides yet another domain of researchers with access to basic physical
information (e.g. density, color spectra, seismic velocity) collected in tens of
thousands sediment and rock cores held in national and international core
repositories, which provides scientists with inimitable “time-stamped” records
on ocean chemistry, geohazards, environmental tipping points, climate change,
extinctions, Earth’s magnetic field behavior, global elemental cycles, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The containerized FIESTA approach is designed to be
readily adopted by a broad range of disciplines and, by hosting FIESTA at the
EarthRef.org cyberinfrastructure, this will remove a significant set of hurdles
in developing and managing a long-term FAIR data repository for these
scientists. The two new FIESTA data repositories will also lead to the
development of improved education in data mining tools and the use of
cyberinfrastructure by exposing data in standardized easy-to-use formats,
including standards developed in EarthCube, and making data available on GitHub
and EarthRef.org’s JupyterHub. Finally, the standardization of datasets will
enhance capabilities for interdisciplinary geoscience research as it lowers the
hurdles to linking data across different fields and finding new applications to
help solve persistently challenging scientific integration
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.