* 2126458
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Capabilities: Raijin: Community Geoscience Analysis Tools for Unstructured Mesh Data
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Clyne, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 879,946.00

The next generation of numerical models used to simulate the Earth’s climate and
global weather represent a significant advancement in humanity’s ability to
realistically and accurately model the Earth System. These new models solve
complex mathematical equations that describe the motion, chemistry, and energy
transfer of the planet’s oceans and atmosphere at spatial scales fine enough to
capture individual storms. As a result, these so-called “Global Storm Resolving
Models” (GSRMs) generate tremendous amounts of numerical data. Moreover, the
structure of these data is far more complex than it is for current models. The
goal of this work, Project Raijin, is to develop and provide the global weather
and climate modeling communities with the software tools they need to make sense
of these massive and complex data sets. Without the ability to effectively
explore and interrogate GSRM outputs the value of these new models will be
greatly limited. The tools created by Project Raijin will be developed under an
open source license and made freely available to anyone in the world who wants
to use, or even improve, them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition by the global
weather and climate modeling communities to kilometer-scale resolutions enabled
by unstructured grid “dynamical cores” comes with a two-fold cost. First, the
increased model resolution results in the output of massive volumes of data,
further exacerbating the “Big Data” problem. Second, the existing, general
purpose software tools commonly used for analyzing, post-processing, and
visualizing geoscience model outputs primarily operate on structured grid data,
providing little or no support for unstructured meshes. The goal of this
project, called Raijin, is to enhance the analysis and visualization tool
landscape by developing community-owned, sustainable, scalable tools that
facilitate operating on unstructured climate and global weather data. Working in
close collaboration with atmospheric modelers the researchers plan to: 1.
develop extensible, scalable, open source tools supporting fundamental analysis
and visualization methods capable of operating directly (without resampling) on
unstructured grid model outputs at global storm resolving resolutions; and 2.
establish an active, vibrant community of user-contributors, committed to
extending our work beyond the scope of this project, and helping ensure the long
term sustainability of the project. The primary environment for this effort will
be the Scientific Python Ecosystem. The researchers will leverage, in
particular, the NSF-supported, open development Xarray and Dask packages, and
the Pangeo community. To better support both of our primary goals, our work will
be conducted under an open development model that encourages participation in
all aspects of the project’s development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.