* 2126031
* Understanding how Making contributes to student self-efficacy and character development across multiple STEM disciplines and student identities
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Erin Henslee, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,442.00

This is a STEM education research capacity building project that incorporates a
study to investigate the effect(s) of Making activities by examining domains of
self-efficacy and character development and a professional development plan to
build the investigator's subject matter expertise in self-efficacy and character
virtue development and qualitative research design and methods. The research
project aims to (1) develop Making activities that represent technical,
conceptual, or dispositional competencies across STEM courses; (2) evaluate the
impact of Making pedagogy on student self-efficacy; and (3) compare Making
pedagogy outcomes across disciplines and student identity groups. The
investigator will concurrently implement a professional development plan to
acquire training and experience crucial to pursuing future work in student self-
efficacy, character development, and interdisciplinary STEM education
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will examine four research
questions: (1) How do Making activities contribute to students’ self-efficacy in
their course, discipline, and character development? (2) What characteristics of
the Making activities contribute most to student self-efficacy in these domains?
(3) How can we better understand the relationship between psychosocial factors,
such as mindset and self-efficacy, in these domains? and (4) Are the
contributions of Making on self-efficacy consistent across disciplines and
underrepresented groups? The research will be framed partly by Bandura’s self-
efficacy theory as part of the larger Social Cognitive Theory and Active
Learning Pedagogies. The investigator will test an instrument that was developed
in a preliminary project to examine self-efficacy in an engineering
instrumentation and controls course that focused on aspects linked to
entrepreneurial mindset: curiosity, creativity, and making connections. The
project will be among the first interdisciplinary examinations of Making
pedagogical practices at the institution in formal course settings. Faculty from
STEM disciplines will be recruited to develop their Making intervention. The
investigator will administer a survey instrument that will provide insights into
disciplinary specific self-efficacy while examining common metrics of character
and virtue development, specifically the character virtue of creativity.
Exploratory factor analysis will be used to identify factors present across
courses, semesters, and modes of Making. Linear mixed models will examine self-
efficacy outcomes across discipline and student groups. The Classroom
Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM (COPUS) will be performed in all of
the courses recruited for the study. The project is expected to produce
materials for faculty development and improvements in instructional pedagogy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the ECR: Building Capacity in
STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR
supports fundamental STEM education research focused on STEM learning and
learning environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM
workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.