* 2126744
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Mouth Guard for Measurements of Physiology and Physical Effects
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Michael Wright, WRIGHTGUARD INNOVATIONS CORPORATION, THE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2022
* USD 275,944.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to minimize short-and long- term effects of
heat exhaustion and heat stroke, impact, and other conditions. The proposed
project advances an oral system capable of monitoring physiology and physical
responses. The initial application of athletics enables development of a tool
that can be used more broadly for health monitoring of military forces and other
users at risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop a durable, adaptable, and wholly
instrumented physiology monitoring mouth guard system that can provide real-time
tracking of a range of biometrics, such as impact force and body temperature.
Intra-oral measurements lend themselves monitoring and assessment, and a mouth
guard can collect precise multi-sensor data at low power, then transmit data
wirelessly. The proposed research and development activities will focus on
development and integration of sensors and wireless communication capabilities
for real-time data on health (e.g., core temperature), movement (e.g.,
acceleration, rotational motion), and impact forces (e.g., high-velocity
collision).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.