* 2126229
* CC* Compute: A Balanced Cluster For Science and Engineering in the Great Lakes Region
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ryo Amano, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM) is building and deploying a modern,
high-performance, high-throughput, and compute-on-demand cluster that balances
the growing but distinct research needs for computing, storage, and memory in
the diverse areas of astronomy/astrophysics, atmospheric sciences, biomedical
sciences, engineering, freshwater sciences, physics, and other fields. This
cluster enables UWM researchers to push the computational frontiers of their
research, create cutting-edge computational tools, and scale their computations
to run on national resources such as XSEDE. The system is also integrated into
the Open Science Grid to enable full utilization of idle computing resources to
enhance local, regional, and national scientific computational capabilities.
Finally, the cluster enhances undergraduate and graduate education and research
by providing superior access to large-scale computing resources for student
research and computationally intensive classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster
has a total system capacity of 1,568 cores, 9 TB of RAM, 504 TB of storage, and
27K GPU cores.The cluster is comprised of a login/storage server, eight compute
nodes, two high-memory nodes, two GPU nodes, a 100 Gbps InfiniBand interconnect,
and a 10 Gbps Ethernet network. The nodes are locally accessible to UWM
researchers, available to external researchers through the Open Science Grid,
and secured with the best practices in cybersecurity and monitoring. The cluster
achieves a balance between large CPU counts, GPU cores, large memory, and
storage to provide a flexible and responsive resource for a diverse group of
researchers to perform their complex computational
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.