* 2126677
* OCE-PRF Uncovering the Genetic Basis of Novel Oxidative Extracellular Electron Transfer Mechanisms in an Electrochemically Active Marine Bacterial Consortium
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joshua Sackett, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,356.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, it was discovered that
some microbes are capable of respiring (‘breathing’) or deriving energy
(‘eating’) from solid-phase minerals located outside the cell. This is
facilitated by extracellular electron transfer (EET): the process by which some
microbes shuttle electrons into and out of their cells from/to solid materials.
EET can be evaluated in a laboratory setting, in which microbes are grown on
electrodes and the generation of biological current – the flow of electrons
to/from the electrode – can be measured. In these experiments, the electrodes
are poised at specific voltages (redox potentials) that function as proxies for
mineral surfaces. Much of our knowledge of EET has been obtained from just a few
model organisms capable of respiratory mineral reduction, in which electrons are
transferred out of the cell onto oxidized solid-phase materials, such as iron
and manganese oxides, which are prevalent in freshwater and marine sediments.
However, little is known about the mechanism or ecological implications of
oxidative EET, the process by which electrons are transferred from reduced
minerals into the cell as a source of energy (‘eating’). Evidence from microbial
community surveys suggests that organisms inhabiting a wide variety of habitats,
including both freshwater and marine environments, may be capable of EET. This
project will expand upon our understanding of the genetic basis of oxidative EET
in microbes isolated from marine sediments grown individually and in a co-
culture consortium. Further, this information will provide insight into the role
of EET in global elemental cycling and may inform alternative clean energy
generation, bioremediation, and wastewater treatment efforts using
electrochemically active organisms. This project will provide educational and
training opportunities to undergraduate students, who will be recruited to aid
with research tasks. Community outreach activities, particularly in underserved
areas of Cincinnati, will be organized to provide middle-school aged children
with hands-on educational opportunities focused around electromicrobiology and
bioenergy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery of extracellular
electron transfer (EET) has important implications for a wide range of
biogeochemically important processes. In marine subsurface sediments, where
microbial biomass is estimated to account for 0.6% of the total biomass on
Earth, lithotrophic metabolisms are difficult to detect since the genetic basis
of oxidative EET remains largely unknown and uncharacterized, and ‘omics’
studies fail to identify genes or proteins involved in this process. This
significant knowledge gap, coupled with direct measurements of microbial
metabolism in the ‘deep’ and ‘dark’ ocean far exceeding the expected models
based on the influx of organic carbon to the system, strongly suggest that the
importance of lithotrophic metabolisms, and the mechanisms by which these
metabolisms operate, has been overlooked and understanding and detection of
these processes in nature is crucial. Furthermore, the ecology of EET in
polymicrobial communities is poorly understood, but a variety of data imply that
diverse microbial communities are important for stable and processive
environmental function. Thus, the overarching goal of this project is to gain
insight into the genetic basis of EET in oxidative processes, and into the
ecological implications of these processes, in two genetically tractable,
electrode-oxidizing lithotrophic marine sediment bacteria in pure culture and in
co-culture. Cutting-edge, targeted high-throughput sequencing techniques will be
used to identify genes putatively involved in oxidative EET and genes that
facilitate interspecies electron transfer in co-cultures. Gene deletion mutants
will be constructed, and mutant strains will be assayed for their capacity for
oxidative EET and interspecies electron transfer. Not only will this allow for a
better understanding of microbial community ecology in marine systems, but this
study will also provide insight into oxidative EET in a wide array of habitats,
including marine and terrestrial subsurface environments and engineered
environments where reduced electron sources are prevalent. From an applied and
biotechnological standpoint, results from this work will enhance the capacity
for evaluating microbe-electrode interactions in genetically tractable
organisms, and may inform industrial applications of electrochemically active
organisms, such as clean energy generation, wastewater treatment, and
electrosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.