* 2126148
* CC* Integration-Large: Prototyping a Secure Distributed Storage Infrastructure for Accelerating Big Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lixia Zhang, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 997,221.00

Big science communities routinely publish and share vast amounts of data.
Scalable, resilient, interoperable and controllable access to published data is
essential to support data Â­intensive science and engineering research. To
facilitate scientific data publication and accessibility, this project aims to
create a secure, resilient, and distributed data storage framework, Hydra, that
enables scientific communities to build a loose federation of data repositories
potentially owned by multiple administrative entities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
taking a data-centric approach and leveraging the Named Data Networking (NDN)
primitives, Hydra provides a generic software framework that allows scientists
to publish datasets easily with data-centric security, automated access control,
and automated data replication. It also facilitates access to data published on
Hydra as well as other existing data repositories. The project team aims to test
Hydra using NSF's FABRIC testbed and utilize its built-in logging capability to
verify and validate its usability, scalability, and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydra enables secure and scalable data access to
alleviate the publication, data access, and security problems currently faced by
a large number of scientific communities. Hydra has the potential to benefit
scientific communities such as climate, meteorology, astrophysics, geology, and
more through streamlined data publication, built-in data authenticity and access
control, improved availability, and reduced network
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The publicly available website for this project is
https://hydra-repo.io. This website maintains pointers to various repositories
that host up-to-date codebase, user documentation, hydra-repo operational data
logs, and publications. This website will be available at least three years
beyond the project's duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.