* 2126741
* SBIR Phase II:  Generating HLB and canker resistant citrus trees using CRISPR/Cas9
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,02/29/2024
* ChanHo Park, Soil Culture Solutions, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,187,868.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to help the US citrus industry mitigate the
devastating effects of two diseases: Huanglongbing (HLB) and citrus canker, both
of which have killed millions of citrus trees in Florida, cost the state
billions in lost revenue, and caused the loss of thousands of jobs. HLB has also
spread to other states including California, Texas, Arizona, and Georgia. This
Phase II project will produce non-GMO, disease-resistant citrus trees using
Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) precision
breeding technology. These new varieties will boost the US citrus industry,
especially in Florida where HLB and canker have led to a 79% production decline.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to combine effector-interactome
and CRISPR to create a commercially valuable new citrus variety for growers.
This project leverages research that identified citrus genes that interact with
bacterial effector proteins causing disease development. The project explores
disruption of the pathogen-citrus interactions by a multiplex CRISPR system and
the associated potential for disease resistance in commercially valuable citrus
varieties. This project will generate citrus plants with edits to promising
target genes and test those new varieties for resistance and other agronomic
traits in greenhouse and field trials. The methods and approaches are multiplex
CRISPR plasmid constructions, and citrus protoplast transformation and
regeneration to create non-transgenic resistant citrus varieties. The testing
protocol calls for grafting to inoculate the new varieties with HLB to confirm
resistance and clonal micropropagation for large-scale experiments and field
trials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.