* 2126461
* Collaborative Research: ISS: GOALI: Transients and Instabilities in Flow Boiling and Condensation Under Microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Boris Khusid, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2025
* USD 322,775.00

Extensive terrestrial studies have been conducted for over seventy years to
develop, test and validate predictive theories for flow boiling and condensation
as they occur in various applications in the petrochemical, pharmaceutical,
biochemical, nuclear, and metallurgical industries. Once a boiling bubble forms
on a heated surface, it soon grows large enough to detach from the nucleation
site and travel with the flowing fluid. Evolution of boiling bubbles is governed
by a delicate balance between the inertial, capillary, drag &amp; lift
hydrodynamic, and buoyancy forces. A small inaccuracy in measuring the bubble
motion can lead to a large uncertainty in the interpretation of experimental
data. Rigorous testing and validation of theories for two-phase flows at the
individual bubble level remains a longstanding challenge. By eliminating strong
buoyancy effects, long duration microgravity experimentation on the
International Space Station's (ISS) Flow Boiling and Condensation Experiment
(FBCE) Hardware offers a unique opportunity to study the role of capillary and
hydrodynamic forces in the bubble growth and coalescence in a flowing fluid and
condensate film. The project team will also participate in educational programs
that use space themes to improve interest and skills in STEM by incorporating
our project work into lesson plans and laboratory work for the benefit of
college and high-school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort
seeks to quantify the interactions between the flow field, temperature field,
and phase distributions in flow boiling and condensation under transient and
unstable conditions in the absence of gravity. Experiments will involve setting
the ISS FBCE operating parameters and then recording the pressure and
temperature responses within the system and imaging the two-phase flow. The
focus is to force transients and instabilities in two-phase flows and to
simulate system performance using numerical techniques. The ultimate goal is to
see if theoretical predictions for boiling and condensation match up with the
measurements in microgravity, and if not, to determine what is missing in the
theories that is required to better match the experimental data. The project
team will inspect the fine details of bubble dynamics using image analysis
techniques, scrutinize the density-wave oscillations in two-phase flows, and
correlate those with temperature and pressure-drop oscillations generated by the
mechanical and thermal components in the system. Machine learning techniques
will use microgravity experimental data to test and validate theoretical
predictions models for phase-change fluid flows and enhance guidelines for the
design of flow boiling and condensation equipment in terrestrial and gravity-
independent applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.