* 2126631
* OCE-PRF Biological methane sinks in the deep ocean: Linking genomic diversity and ecophysiology in syntrophic methane-oxidizing consortia
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Daniel Utter, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2023
* USD 327,228.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes are the workhorses behind
every biogeochemical cycle, where they control the availability of different
nutrients and other compounds. Methane seeps in the deep sea are one such
system, where methane and other gases seep out from marine sediments, and they
account for a significant fraction of the global methane budget. At these seeps,
diverse microbial communities thrive and can metabolize the methane released
from the seafloor. However, little is known about the specific forces and
processes controlling the distribution of these microbes and their ability to
perform their important metabolisms. This project investigates the links between
microbial diversity and the environment in a methane-degrading system, focusing
on consortia of anaerobic methanotrophic archaea (ANME) and sulfate-reducing
bacteria (SRB). The results will clarify the fundamental determinants of
microbial community composition and improve understanding of marine methane
dynamics. The proposed work will engage the broader public in several ways.
Undergraduate students from backgrounds underrepresented in STEM will be
mentored over a summer research project through the Caltech WAVE program. The
researcher will also partner with local elementary, high school, and
undergraduate-serving programs through the Caltech CTL&amp;O office and the
Center for Environmental Microbial Interactions (CEMI) to encourage student
participation in research opportunities related to the proposed work. Through
existing collaborations between the ANSEP program and the Orphan lab, the
researcher will participate in the ANSEP middle school Career Exploration in
Marine Science program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify 1)
how the genomic diversity of ANME/SRB partners is structured across scales
ranging from individual consortia to environmental gradients and 2) the genes
and ecological factors determining ecological outcomes for each partner. Samples
containing ANME/SRB consortia have been previously obtained from methane seep
sediments with a range of biogeochemical parameters. Individual consortia will
be sorted and sequenced to produce high-quality metagenome-assembled genomes
(MAGs) for comparative analysis to reveal the strain-level composition of
individual consortia and the proportion of each strain across different sediment
samples to different methane seeps. Functional profiling of MAGs will then allow
comparative genomic approaches to identify the genes most likely to be critical
to each population’s success in each environment. Predictions will be
experimentally tested by a range of laboratory experiments including nanoscale
secondary ion mass spectroscopy (NanoSIMS), bioorthogonal non-canonical amino
acid tagging (BONCAT), and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The genes
and associated ecophysiology identified here will result in greater
understanding of the factors controlling methane at seep- and basin-scales, and
more broadly, the generalizable principles of how microbes adapt to
heterogeneous environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.