* 2126708
* OCE-PRF Effects of below-ground complexity on seagrass sediment structure and function
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Kara Gadeken, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 229,910.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine sediments control the fate
of carbon in the ocean by either metabolizing (“breaking down”) organic matter
or burying it away. However, sediments are somewhat of a “black box”. Chemistry
and ecology are closely connected in sediments, making it difficult to identify
which processes control metabolism. This problem is even more pronounced in
seagrass beds which are important coastal ecosystems and sites of very high
carbon burial. Seagrass roots create complex structures that exchange nutrients
and oxygen with the surrounding sediment, and burrowing animals can increase
sediment metabolism by mixing and flushing water through sediments. This results
in variability in seagrass sediment metabolism that is currently not well
explained. The proposed research will link differences in seagrass root
structure and animal communities to variation in sediment metabolism rates. The
results of this research will inform strategies to manage and protect seagrass
beds and anticipate changes in their valuable ecosystem services. Undergraduates
from underrepresented groups will be involved in the research and mentored in
their own research projects. The findings of the project will be adapted into a
middle/high school level lesson plan on “Hidden Complexity” to teach students
about the relationships between physical structure, chemistry and ecology in
nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposed research is
to integrate the complex physical structure and geochemical activity of seagrass
roots and rhizomes into a model of the seagrass below-ground environment to
assess which features of that environment affect sediment metabolism. Dense,
complex root mats may oxygenate sediments more and drive higher sediment
metabolism rates, and the 3D structure of the roots may control what fauna can
live there and by extension the metabolism-enhancing activities the fauna
perform. Specific goals of the project are to; (1) determine how the physical-
chemical environment created by seagrass roots and rhizomes influences
macrofaunal functional diversity, (2) assess how variation in the sediment
physical-chemical environment at different locations in an expanding seagrass
bed corresponds to variation in sediment metabolism, and (3) assess how
differences in the sediment physical-chemical environment between seagrass taxa
corresponds to variation in sediment metabolism. Physical structure will be
characterized using CT imaging and geochemical patterns will be measured using
planar optode imaging and targeted microprofiling. The structural and
geochemical data will be integrated together using multiphysics modeling
techniques to simulate geochemical permeance into the sediment around seagrass
roots. These model results will then be compared to measurements of sediment
metabolism from in situ benthic chambers to draw conclusions about the influence
of roots on total sediment oxygenation and faunal behavior. The combination of
non-destructive CT and planar optode imaging into a unified model will provide
valuable information on the 3D structuring of seagrass sediments previously only
described to a limited extent. The developed methodologies will also be of use
to other researchers studying complexity in “opaque” systems, such as marshes,
mangroves, and soils. By describing variation in below-ground structure, this
work will provide a mechanistic understanding of its processes that can then be
connected to larger-scale patterns in seagrass ecosystems, generating valuable
knowledge for seagrass conservation, restoration, and management, and informing
on seagrass susceptibility to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.