* 2126112
* Environmental consequences of expanded recruitment of an ecosystem engineer on a hypoxia-influenced continental shelf
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Clare Reimers, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 680,529.00

Highly productive US West Coast fishery species and marine mammals rely on
benthic invertebrate communities for food. However, these communities are
changing. This project addresses the potential ecological consequences of a new
member to these benthic communities, the ghost shrimp Neotrypaea. In estuaries,
Neotrypaea continuously rework the sediment via their burrowing activities. The
combination of high shrimp abundances and the effects of burrowing mitigate the
impacts of nutrient run-off (natural and human-induced) that can exacerbate low
oxygen conditions. However, Neotrypaea are also considered threats to the oyster
industry because of their sediment-excavating activities. An expansion of their
distribution beyond estuaries may have additional unforeseen consequences for
the Dungeness crab fishery (regionally valued at $33-74M/y) as Neotrypaea are
both competitors with juveniles and prey for larger Dungeness crab. Thus, new
data are needed to determine how offshore benthic communities are being altered
by the recruitment of Neotrypaea into new habitats. This study is comparing
communities with high and low shrimp abundances to understand their impact on
offshore benthic communities. The shrimp’s contributions to oxygen and carbon
cycling are being estimated through field measurements. Benthic community
assessments are quantifying changes to food resources on the seafloor caused by
the presence of these relatively large shrimp. The coastal waters along the
Oregon-Washington shelf are commercially valuable, yet they are also subject to
growing human-related impacts. Sustainable management requires optimizing
extractive, cultural, and recreational activities. The broader impacts of this
research include key data for managers, commercial fisheries’ stakeholders and
oyster growers that inform decisions regarding ocean-use planning and management
of burrowing shrimp. This project is providing research training for three
graduate students and two summer undergraduate students. Curriculum development
for elementary school students is focused on the ecology of soft-bottom benthos.
The ocean sandy/muddy benthos are often unknown to K-12 students on the West
Coast who are usually more familiar with intertidal and kelp forest
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing environmental conditions in shelf waters
along the Oregon and Washington coasts and elsewhere have included increasingly
frequent and severe hypoxia events, ocean acidification, and warming. These
changes have affected biological communities and altered species distributions.
An abundant mid-shelf population of the burrowing ghost shrimp, Neotrypaea sp.
was documented in shelf waters following the Marine Heat Wave of 2015.
Neotrypaea are ecosystem engineers that were previously known to be abundant in
intertidal estuary mudflats with an insignificant presence in the open ocean. In
estuaries Neotrypaea continuously rework the sediment via their burrowing
activities. The shrimp can increase oxygen cycling due to burrow irrigation and
reduce impacts of nutrient loading such as low-oxygen conditions. However,
enhanced benthic oxygen consumption linked to Neotrypaea sp. beds could have the
opposite effect on the shelf by intensifying regional hypoxia. This study is
characterizing the environmental conditions associated with the expanded
distribution of Neotrypaea using a habitat-suitability modeling approach. Model
predictions are being validated through extensive field sampling via box coring
and video lander observations. In addition, the benthic samples are documenting
changes in the benthic invertebrate communities within the Neotrypaea beds and
how this is potentially affecting biological interactions. Analyses of aquatic
eddy covariance and of core incubations in shelf areas with and without abundant
shrimp are providing estimates of the shrimp’s contribution to benthic oxygen
fluxes and organic carbon cycling. These data are being used to quantify the
shrimp’s and their burrows’ effects on the overall productivity of the mid-shelf
benthos relative to reference areas. How Neotrypaea alter seafloor structure and
biogeochemistry need to be characterized to predict the impact of these
ecosystem engineers on the food supply for higher trophic levels and
fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.