* 2126828
* SBIR Phase I:  Compact Power-Stack and Packaged Power Module
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Gary Miller, MAREL POWER SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of modular power sub-systems
(power-stacks) that will enable a new generation of power inverters that are
compact, re-usable, upgradable, resilient against die-supply shortages, and can
be manufactured faster and cheaper. As the world migrates to sources of clean
energy and the further electrification of industry, transportation, and homes,
there is a significant and growing demand for electric power converters.
Widespread adoption of clean energy requires that these converters be simple,
scalable, reliable, and cost-effective. Today's designs are inconvenient both
for end customers and for converter suppliers, as they typically are: complex,
large, heavy, inflexible, expensive, and slow to market. Current inverter are
often made by only a few specialized companies and have high technical barriers
to entry for inexperienced entrants. Additionally, current inverters are locked
to power-die suppliers, making scale-up and re-use challenging. The proposed
project will develop and test a novel approach to enable inverters to meet new
market demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a novel approach to power conversion
problems. High speed operation of high-power semiconductor switches typically
generates significant heat. The novelty of the proposed innovation over current
technologies resides in moving the point of electrical isolation from adjacent
to the power-die to adjacent to the coolant, and massively integrating the power
path, the control path and thermal path into scalable building blocks. An
additional advantage is the ability to develop new manufacturing processes to
build and integrate these blocks reliably. The outcomes of this project may be a
design and manufacturing approach that results in 50% reduced development time
and development cost, 80% lower weight and size, a $100-$200 per unit cost
reduction, increased scalability, and improved resilience to die-supply
shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.