* 2126625
* OCE-PRF: Alkane-based metabolic coupling between phytoplankton and Marine Group II Euryarchaeota
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Eleanor Arrington, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 296,508.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Petroleum hydrocarbons enter the
ocean via natural means—such as seepage from geologic strata—as well as from
anthropogenic sources, such as industrial oil spills associated with extraction,
transportation, and consumption of petroleum. Biogenic hydrocarbons (or cryptic
microbial hydrocarbons) originate from phytoplankton (cyanobacteria and other
microalgae) in the form of long-chain alkanes and alkenes, and are also released
into the ocean in a massive and rapid cycle that greatly exceeds all other
marine petroleum inputs. The lack of biological hydrocarbon accumulation in the
ocean points to their efficient consumption by networks of microorganisms.
However, there is currently a major knowledge gap on the fate of these compounds
in the sunlit ocean where the majority of biogenic hydrocarbon consumption
occurs. This work seeks to lay a scientific foundation for understanding the
production and biodegradation of biogenic hydrocarbons in contrasting oceanic
environments, and to inform how biogenic alkane cycles play a role in
structuring the ocean’s response to devastating marine oil spill
disasters.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specific research proposed here derives
from a combination of recent discoveries, namely the discovery of a pervasive
biological hydrocarbon cycle in the ocean, described above, and the discovery
that Marine Group II (MGII) Euryarchaeota broadly harbor the genomic capacity
for hydrocarbon-degrading enzymatic machinery, specific genes which we directly
observe abundant in nature. To explore the linkage between these observations, I
have developed three testable hypotheses that focus on the uptake of biogenic
alkanes by MGII, the extent to which MGII populations reflect ambient
hydrocarbon supply, and whether MGII is capable of blooming when fed whole
petroleum as substrate. This approach involves field studies conducted in tandem
with a previously funded expedition, leverages access to natural oil seeps in
the Pacific and Gulf of Mexico, ties-in to two local ocean time-series sampling
programs (Plumes and Blooms and San Pedro Ocean Time Series), and incorporates
laboratory studies centered on MGII dynamics in relation to biogenic alkanes.
Toward broader impacts and educational opportunities, this research includes
training of multiple undergraduate students over the entire duration of the
project and the experience will include field work on a previously funded
expedition, laboratory experience with isotopic and microbial techniques, and
participation in a major ocean sciences meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.