* 2126646
* OCE-PRF: Quantifying the Chukchi Sea's role in modulating present and future changes of Pacific waters in the Arctic
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Marion Alberty, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 335,468.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is changing quickly as
the ocean and atmosphere warm and sea ice shrinks. These changes impact the
global climate, regional ecosystems, native communities, and geopolitical and
economic decision-making. The sea ice loss has been greatest in the seas off the
coast of Alaska, the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas. The majority of this loss is due
to warming oceans in the region. Future sea ice loss will depend on how the
Chukchi and Beaufort Seas gain heat. This work aims to create a detailed
accounting of how heat moves through the Chukchi Sea from the Pacific Ocean
before either being released to the atmosphere or entering into the Beaufort
Sea. This work will use state-of-the-art climate models from the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Geophysical Fluid Dynamics
Laboratory (GFDL) to investigate both the current and future pathways of heat
through this region. The scientific impact of this work is to provide important
insights into how the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas have gained and will continue to
gain heat. In addition, this work will also help improve future predictions of
Arctic sea ice and ecosystem conditions, providing important information to the
public, policy makers and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chukchi Sea is a
key marginal sea in the Arctic where warming Pacific Waters are modified through
surface fluxes before subducting below the Beaufort Gyre halocline. While a
critically important region for understanding current climate and predicting
future changes, it's exact role in modulating Pacific Water heat remains
unclear. The scientific goals of this proposal are to determine the fate of
Pacific Water heat using a closed heat budget of the Chukchi Sea, identify the
physical processes that set the balance between heat budget terms and their time
scales of variability, and quantify the role of sea ice in the Chukchi Sea's
heat budget. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) coupled climate model, CM4.0, will
be used to produce closed mean annual and seasonal heat budgets of the Chukchi
Sea. These mean heat budgets will provide a framework for understanding the
temporal variability of individual heat budget terms in past and future
simulations and guide investigation into the physical processes responsible for
modulating terms on a range of time scales, including the influence of Marine
Heat Waves on ocean heat transport through the Bering Strait. Through analysis
of CM4.0â€™s sea ice model, I propose to determine the role of sea ice extent and
advection on the surface flux component of the Chukchi Sea heat budget. The
scientific impact of this work is to provide important insights into how the
Chukchi and Beaufort Seas have gained and will continue to gain heat. In
addition, this work will also help improve future predictions of Arctic sea ice
and ecosystem conditions, providing important information to the public, policy
makers and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.