* 2126607
* OCE-PRF: Variability in connectivity and receptivity of highly dynamic coastal ecosystems: implications for community structure and function in a recipient soft-sediment ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Kyle Emery, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 292,243.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal ecosystems face pressures
from both the land and the sea, including development and sea level rise. It is
important to better understand how coastal ecosystems function so that
predictions can be made about how they may change under future conditions and to
better manage these environments now and in the future. This project will use
long-term data, observational studies, and experiments to learn more about the
relationship between kelp forests and sandy beaches. Specifically, this project
will explore how waves, tides, and sea level control the amount of kelp wrack
that washes ashore, how the condition of kelp forests impacts the ecology of
sandy beaches, and how beach wrack provides habitat and food for animals that
live or find food on beaches. This project will develop new research methods
using drones and start new, long-term monitoring datasets that will contribute
to the conservation of these important coastal ecosystems. Additionally, this
project will support the next generation of marine scientists and increase
diversity in the field by providing research opportunities and mentoring to
under-represented minorities at the undergraduate and high school levels. This
project will also increase community awareness of coastal ecosystems and
conservation issues through Earth Day participation, guest lecturing at public
high schools, and public biology days at the university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-ecosystem connectivity is a critical feature of many
ecosystems and has important implications for food webs, biodiversity, and
ecosystem functioning. Sandy beach ecosystems provide a unique study system for
the role of ecosystem subsidies because of strong natural gradients in the type
and amount of marine wrack inputs and the dependence of multiple trophic levels
on wrack for food and habitat. The proposed research will use a combination of
observations, experiments, and theory to explore how environmental attributes,
including ecosystem connectivity, food web subsidies, and natural variation work
across scales to affect multiple levels of biological organization and ecosystem
functioning. This study will utilize nearshore rocky reefs and sandy beaches to
understand the fate of subsidies under varying environmental conditions,
determine how variability and stability in a donor ecosystem affects the
structure and function of the recipient ecosystem, and to explore how
variability in the type and supply rate of subsidies affects its colonization
and remineralization. This project will also initiate and contribute to long-
term monitoring datasets and utilize unoccupied aerial vehicle-based methodology
and analyses to quantify ecosystem subsidy dynamics and fate across spatial and
temporal scales. Using a natural gradient in kelp forest persistence and a
manipulative field experiment varying subsidy inputs, it will explore how
subsidy variability impacts the biodiversity of multiple sandy beach trophic
groups. Field experiments will be utilized to better constrain the dynamics and
fate of subsidies over time and across a range of oceanographic and beach
conditions. This research will expand understanding of the coupling between kelp
forests and beaches and the fate of detrital kelp export. Results from field
surveys and experiments will also further elucidate the importance of ecosystem
connectivity for critical ecosystem functions from promoting and maintaining
biodiversity to secondary productivity and other aspects of this detrital food
web. This study will have implications for management and conservation of
coastal ecosystems in the face of reduced connectivity, increased variability,
and loss of food resources and habitat associated with global climate change and
other direct anthropogenic pressures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.