* 2126780
* SBIR Phase II:  Adaptive Experiential Learning Platform to Close Learning Gaps in Secondary Algebra
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Anurupa Ganguly, PRISMS OF REALITY INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 944,532.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to close gaps in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) proficiency, improving participation and
sustained achievement, particularly for historically underserved student
populations. Learning science has validated that the mathematical sciences are
processed experientially — through seeing, moving, doing, perceiving — but
current educational solutions generally do not explore this learning modality.
This platform will utilize Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR) and advanced
analytics to scale these best practice pedagogies for both students and
teachers. The aim of this project is to actualize the vision of technology-
assisted STEM learning and operationalize it across the US K-12 system to close
long-standing barriers to access and proficiency at scale. In the wake of the
COVID-19 pandemic, this platform offers a way to rapidly close significant
learning gaps students are facing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to demonstrate how multimodal
and game-driven learning in IVR can be used to enhance math proficiencies and
the ability to transfer mathematical knowledge across contexts. Such abilities
have so far eluded incumbent learning technologies and interventions for math.
In particular, this research may culminate in an experiential solution for
students to learn Algebra efficiently, effectively, and purposefully. Immersed
in relevant real-world contexts, students will use tactile 3D tools, movement,
and a research-based pedagogical framework to build lasting fluency with math
concepts while solving high impact problems. The platform will leverage the
latest advances in data analysis to personalize learning experiences based on
individual behaviors, skills and goals. This solution provides teachers with
real-time data on student thinking so they can closely monitor, identify, and
support priority students while providing timely feedback during critical
cognitive moments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.