* 2126794
* Collaborative Research: NNA Research: Interactions of natural and social systems with climate change, globalization, and infrastructure development in the Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* John Ziker, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 12/31/2026
* USD 726,093.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA areas: Arctic Residents, Data and
Observation, Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seasonality shifts, thawing permafrost, and the occurrence
of extreme weather conditions in the Arctic today have led to cascading effects
in the natural and human worlds. Plants and animals are changing their
seasonality and ranging patterns. These changes put increased pressure on
livelihoods of peoples of the North, whose dependence on the natural world is
tied to weather and seasonality. Globalization, such as the growing presence of
industrial and urban centers, also impacts the Arctic tundra and livelihoods of
Indigenous peoples as never before. By considering impacts of multiple climatic
and socioeconomic drivers on the functioning of an increasingly industrialized
Arctic region, this project crystalizes processes that are or represent
potential threats to the well-being of Arctic communities relying on reindeer
herding economy. This project co-produces knowledge with various stakeholders
representing the Indigenous community, regional government, and industry
sectors. The project links numerous disciplines and provides training
opportunities for the next generation of scientists as well as broader exposure
via an inter-institutional course-forum and public outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how the
natural, social, and built environment systems within a tundra region are linked
in their responses to stressors. This project examines how (1) tall vegetation
impacts animals and reindeer herders, and feedback mechanisms conditioned on
human activities; (2) changing snowpack influences food webs and animal
population dynamics, and alters decision-making by reindeer herders and other
stakeholders; (3) the built environment affects the reindeer herding system, as
well as interactions between industrial workers and indigenous people and
perceptions of the environment by these groups; and (4) reindeer management,
social institutions, and markets for reindeer products affect community
resilience, indigenous traditions and practices, and landscape structure. The
Yamal region of Russia is an ideal site as it spans four of the five Arctic
bioclimatic subzones and has an unprecedented large-scale survey of Yamal in the
late 1980s as well as voluminous Soviet-era anthropological research on reindeer
herders. This project works with regional stakeholders to test hypotheses of
multi-system responses to changes in summer and winter heating, growing presence
of industrial activities, and increasing social complexities in peoples of the
North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.