* 2126230
* Brownian bridges for stochastic problems in chemical sciences
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Doraiswami Ramkrishna, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 294,549.00

Continuous random walks – noisy processes that drift in time – are omnipresent
in a wide range of chemical fields such as in studying polymer molecule
dynamics, identifying chemical reaction pathways, and quantifying heat and mass
transfer processes at the molecular scale. In many practical situations, one is
interested in examining random walks whose paths start and end within specified
sets of values that represent distinct chemical species or molecule
configurations. Such ideas would allow one to quantify rare events in a chemical
process, or conversely, quantify the most probable configurations and reaction
pathways. One promising methodology to systematically generate these random
walks is to make use of a concept known as a stochastic bridge, an idea that has
been used in chemical process control theory to guide noisy processes to safe
and profitable end states. However, this idea has yet to be adapted to
applications in chemistry despite its potential for a wide range of applications
in polymer physics and molecular simulations. This proposal formulates
stochastic bridges for two chemistry applications where traditional techniques
to account for the noise are computationally inefficient. The first application
considers the growth of semi-flexible polymer chains of a specific
configuration, which is useful when studying DNA molecule behavior during
biochemical processes. The second application focuses on efficiently examining
different reaction pathways during crystallization, which is vital for
manufacturing pharmaceuticals. The investigators will disseminate their results
through national conferences and will provide science demonstrations to a local
science museum that will revolve around the theme of random
walks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To computationally study the wide range of
molecular-scale chemical processes with dynamics governed by continuous random
walks, two primary research objectives will be pursued by the research team. The
first objective is to develop highly efficient numerical techniques for
stochastic bridges that condition continuous random walks to end in a specified
region, stay in a given region, or reach one region before another. Currently,
all stochastic bridges are created by solving a Backwards Fokker Planck (BFP)
equation, a partial differential equation (PDE), and then using this solution to
compute an effective drift that guides paths towards the desired region of phase
space. The largest roadblock behind this approach occurs when one cannot readily
compute the PDE solution exactly, which is the case for complex or high
dimensional systems. The first objective will use the asymptotic properties of
the BFP equation to generate an approximate drift that guides random walks to
the correct regions of phase space, and determine ways to correct (i.e., re-
weight) any errors incurred from this approximation. This procedure will create
a computationally efficient method to generate conditioned random walks that can
scale to higher dimensions and can be used for complex molecular systems. The
second objective will employ these ideas in two applications. The first example
will focus on simulating the dynamics of a continuous polymer chain in an
external field - a canonical problem in all polymer field theories. The proposed
research program will demonstrate that a stochastic bridge can effectively
sample polymer conformations that end with a given topology or end with a range
of final energies, the latter of which is important for rare event sampling. The
second example will consider nucleation pathways during crystallization and will
show that a bridge can efficiently sample paths in a free energy landscape that
reach one crystal conformation (polymorph) before others, ultimately making it
possible to control selectivity between crystal product
polymorphs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.