* 2126098
* Impact of Surface-Cloud Coupling on Aerosol-Radiation- Cloud-Interactions for Boundary-layer Clouds over Land and Oceans
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zhanqing Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 838,779.00

The project seeks funding to investigate impacts of heating from the earth’s
surface in transporting tiny particles (also called aerosols) and water vapor in
the atmosphere upward to form clouds and precipitation as well as how aerosols
and clouds affect the surface heating by blocking sunlight or the surface
cooling by blocking the surface heat release---the process is called radiation.
Aerosols are found mostly in the air layer of about 1 mile above the earth
surface, which is also called the planetary boundary layer (PBL). Meteorology
and the atmospheric environment in the PBL are of utmost importance to our
lives. Interactions between aerosols/clouds and the earth’s surface are among
the most uncertain factors in weather forecasting and climate studies. This
project aims to improve understanding of some fundamental processes governing
the interactions over both land and oceans. By examining the development of
boundary-layer clouds and aerosol transport in the context of the surface-cloud
coupling, this project will help advance our understanding of extreme weather,
climate change, and air pollution, which are critical to the society. The
research project will train young scientists to become the future generation of
scientists and educators to understand and resolve problems facing weather
forecasts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching question of the proposed study
is how aerosol-radiation interactions (ARI) and aerosol-cloud interactions (ACI)
are affected by the coupling between clouds and the surface or the PBL for both
continental and marine clouds. Because the coupling between clouds and the
surface is expected to play an important role in regulating ARI and ACI, the
project will sort out the boundary-layer processes dictated by the cloud-PBL-
surface coupling. The study will test the hypotheses: (1) absorbing aerosols
inhibit heat fluxes and the entrainment process of the PBL, suppressing
convection initiation, and the development of continental cumulus clouds; (2)
the fraction of surface cloud condensation nuclei reaching the marine cloud
layer is lower under the decoupled condition, leading to markedly weaker ACI
with weakened impacts on precipitation, whereas the opposite is the case for the
coupled condition. Using comprehensive field observations, this project will
investigate the impacts of ARI and ACI on the vertical distribution of heat
fluxes, entrainment, and convection initiation for different surface-cloud
coupling states. The project will also explore how the decoupling between clouds
and the surface regulates aerosol vertical transport and how cloud micro- and
macro-physical properties respond to the coupling state. These tasks will also
help quantify the magnitudes of both individual and joint effects of ACI and
ARI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.