* 2126278
* RAPID: COVID-19 Scenario Modeling Hub to harness multiple models for long-term projections and decision support
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Katriona Shea, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has been accompanied by many difficult management
decisions for policymakers. This project supports the COVID-19 Scenario Modeling
Hub, which brings together multiple modeling groups from different scientific
backgrounds to help inform decisions about the long-term potential impact of
control measures on SARS-CoV-2 infections, hospitalizations, and deaths. By
considering projections of these outcomes under different assumptions about the
upcoming course of the pandemic, researchers will help inform decisions by
providing timely information to government officials and the public to inform
response efforts in the United States. The need to consider multiple potential
scenarios and involve input from multiple modeling teams is particularly
important when the conditions under which the pandemic will continue are
uncertain. This includes effects on pathogen transmissibility and disease
severity that may accompany novel variants. The environment in which the
pathogen spreads also varies greatly in often unpredictable ways, depending on
human behavior and interventions, such as social distancing and vaccine
administration. Epidemic projections generated from this research will help
inform decisions about how to manage COVID-19 interventions under rapidly
changing circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaches from decision analysis,
expert elicitation, and model aggregation will be used to collect model
projections from multiple groups and then synthesize these results into a
unified ensemble projection. This synthesis will be particularly useful as
timely management decisions need to be made in order to reduce devastating
effects on public health while also accounting for uncertainty and limited
resources. Updates will be provided directly to stakeholders, such as the United
States Centers for Disease Control and the White House COVID-19 Data Team.
Progress will also be shared with other interested parties (e.g., the World
Health Organization). Visualizations of the individual model projections and the
ensemble projection will be made accessible to the public via a web interface
and scientific insights will be made accessible through open access publishing.
The development of this framework will also benefit future endeavors to quickly
establish collaborations across modeling groups to help inform decisions to
limit public health and economic burden in the face of other emerging and
endemic pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.