* 2126656
* SBIR Phase II:  A Modular and Reconfigurable Liquid-handling Toolkit for Laboratory Research
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Luri Middleton, AQUEDUCT FLUIDICS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase (SBIR) Phase II project will
develop a highly customizable, programmable system that allows researchers to
program and run experiments across wide-ranging use cases. Physical- and life-
science R&amp;D personnel frequently conduct repetitive, long-duration
experiments manually with unconnected benchtop equipment. A tailored flexible
automation system would serve multiple industries, including chemicals,
specialty polymers, and biotechnology. The goal is to optimize the flexibility
that researchers need to complete their studies while minimizing the efforts
they expend on equipment and development customization. This system will bring
the benefits of automation found in large-scale manufacturing facilities to the
laboratory benchtop-scale in terms of (1) decoupling researchers’ time from
their productivity and (2) enabling modern programmatic approaches for
collaborating and building directly upon previously programmed protocols. This
will accelerate the research and development enterprise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is the development
and commercialization of a system that makes laboratory protocol automation
accessible to researchers. The system will make automation accessible by
addressing the most difficult elements of system integration (communication
timing, command timing, a user-interface, data persistence) so that researchers
need only focus on the protocols. The system hardware unifies the disparate
types of input and output (I/O) for multiple types of benchtop lab equipment.
The software front-end provides an accessible Python application programming
interface (API) for the network of connected equipment. The software application
handles command queuing and execution for a user’s customized script. Used in
combination, these capabilities result in a flexible network of plug-and-play
laboratory devices that seamlessly communicate with each other to execute
complex protocols. The research objectives are to 1) establish a robust and
scalable software and hardware architecture, and 2) develop, test, and implement
assets to accelerate user adoption. The anticipated result is a system that
enables a researcher to select any combination of benchtop lab equipment from
the device library, configure the equipment into a custom setup, select and
modify template protocols, and execute specialized protocols in a matter of
minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.