* 2126564
* SBIR Phase I:  Sustainable Engineering of Lightweight Aggregate for Concrete Use from Waste Coal Combustion Ash
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Mohammad Balapour, SUSMAX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,755.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is two-folds: (1) increasing the
accessibility of construction lightweight aggregate (LWA) for the concrete
industry and (2) conversion of waste coal combustion ash (W-CCA) to value-added
products (i.e., construction LWA). Yearly, about 100 million tons of coal
combustion ash is produced in the US, of which only about 60% is recycled and
the rest is moved to the landfills. This imposes risks to human health and the
environment. Meanwhile, accessibility of construction LWA that is traditionally
produced from clay, slate, and shale is challenging for the concrete industry in
some states due to the absence of local construction LWA manufacturers.
Therefore, LWA must be imported from elsewhere in the country, increasing (i)
the final cost for the material and (ii) greenhouse gas emission due to
transportation. With an abundance of W-CCA landfills scattered throughout the
US, LWA can be produced from this material near the landfill sites to increase
the local accessibility of construction LWA for the concrete industry. By
implementing this technology, the environmental impact of W-CCA will be reduced,
natural resource consumption will be prevented, CO2 emission associated with
material transportation will be reduced, and users can save money by having
access to local construction LWA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses hurdles associated with
manufacturing a novel porous lightweight aggregate (LWA) produced from waste
coal combustion ash (W-CCA). The melting properties of W-CCA enable the
production of construction LWA with superior engineering properties, including
increased water absorption/desorption capacity and concrete workability relative
to traditional LWA. The deliverables of this project include: (i) development of
a LWA with desired sintering properties during pilot-scale production to assure
technical feasibility of scaling-up the proposed technology, (ii) optimization
of pilot-scale rotary kiln parameters translatable to large-scale production,
(iii) demonstration of the superior engineering properties of LWA for concrete
applications produced at lab pilot-scale, and (iv) demonstration of the non-
leachability of W-CCA based LWA in encapsulated concrete
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.