* 2126965
* NNA Research: Permafrost Grown: Cultivating convergence between farmers and researchers to foster sustainability for intensifying permafrost-agroecosystems
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Mikhail Kanevskiy, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2027
* USD 3,000,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills some of
these aims by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents,
Education, and Resilient Infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alaska, like much
of the Arctic, is considered food insecure as roughly 95% of food is imported.
With the rapid rate of northern latitude climate change, a new agricultural
frontier has emerged in the discontinuous permafrost region. The future of
northern cultivation depends on science and an informed knowledge base for a new
generation of Arctic farmers. For northern agricultural expansion to be
successful and solution-oriented, better understanding of the feedbacks between
cultivation and permafrost is necessary. The Permafrost Grown project brings
together researchers and permafrost-region farmers to better understand the
feedbacks between farming and fertile, yet vulnerable permafrost soils. The
project enhances education and workforce development for early career
researchers, undergraduate and graduate students, and northern region farmers.
Community engagement is fostered through the publication of field guides and
outreach videos, workshops, and exhibits. The Permafrost Grown project fills
important scientific knowledge gaps that will ultimately help improve national
food security and economic resiliency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Permafrost
Grown project accelerates scientific discovery through promoting forward-
thinking convergence among studies of the natural environment (permafrost,
geomorphology, and ecosystems), the built environment (agricultural
infrastructure), and social systems (economic, social, and cultural forces) by
focusing on the interactions between permafrost and cultivation practices. This
highly coupled system is defined as the permafrost-agroecosystem, and the
research focuses on how permafrost type and degradation affect agricultural
infrastructure, how agriculture and cultivation impact different types of
permafrost, and how the knowledge creation between researchers and the Arctic
farming community can develop sustainable, adaptable, and resilient permafrost-
agroecosystems. The project uses a combination of field data collection, remote
sensing techniques, cultivar trials, existing agriculture experience,
interviews, and socio-economic risk modeling to address the following four
objectives: (1) investigating the feedbacks and interactions within the
permafrost-agroecosystems by co-producing knowledge with farmers in Alaska; (2)
understanding and quantifying the legacy effects of permafrost-agroecosystem
interactions over the last 100 to 300 years; (3) evaluating the socio-economic
trade-offs and providing decision tools related to the intensification of
permafrost-agroecosystems in the Arctic; and (4) broadening public and farmer
participation through education and outreach activities focused on advancing
knowledge and fostering opportunities for improved food security in the Arctic.
The Permafrost Grown project advances fundamental knowledge by providing a basis
for predicting the combined impacts of climate change and cultivation on
permafrost-agroecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.