* 2126373
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the tempo of exhumation and relief development to investigate mantle-to-surface connections around the Yellowstone hotspot
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Marissa Tremblay, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 12/31/2024
* USD 54,148.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yellowstone is an area where a
mantle hotspot upwells beneath the continent causing volcanism and the region’s
iconic geothermal features. In addition, the passage of the Yellowstone hotspot
beneath the area is suggested to have caused larger scale landscape change by
uplifting the regional topography. This project will test that theory by
quantifying the erosion history of the Gallatin River, southwest Montana, over
the last 6+ million years. The nature and strength of connections between mantle
dynamics and Earth’s surface remains a broad question within the field of
tectonics, and Yellowstone is an ideal location to study these interactions. The
Gallatin River drains off the Yellowstone Plateau and records how the landscape
has uplifted, eroded, and changed in response to the arrival of the Yellowstone
hotspot in the region. Quantitative estimates of the erosion history on the
timescales of tens of thousands to millions of years will be used to test
hypotheses about which geodynamic processes contributing to topographic uplift.
Results from the project will advance our understanding of the formation of the
landscape in the Yellowstone region, an area that receives millions of visitors
each year. In addition, the project supports a geoscience internship for
underserved high school students from Idaho aimed at increasing the number of
students who attend college and pursue technical degrees. The project also
supports the training of graduate and undergraduate students at three
institutions and helps to advance the careers of two early-career women faculty
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to track the
rates and evolution of incision, exhumation, and topographic relief in the
Gallatin River drainage basin in southwest Montana during the approach and
arrival of the Yellowstone hotspot in the region. The mountainous upper portion
of the drainage is actively exhuming, whereas the lower portion contains a
Miocene to Pleistocene sedimentary record of this exhumation, which is recently
being incised. Bedrock low temperature thermochronology will be combined with
detrital thermochronology from the basin and luminescence dating of river
terraces to create a complete record of the tempo of incision and exhumation
across timescales. These and other geologic observations will be integrated into
a landscape evolution model to test hypotheses for patterns and drivers of
surface uplift in the region. Research components include: 1) Apatite (U-Th)/He
and 4He/3He thermochronology on valley to ridge transects of Cretaceous and
Eocene intrusive rocks in the upper Gallatin drainage and integration with
geologic constraints to quantify Cenozoic exhumation and relief evolution; 2)
Mapping and luminescence dating of terraces along the transect of the Gallatin
River to constrain Quaternary incision and deformation; 3) Detrital apatite
fission track, U-Pb, and luminescence dating from Miocene and Quaternary
sediments in the Gallatin valley to quantify exhumation rates over that
timespan; and 4) Integration of geologic and chronologic data into a numerical
landscape evolution model to test hypotheses and quantify magnitudes of surface
uplift using an inversion scheme. Students ranging from high school to graduate
level will be directly involved in this research, including through a summer
internship program where underprivileged high school students will participate
in research at the University of Idaho.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.