* 2126195
* I-Corps:  Web-based Application for the Treatment of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome (PCOS)
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Phy, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a web-based application to help women manage Polycystic Ovary
Syndrome (PCOS). PCOS is the most common endocrine disorder in women and leads
to higher risk of obesity, heart disease, diabetes, infertility, and cancer.
Women with PCOS are using on average 5 to 6 separate apps to manage their
symptoms. Many of these apps are not based upon research. Women with PCOS note
frustration, confusion and exhaustion trying to determine the right diet and the
right way to manage their health problems. Many do not have access to a
specialist or even a local health care provider with knowledge of PCOS. The goal
is to educate women with PCOS about their unique nutritional and metabolic needs
and to offer “one place” for women with PCOS to go for evidence-based advice
from experts in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of a web-based application for the treatment of Polycystic
Ovary Syndrome (PCOS). Research has shown that PCOS patients may control and
mitigate their symptoms by managing their diet. The unique feature of this diet
is that it is not based on counting caloric intakes, rather it is based on
eliminating certain elements from the diet. The technology is based on a
prospective clinical trial leading to an average weight loss of 19 pounds in 8
weeks without counting calories, carbs or fats. In addition, participants showed
a 50% reduction in fasting insulin and a significant reduction in total
testosterone as well. The goals of the proposed technology are to provide
evidence-based education about PCOS directly to patients, and to relieve some of
the burden on health care providers who care for these patients. The goal is to
provide education and treatment based on 10 years of research conducted by
nutritional and medical experts for the management of
PCOS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.