* 2126468
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Capabilities: Open Polar Radar (OPoRa) Software and Service
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robin Bell, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 343,812.00

Earth’s polar ice sheets play a critical role in shaping sea level over
geological time, yet ice-sheet response to contemporary climate change remains
highly uncertain. Forty years of spaceborne observations reveal the recent
acceleration in mass loss of the ice sheets through measured change in
elevation, gravity, and ice-flow variation. It remains difficult, however, to
use these satellite observations to predict future behavior. Airborne radar
sounder measurements offer the potential to constrain ice-sheet surface dynamics
because they can map out subsurface parameters on an ice-sheet-wide scale.
However, five decades of radar data collection by multiple organizations
deploying a range of systems with data distributed under inconsistent data
policies and processing methods leads to siloed research resulting in lower
efficiency and increased time to science. The Open Polar Radar team accounts for
83% of Antarctica radar sounder data and nearly complete Greenland and polar
sea-ice coverage. These datasets will be placed in common formats and made
available through a common interface with a common set of tools for scientists
via an end-user driven process. Open Polar Radar has the potential to vastly
improve ice-sheet models at multiple scales. This could radically improve the
understanding of the ice-sheet collapse processes, revise the understanding of
past ice-sheet dynamics, and rapidly improve sea-level rise estimates. Improved
sea-level projections will lead to better mitigation strategies that could
reduce the dangers and costs of coastal flooding. The radar software and
services will be common to other sounding radar problems, including planetary
applications. The shared tools will contribute to and leverage the EarthCube
ecosystem leading to solutions to other challenges in data sharing and image
analytics research. Open Polar Radar will contribute to the multidisciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdocs. The principal
investigators will engage scientists with annual training workshops and
hackathons and activities at discipline-specific meetings to gather feedback and
to advance the radar capabilities of the cryospheric sciences community. The
project will also include under-represented communities in summer research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Open Polar Radar project will establish a
software ecosystem to consolidate polar radar software and services and make the
associated datasets standardized and searchable – all in a community driven
process. The target audiences are radioglaciology domain scientists, AI data
scientists, and the software and data engineers behind the various satellite,
airborne, and ground-based ice penetrating radar data collected over ice sheets,
mountain glaciers, sea ice, and planetary icy bodies. Polar radar sounder data
are a largely untapped resource, because the challenges associated with
decentralized processing and manual interpretation prevent advanced applications
of radar data on an ice-sheet-wide scale. This work starts a growing database of
AI training data for geophysical imagery, enabling computer vision techniques
common for traditional photography to a field that has, until very recently,
relied on humans to extract meaning from images of Earth’s subsurface. To enable
sharing data for scientific innovation, this project proposes to: (1) Merge data
processing chains from each institution into one open-source software suite, (2)
Upgrade the current Open Polar Server to meet Findable Accessible Interoperable
and Reusable (FAIR) principles and multi-institution needs as well as
incorporate a number of new data layers, (3) Enhance the quality of all data
products by employing the shared tools for noise removal and image enhancement
driven by science applications and AI model needs, (4) Demonstrate several use
cases including the application of combined AI and physical models for tracking
englacial features to validate results in two regions that are intersections of
multiple data providers’ coverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.