* 2126613
* Seeing the Paths to Change: Evaluating Vision &amp; Change in Undergraduate Biology Education Using a Pathway Modeling Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Mark Graham, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 462,112.00

The field of biology has seen dramatic advances in the past two decades, both in
its research findings and research methodology. Vision and Change (V&amp;C) in
undergraduate biology education began nearly fifteen years ago with
conversations in the biological sciences community about how those advances
challenge the nature of what students ought to learn in their undergraduate
programs of study. This project aims to serve the national interest by
undertaking a holistic evaluation of the Vision and Change “movement” to better
demonstrate how it has contributed (and continues to contribute) to improving
undergraduate biology education. The project will provide an organizing
structure by identifying short-, mid-, and long-term V&amp;C outcomes and
connecting them in a way that affords stakeholders a useful and helpful way to
“see” the successes, opportunities, and future trajectory of V&amp;C. The
project will develop a visual and easy-to-understand theoretical framework known
as a Pathway Model of V&amp;C. The V&amp;C Pathway Model is a visualization that
will be developed through the systematic integration of the literature on
V&amp;C as well as key stakeholder perspectives on what V&amp;C is and how it
works. The project will enable the V&amp;C community to develop a stronger
understanding of what their impact has been on undergraduate biology and what
they should turn their attention to in upcoming years to maximize the
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop a theoretical framework
that will: a) organize and articulate the wide variety of V&amp;C activities and
outcomes; b) consolidate the current body of knowledge about the nature and
extent of V&amp;C's use and impact; and c) structure future directions for
V&amp;C evaluation at both the local and national levels. The model will strive
to 1) identify and address critical assumptions underlying implementation of
V&amp;C; b) optimize plans for implementing V&amp;C at all levels; c) enable
local implementers to strategically focus their evaluation efforts; and d)
provide national-level investigators with an organizing guide for their
research. Once the initial theoretical model is developed, the content of the
model will be validated through the contributions of three V&amp;C stakeholder
cohorts via online focus group sessions. These include early V&amp;C organizers,
current V&amp;C implementers, and organization- and system-level change-makers.
The project will develop a five-year plan for expanding adoption of the V&amp;C
framework. The five-year plan will be distributed alongside the pathway model as
a credible tool for planning, decision-making, and evaluation. Subsequently, the
pathway model will be used in a series of webinars as a training and
brainstorming tool to inform a wider range of stakeholders on the V&amp;C
principles and outcomes. Through focused dissemination efforts this project has
the potential to enrich the national conversation around V&amp;C. This project
is funded by the Division of Undergraduate Education’s Improving Undergraduate
STEM Education Program through its Program Description 21-7412 that calls for
projects that study the impact of the V&amp;C movement in Undergraduate Biology
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.