* 2126095
* RAPID: Detecting and Deterring Harmful Online Speech Directed at American Election Officials
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Ramon Alvarez, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2022
* USD 75,627.00

In the 2020 election cycle, election officials in the United States were
subjected to personal attacks, hate speech, and in some instances physical
threats. Many of these attacks were launched on social media, which may have
amplified their toxicity and reach. This project uses machine learning and
artificial intelligence methods to sift through social media posts to identify
hate speech and online attacks directed at election and other public officials.
The project’s novelties are the use of machine learning and artificial
intelligence methods to find attacks and hate speech directed at public
officials in near real-time, and in the study of the networks where these
attacks and toxic speech originate. The project’s broader significance and
importance are the development of methodologies that detect toxicity in social
media conversations quickly and accurately, when these attacks are directed at
public officials administering elections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
contributes to computer science and social science. Identifying online attacks
directed at specific public officials in streaming social media data is complex.
The first contribution of the project is building tools to determine the domain
of streaming social media data to collect and analyze, as there are thousands of
state, county, and local election officials. The second contribution of this
project is the use of artificial intelligence methods that adaptively seek hate
speech and online attacks, in particular in situations where the adversaries try
to avoid detection by shifting online identities and the language they use.
Substantively, the project contributes to the growing research on social media
misinformation and harassment activities, in particular the identification of
organized efforts to attack and delegitimize the work of election officials.
Finally, the project’s software and code will be available for other researchers
to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.