* 2126404
* Quantum optics with nonlinear organic small molecule enhanced integrated photonics devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Andrea Armani, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2024
* USD 404,374.00

Quantum networking has emerged as a global grand challenge in the field of
quantum information sciences, identified as a critical technology for enabling
general purpose quantum computing and its applications. Therefore, developing
implementable devices to accelerate quantum networking will advance US security
and technical leadership. A flexible quantum network will have the ability to
transmit an arbitrary quantum state with high-fidelity over room- (data-center),
metropolitan- (LAN), continental- and trans-continental-distances. In this
proposal, we provide a path for the development of quantum frequency converters
(QFC’s) for translating the wavelength of photons into and between pre-assigned
channels of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) frequency grid,
while preserving the delicate quantum information that is encoded on those
photons. The planned approach is fully compatible with silicon photonics
technology providing a scalable, robust, manufacturable platform for the
generation of non-classical light and frequency translation of that light. The
training and outreach efforts directly engage the scientific community and the
general public. In collaboration with USC’s Center for Engineering Diversity,
two undergraduate student researchers will be hosted in the PI and Co-PI’s
laboratories, and a free online Quantum Optics conference will be
organized.&lt;br/&gt;The past decades have witnessed a rapid increase in the
performance of on-chip integrated photonic devices for studying nonlinear and
quantum phenomena. These devices have enabled a wide range of discoveries and
are serving as critical roles in our optical communications network. However, as
we look to shift from classical to quantum networking, we must be mindful to
engineer components that enable quantum communications and yet are compatible
with the large existing infrastructure already in place for classical optical
communications. An important capability in quantum networking is making quantum
information, stored on optical qubits, compatible with the modern
telecommunications infrastructure, which includes mapping quantum channels to
the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) frequency grid. One approach
being explored relies on frequency conversion using integrated optical resonant
cavities. While the concept is theoretically robust, in practice, there are
several hurdles related to low conversion efficiencies and optical power
requirements that must be solved. While it is possible to overcome the power
requirements by using a cavity with a long photon lifetime, the conversion
efficiency is intrinsic to the cavity material. In the present work, we will
explore a new type of hybrid optical cavity comprised of a self-assembled
monolayer of nonlinear optical organic materials on a silicon oxynitride
microring. Organic materials possess 1,000-100,000x higher Non-Linear Optic
(NLO) coefficients than conventional optical materials; thus, the proposed
hybrid system could provide a transformative solution to the current challenge.
The key quantum capability of the microresonators to be validated is coherent
wavelength translation of an optical state while preserving the quantum
coherence of observables on which quantum information is encoded. The Si device
architecture that will be studied is compatible with existing infrastructure;
thus, this work will pave the way for establishing the quantum network using the
existing ITU grid. Undergraduate and graduate students will be directly engaged
in all aspects of the research, and all findings will be disseminated using
scholarly publications as well as social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.