* 2126723
* Supporting Active Learning in Introductory STEM Courses with Extended Reality
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Wei Wu, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 645,054.00

California has the largest STEM workforce in the country and anticipates rapid
growth in STEM careers. Despite its size and growth capacity, minority groups,
especially Latinx workers, represent less than 15% of the California STEM
workforce while making up nearly 40% of the working-age population. This
imbalance presents a key opportunity which this project seeks to address.
Supported by the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), California State University-Fresno, San Jose State
University, Sonoma State University, and Fresno City College are collaborating
to provide training for 30 STEM educators to integrate active learning into
introductory STEM courses in chemistry, physics, civil engineering, and
construction management. In particular, the project team will explore the use of
extended reality (XR), which represents three technologies (virtual reality,
augmented reality, and mixed reality) that will enable students to engage with
course materials in ways that cannot be accomplished in a traditional classroom
setting. Building from prior NSF-funded work that resulted in positive outcomes
for students using XR in early STEM courses, the project will impact more than
15,000 undergraduates and will establish a community of practice centered on XR-
enhanced active learning. The project research plan will generate new knowledge
about faculty implementation of XR technology, techniques for implementing XR
effectively, and the impact of these approaches on student learning outcomes.
The involvement of the California State University (CSU) Chancellorâ€™s office
will support institutional and community transformation, and the collaboration
with Fresno City College. This is part of a more extensive relationship which
introduces a new connection between the CSU system and the California Community
College (CCC) system, which serves more than 2 million students annually
throughout its 116 colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
design, implement, and evaluate XR-supported active learning strategies to
narrow achievement gaps and promote systemic transformation at the collaborating
institutions to achieve equitable STEM education. Using a mixed-method research
design, the project team will investigate three research questions. 1) What are
the barriers and pathways for STEM instructors across disciplines when adopting
XR in active learning for introductory courses? 2) What factors and strategies
influence XR's effectiveness for achieving learning outcomes in introductory
STEM courses? and 3) What are the pedagogical impacts of XR on learning and
achievement gaps for minority students whose participation in STEM fields of
study lags behind their representation in the general population? The project
team will collaborate closely with key partners and external advisory board
members to pursue four goals. First is to develop a community of practice to
support STEM faculty efforts to adopt and sustain XR-enhanced, student-centered
active learning. Second is to create an online repository of XR open educational
resources. Third is to conduct in-class trials and pilots to compare the
effectiveness and pedagogical impacts of different types of XR technologies and
active learning experiences. Fourth is to lead faculty professional development
to engage a broader education community in developing and disseminating
pedagogical uses of XR in STEM. The findings of this project will ultimately
advance the understanding of a systemic, inclusive approach that leverages XR
technologies for active learning in STEM to meet the diverse needs of a diverse
population of students. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also
draw from these approaches to generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.