* 2126315
* EarthCube Capabilities: OpenMindat - Open Access and Interoperable Mineralogy Data to Broaden Community Access and Advance Geoscience Research
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiaogang Ma, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 792,475.00

Mindat is a community-driven, free-access, online database that records
information about all known mineral species and their worldwide distribution.
Although all the data on the Mindat website are free for users to browse, the
machine interface for data access and download has never been fully established.
The OpenMindat project will, for the first time, allow automated querying and
downloads from this data resource for academic research. This effort includes
technical developments to establish open data access, research and training
activities to advance data curation and data-driven geoscience discovery, and
outreach activities to EarthCube and the broad geoscience communities. Opening
the Mindat data for free academic use will encourage a new generation of
research in geosciences as well as other disciplines. Mindat is already an
important resource for geoscience education. Currently, it receives more than
3.5 million page views every month. These new data access tools in OpenMindat
will make it easier for educational access to mineralogical data in the
classroom, the laboratory, and even from home, allowing students greater
opportunities to experiment with mineralogical data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OpenMindat project will involve moving all appropriate
Mindat data into an open science compatible license, building and operating a
web-based platform for both automated queries and bulk data downloads, preparing
all documentation on the use of this data, and building a suite of developer
tools including packages in Python and R for direct data access from workflow
platforms. OpenMindat will also deploy metadata standards to establish
connections to EarthCube GeoCODES. The project will create several training
positions and organize a list of engagement and outreach activities, with
priorities given to underrepresented groups. Computational and statistical work
on large mineralogy datasets has driven the recent studies in Mineral Evolution
and Mineral Ecology of which the Mindat data was a critical component.
OpenMindat will democratize this research allowing anyone wishing to utilize the
Mindat data for research to do so immediately. Using machine learning techniques
in combination with the OpenMindat dataset raises the possibility of finding
previously unseen patterns in the mineralogical diversity on the Earth and
beyond, such as, comparing the mineral assemblages and localities on Earth with
other planets. This project will illustrate the importance of collecting and
providing certain information when analyzing mineral samples and thus cause a
cultural shift in mineralogical data collection and sharing. Likewise, the
studies in this project will be an example for how rapidly scientific discovery
can move forward when the data are in place and coupled with advanced analytical
techniques and data science expertise. The service and tools that will be
developed as part of OpenMindat will themselves be open-sourced and potentially
of benefit to other projects wishing to provide access to their
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.