* 2126583
* OCE-PRF A transferable modeling approach to predict species distributions under changing conditions across multiple life stages
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Joshua Cullen, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 273,561.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the distributions of
species is fundamental to ecology, especially within the marine environment
where biotic and abiotic variables are often dynamic over space and time.
Ecological models have been used to make inferences on species-environment
relationships in addition to predicting past and future patterns of species
distributions. However, these models are typically developed for a single
location, time period, spatial scale, or species life stage, resulting in poor
predictive accuracy beyond the study domain. This project will provide a new
transferable modeling approach that is applicable to a wide range of species,
which will be used to test predictions of current and future distributions of
green turtles (Chelonia mydas) in the Gulf of Mexico, Brazil, and Qatar. Since
there is a lack of information on how marine turtles in general will respond to
climate change impacts, these results will provide a crucial evaluation of
projected range shifts that could be used by both conservationists and decision
makers. This project will foster the integration of research and education
through mentoring undergraduate students that identify as underrepresented
minorities, teaching marine ecology and conservation at Florida State
University, hosting workshops on the analysis of animal movement data, as well
as hosting public outreach events. These efforts to disseminate knowledge and
results beyond traditional means within the scientific community will be used to
engage future scientists and the general public on pressing ecological topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall aim of this project is to develop a
transferable modeling approach that can provide accurate and precise estimates
of species distributions under changing conditions. This study addresses some of
the challenges of model transferability through three hypotheses: 1) a model
informed by biological processes and physiological constraints will exhibit
greater transferability than those that do not; 2) the analysis of environmental
variables at the scale of species perception will result in greater model
transferability; 3) a model that accounts for differences among life stages will
result in greater model transferability. These hypotheses will be tested using a
large dataset of green turtle occurrences at three distant locations (Gulf of
Mexico, Brazil, Qatar) with a flexible Bayesian species distribution model. The
use of independent datasets (from Brazil and Qatar) to validate the species
distribution model (developed on data from the Gulf of Mexico) provides a unique
opportunity to critically evaluate the spatial transferability of the model. The
findings from this proposed work will provide a roadmap for the further
development of transferable ecological models to predict biodiversity, disease
outbreaks, and risks of biological invasions across global regions and possibly
under future climate change impacts. Elucidating the importance of biological
mechanisms, scale, and life stage differences to ecological modeling is
transformative because these factors have been largely untested with regard to
model transferability. Since predictions remain a major frontier in ecology,
products of this work will be of broad interest to a diverse group of
scientists, such as marine ecologists, biological oceanographers, fisheries
scientists, and conservationists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.