* 2126413
* EarthCube Capabilities: CloudDrift: a platform for accelerating research with Lagrangian climate data
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shane Elipot, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 476,876.00

The DriftCloud project aims at propelling forward the discovery and use of
unique oceanic Lagrangian observational data principally gathered by freely
drifting buoys. The tools developed will utilize existing cyberinfrastructures
and established open source and open access protocols in order to bring analyses
of ocean observational and numerical heterogeneously distributed geospatial data
at the fingertips of users with level of proficiency ranging from high school
students to statistical experts. This will potentially contribute to more
equitable access to data and computing resources for a broad spectrum of
specific and interdisciplinary applications ranging from marine plastics
transport to the impact of surface gravity waves on satellite sea surface
temperature calibrations. A wide and diverse set of users will be able to access
these notebooks which will be bound to openly-accessible cloud-based executable
environments deployed on existing infrastructures thanks to collaborations with
the EarthCube and other cognizant communities. This project will support an
early-career scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The DriftCloud project will
facilitate and accelerate the production and analysis of Lagrangian datasets by
using the climate relevant Lagrangian data of sea surface current, sea surface
temperature, and sea level pressure from the drifting buoys of the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administrationâ€™s Global Drifter Program as a working
framework. The project will generate new add-on datasets and a suite of modular
and open source conversion tools to render Lagrangian datasets ready for
analyses and optimized for cloud computing environments. An additional suite of
open source tools will be developed for rapid and efficient visualizations and
analyses of any Lagrangian data. The utilization of both suites of software
tools will be fostered by creating pedagogical demonstration Jupyter Notebooks
using the open source python language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.