* 2126858
* SBIR Phase I:  Microparticle reagents for clonal selection of producer cell lines
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Joseph de Rutte, PARTILLION BIOSCIENCE CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,916.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of an easily distributed and
adopted approach to find cells used to manufacture antibodies. Many of the
antibodies used today for diagnostics and therapies are produced using cell
lines. Selection of the cells that produce the most antibodies in a stable
manner is required to bring new diagnostic and therapeutic products to market
faster and with lower costs. However, the tools and approaches used to identify
and pick cells today are extremely slow and/or expensive, often requiring costly
custom equipment. The goal of this project is to develop a product that enables
a user to identify individual cells that produce the most antibodies with
equipment already present in their labs. This would enable more small
pharmaceutical companies, biotechnology companies, and research labs to develop
stable cell lines for antibody production and could have immediate impact in
enabling distributed development and production of antibodies during pandemics,
such as COVID-19.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a reagent-based workflow to perform
single-cell antibody secretion assays that is user-friendly and easily
distributed. The ability to analyze and select out single cells based on
secretions is critical for the rapid development of monoclonal antibody
therapies. A key challenge is the screening of producer cell lines for
productivity, which can take months and require significant time and effort.
Existing systems that try and address this problem require specialized expertise
or commercial equipment that is not widely available, so the number of cells
that can be analyzed remains small. This project focuses on developing a
microparticle, reagent-based product that can isolate single cells, concentrate
and analyze their secreted products, and sort individual cells based on
secretions in high-throughput using standard flow cytometers. The key technical
objectives of this project are to: develop microparticle product formulations
optimal for standard cells used to produce high quantities of antibodies,
compare the system performance to current approaches, and use the system to
create a cell line producing high amounts of a potential SARS-CoV-2
therapeutic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.