* 2126387
* MIM: Elucidating the Rules of Cooperation and Resiliency in Microbial Communities through Stochastic Graph Grammars
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,989,933.00

Microbial communities in aquatic ecosystems are central to maintaining the
resiliency of these important environments. These dense microbial populations
are rich in species diversity and their genomes are dynamic because of processes
such as gene duplication and horizontal gene transfer. Despite extensive genomic
flux due to these evolutionary processes, microbial communities cooperate and
maintain stable interactions and are resilient to environmental perturbations.
This project aims to develop a suite of computational tools for deciphering the
rules that govern cooperation and resiliency in hot spring microbial mats, or
biofilms, from Yellowstone Park. These well-studied environments are ideal for
examining how critical environmental parameters such as temperature, light and
nutrients influence the diversity, abundance, and evolution of microbial
populations. Novel computational tools will be developed to identify rules that
govern relevant biological processes. Understanding how microbiomes evolve and
adapt, especially with respect to the environment and to perturbations is
crucial to understand many aspects of life. Thus, the results obtained from this
project will have a significant impact on biology, health, conservation efforts,
and animal and plant management. Furthermore, this research will support the
interdisciplinary development of a diverse cohort of PhD and undergraduate
students at Rice University and Carnegie Institution for Science located on the
Stanford University campus. This project will also support the development of a
summer REU focused on bioinformatics, ecology, evolution, and microbiology, and
will also include summer training opportunities for graduate students with
collaborators at the Pasteur Institute in Paris, France. This collaborative,
multidisciplinary project presents an innovative plan for combining education
and outreach activities to achieve real and lasting impact. All software
developed will be made available on open-source code repositories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to understand how
microbiomes evolve and adapt, especially with respect to the environment and to
perturbations. To meet these goals, the team of researchers will introduce
methodological advances at the intersection of graph theory, formal languages,
and machine learning to identify rules governing gene duplication and horizontal
gene transfer from metagenomic sequencing data. In Aim 1, the project will
construct and correlate species abundance networks with genome exchange networks
through genome assembly graphs. In Aim 2, the project will produce a stochastic
graph grammar framework for modeling network evolution over time, as well as
unveil new rules with deep graph generators. In Aim 3, genome-level simulations
will be combined with the genomic events identified in Aims 1 and 2 to assess
the evolutionary benefits of these biological processes and their associated
rates. The final project aim will focus on characterizing cooperation and
resiliency through the study of graph grammars and network analysis techniques.
The open-source computational methods developed across all four project aims
will be evaluated on four distinct metagenomic datasets, including both
environmental and host-associated microbiomes. Finally, a wide variety of
metagenomic datasets will be used to show generalizability of the computational
approaches to host-associated microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.