* 2126785
* Collaborative Research: Microscopic mechanisms and kinetics of laser-induced phase explosion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leonid Zhigilei, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,000.00

“Explosive boiling” or “phase explosion” occurs when a massive number of vapor
bubbles nucleate in a superheated liquid. This phenomenon is relatively common
and plays a key role in numerous practical applications including the generation
of nanoparticles and nanomaterials, surface cleaning, and nano/microfabrication.
Despite decades of extensive experimental and theoretical studies, a clear
understanding of the conditions and microscopic mechanisms of the phase
explosion is still lacking. The objective of the research project is to
understand the mechanisms and kinetics of the explosive phase decomposition in a
metastable liquid superheated up to the limit of its thermodynamic stability. A
combination of large-scale atomistic simulations with state-of-the-art, time-
resolved probing of the transient dynamics of the phase explosion will be used
to track all stages of the process. The dependence of the dynamics of the phase
explosion on the environment, geometry of the target, and heating rate will be
investigated to gain further insights into the fundamental mechanisms that would
enable control over the process for practical applications. This project will
unveil the fundamental mechanisms of explosive vaporization, whose
quantification has long been elusive, and will foster breakthroughs in laser
processing and manufacturing. Accurate and verified predictions of laser
ablation dynamics will contribute to the advancement of material processing and
micro/nanofabrication, as well as the generation of nanostructures with tailored
size, composition, and properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insights into the
microscopic mechanisms and kinetics of the phase explosion will be obtained
through the close integration of experimental and computational studies.
Simulations and experiments performed for the same material systems, confinement
conditions, and laser parameters will maximize the opportunities for reliable
interpretation of experimental observations and direct verification of the
computational predictions. The explosive vaporization of metals and alloys in
the bulk and thin film forms as well as metal nanowires will be studied under
various ambient background pressure conditions and under strong confinement by
capping layers. The temporal evolution of the phase explosion will be studied by
pump-probe optical interrogation, time-resolved imaging, fast pyrometry and
temperature measurement using ultrathin embedded sensors. Quantitative dynamic
data on the transient temperature variation, optical scattering distributions,
speed and internal temperature of ejected nanoparticles will be directly related
to the predictions of large-scale atomistic simulations. Ex situ analysis of the
surface morphology, crystallinity, and defect structures, as well as the size
distribution of produced nanoparticles will also be related to the computational
predictions. These studies will provide a complete multiscale picture connecting
the initial explosive phase transformation to the implications for practically
relevant outcomes, including surface nanostructuring and nanoparticle
generation. The fundamentals of the thermal energy partitioning, transport and
transformations will be analyzed through a combination of direct experimental
probing, modeling of the residual heat in the irradiated targets and the thermal
emission of the ablation plume.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.