* 2126184
* SBIR Phase I:  Automated processing of images and video for wildlife conservation
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Brogan Morton, WILDLIFE IMAGING SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,993.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to revolutionize wildlife field work and research. Many wildlife
professionals already understand the potential for using video as a sensor, but
without commercial software to turn video into data, its vast benefits remain
untapped. It is important to monitor environmental effects and the impact of
urban growth; billions of dollars are spent annually understanding how
construction and infrastructure projects are impacting species and habitats. The
state of practice is to send technicians into the field for observation. In many
situations using a camera system to monitoring for wildlife is not only safer
and more effective, but also much less expensive that using human labor. This
project will reduce the cost, decrease the timeline, and yield better outcomes
for these important conservation efforts, allowing the existing biodiversity to
be preserved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop a web-based software-as-a-service to detect,
track, and classify wildlife from video and images captured in the field. There
is substantial potential for video to provide better data to help wildlife
biologists perform their work, but the main barrier is the complexity. Using
video systems to study wildlife requires advanced multidisciplinary knowledge;
appropriate camera technology, recording methods, advanced video processing
techniques and machine learning algorithms. There are currently no commercial-
off-the-shelf hardware or software packages available for biologists. This
project will reduce the complexity of obtaining quantitative data from video by
developing commercial-off-the-shelf equipment packages, automated video
processing software, and the advisory services needed to make this
transformational technology more accessible to biologists in the field. The
video processing needed is the focus of the research; the goal is the create
algorithms that automate object detection and classification from the video and
allow non-experts to create an accurate machine learning classifier with minimal
labeling requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.