* 2126900
* STTR Phase I:  Edge-Based Oil Condition Monitoring System for Heavy Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Joe James, ZSENSE SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will develop an
intelligent onsite oil condition monitoring system to quickly analyze the health
of high-speed rotating and reciprocating machinery. Oil condition monitoring is
a new and high-growth market with revenues of $505 million in 2017 and expected
growth to $850 million by 2023. The market for onsite oil monitoring is expected
to increase from $193 million to $332 million during the same time frame. This
project develops a benchtop oil monitoring minimum viable system for the
transportation and heavy equipment industry. The system offers not only the
current health status of a machine but also prognosis of wear trends and life
cycle. The system informs a prescriptive and optimized maintenance strategy for
each piece of machinery, extending its life and reliability and preventing
catastrophic machine failures. It will lead to significant cost, energy, and
time savings with sustainability benefits.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project develops a disruptive onsite oil condition
system based on wear debris sensing arrays and artificial intelligence-based oil
property sensing technology. The major innovations include: 1) a unique
inductive pulse sensing array that can detect fine wear debris, 2) microfluidic
signal multiplexing technologies to detect fine wear debris, 3) unique big data
analysis and signal multiplexing that allow fast data processing to obtain real
time health status, and 4) a novel artificial intelligence technique, namely a
General Regression Neural Network (GRNN) approach that allows acquiring robust,
reliable measurements of many properties rapidly with sensors’ cross
sensitivities, but significantly reduces the network’s training time. As a
result, the sensing system provides comprehensive, real-time information about
oil conditions and the machine health status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.