* 2126227
* Advanced Cyberinfrastructure for Teaching and Research at Rowan University and the Southern New Jersey Region
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* David Klassen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,964.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last several years, Rowan
University has seen an increase in computational research, teaching, and
innovation activities. Rowan faces a challenge in supporting the diverse and
growing computational needs of its faculty, while also developing a plan for
optimal investment in institutional infrastructure. To this end, Rowan
University is planning for a cyberinfrastructure that can sustainably support
this increased activity. The work generates institutional knowledge that will
allow Rowan, its community college affiliates &amp; partners, and other regional
universities to reach the full potential of its faculty and students in
conducting larger scale transformative work and increase their competitiveness
in data-driven computational research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CC* Planning
Grant addresses the challenge of building cyberinfrastructure (CI). Early
analysis on the gap between the needs of the university (and Southern New Jersey
region) and the barriers for accessing state of the art cyberinfrastructure
revealed the following needs: assessment and self-study to understand
researchers needs, planning at the institutional level for financing CI needs,
and student engagement and training related to computational research &amp;
experimentation. The project focuses on strategic planning in order to develop a
coordinated approach that informs the communities in Southern New Jersey of the
latest CI developments, assesses the stakeholders’ needs and Rowan’s capacity to
support those needs, builds partnerships with other institutions for sustainable
regional based computing, and develops a robust plan that will enable Rowan to
build shared and accessible CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.