* 2126187
* SBIR Phase I:  A Drop-in Sustainable Cathode Replacement that can Allow Sub-$100/kWh Li-ion Battery Packs with Improved Safety and Performance
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Benjamin Lesel, NANODIAN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,976.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project addresses the high cost and poor safety of Lithium-ion
batteries in new energy applications. Low-cost and safe batteries will improve
economic viability for solar energy storage, which is critical to increasing
renewables penetration to above 30% of total power generation. This project
advances a battery material to provide lower cost, higher safety and improved
cyclability compared to currently used materials. This can support new batteries
in applications including electric vehicles, grid-tied and solar storage, and
consumer power tools, among others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR project
proposes a novel nanostructured LiMn2O4 cathode chemistry (ND-LMO) that offers
~30% lower $/kWh cost compared to incumbent nickel managanese cobalt oxides
(NMC) materials. Furthermore, it will have iimproved performance parameters,
such as cycle life, a safer heat generation profile, and a 10% greater amp-hour
capacity between full state of charge and maximum depth of discharge. Many of
these improvements stem from the “intercalation-pseudocapacitive” properties of
finely nanostructured electrode materials. Technical challenges, such as
inactive and deactivating surfaces, synthetic costs, and others, must be
addressed for these systems to be commercially viable. The project’s proposed
composition and methods used can be applied to other material
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.