* 2126047
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Environmental change and impacts on ancient human colonization of Peary Land, northernmost Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Nicholas Balascio, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2025
* USD 337,882.00

This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (UKRI/NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each Agency funds
the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with its own
investigators and component of the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic communities
have a long history of endurance in extreme climates. How people responded to
environmental change in the past is of direct relevance today and will offer
those who live in the North a window into a time when ancient people found ways
to endure in the most difficult circumstances. The research will document how
periods of human settlement and abandonment in northern Greenland were related
to climate fluctuations over the past 4500 years. In this remote region, climate
change played a critical role in the survival of people by affecting vegetation
and the abundance of grazing animals, as well as the presence of marine mammals
on the coast. When climate was favorable, resources were abundant and the
vulnerability of humans to environmental change was low. During times of less
favorable climate, resources became more limited and sensitivity to fluctuations
in climate increased. When conditions became sufficiently inhospitable to
humans, exceeding the ability of people to adapt, they left the area for more
favorable locations. The project will assess the conditions under which early
people were able to adapt and survive, as well as conditions that may have led
them to abandon the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine
interactions among physical, biological, and human systems in an extreme, High
Arctic environment. The project will produce high resolution, quantitative
records of climate and vegetation change from lake sediments, obtained from
locations adjacent to prehistoric settlements. Measurements of the inorganic
content, lipid biomarkers, compound specific stable isotopes, pollen and spores,
chironomids, diatoms, and sedimentary ancient DNA will shed light on
paleoclimate patterns in the region. An archaeological survey using fixed-wing
drones will be conducted to inventory archaeological sites in the region, and
the project will model past coastal sea-ice extent under different climatic
conditions. Several students and early career researchers will be trained
throughout the project, and outreach to communities in Greenland as well as
students in the United States will communicate research outcomes to a wide
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.