* 2126144
* RESEARCH-PGR: Role of cytokinin in regulating shoot apical meristem function in rice
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Joseph Kieber, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,400,000.00

Plant leaves and flowers are derived from stem cell tissues called meristems.
The regulation of meristem development and activity is central to understanding
plant growth and development, and impacts many agronomically important traits
such as plant architecture, biomass, and grain yield. The goal of this project
is to determine how the plant hormone cytokinin regulates meristem function in
rice, an important crop and a model system for understanding growth and
development of other cereals. For this purpose, the recently developed
methodologies for single cell sequencing will be employed. Gene expression in
individual cells of the shoot meristem and of the reproductive inflorescence
meristem will be examined to uncover cellular mechanisms that regulate the
development of leaves, flowers, and grain. In addition, the packaging of the
genome will be characterized to identify DNA elements that likely play a role in
controlling when, where, and to what degree the genes are expressed in specific
cells. Alternations in meristem development, brought about by disrupting
cytokinin function will reveal how this hormone orchestrates proper rice
development at the cellular level. These studies will illuminate the mechanisms
underlying the development of vegetative and inflorescence architectures, with
an important emphasis on cytokinin’s role in these processes. In broader
context, this work has the potential to realize increased yields in rice and
other agriculturally important cereal species. The proposed research will
enhance the infrastructure of research and education by providing student
training and the development of programs aimed at fostering science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The phytohormone cytokinin plays key roles in
regulating the activities of the vegetative shoot apical meristem (SAM) and
reproductive inflorescence meristem (IM) in rice. Here, the role of cytokinin in
regulating the rice SAM and IM will be examined at the single cell and single
nucleus levels using an integrative array of genetic, molecular, and single-cell
‘-omic’ approaches. First, transcript abundance and chromatin accessibility in
individual SAM/IM cells will be characterized using single-cell transcriptomics
coupled with single-nucleus chromatin profiling. This will provide foundational
understanding of the regulatory circuits in the SAM and IM. Marker genes and
regions of open chromatin within subdomains of the SAM/IM will be correlated to
polymorphisms identified in GWAS panels for panicle traits in rice, potentially
identifying important genomic regulatory regions for panicle architecture.
Second, cytokinin signaling will be genetically perturbed using cytokinin
receptor mutants to reveal how this regulatory network influences cell types,
their distribution and developmental trajectories, and the activity of genes and
regulatory elements within the cell clusters. Third, because type-B Response
Regulator (RR) transcription factors control the initial transcriptional output
from cytokinin, the direct targets of type-B RRs will be identified by ChIP-seq.
Integrating these datasets will identify key targets of cytokinin signaling in
specific cells and types of the SAM/IM, a subset of which will then be examined
by genetic analysis. Collectively, the proposed studies will result in
complementary genome-level datasets that will identify key mediators of
cytokinin in regulating meristem activity, potentially revealing emergent
properties of meristem regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded
by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems and the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.