* 2126815
* Toward a Multi-Proxy Database of Pleistocene Water Isotope Records; Differentiating Precipitation Isotopic Composition from Precipitation Amount in the Asian Monsoon System
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Steven Clemens, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 289,259.00

Monsoon rainfall is critical to billions of people living within South Asia and
East Asia. It is thus important to understand monsoon variability and how and
why monsoons may change over time. This project will analyze a core from the
Indian Ocean continental shelf to produce records of the monsoons over the last
640,000 years. The records will include changes in winds, rainfall, and river
runoff. These records will be compared with records of known changes in
temperature, greenhouse gases, and other potential monsoon forcing mechanisms.
That comparison will help to understand the influence of climate on monsoon
variability. Those records will also provide real-world tests for the numerical
climate models used to predict future climate change. The project will support a
woman graduate student. It also will provide research experiences for
undergraduates recruited from groups typically underrepresented in the earth
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two parameters are key to understanding climate
change - temperature and rainfall. Temperature reconstructions are now
quantitative, accomplished by a number of independent means, and directly
comparable to climate simulations. Rainfall is a difficult parameter to simulate
even in the most advanced climate models because, for example, most rainfall
happens at spatial scales far smaller than models can accommodate now and for
the foreseeable future. Reconstructing rainfall in the past is similarly
difficult and, at this point, qualitative. This research is part of a longer-
term objective that focuses on resolving a key shortcoming in reconstructing
rainfall, the capacity to differentiate changes in the isotopic composition of
rainfall from rainfall amount in water isotope proxies commonly used to
reconstruct rainfall (i.e. speleothem δ18O, sea water δ18O, and leaf wax δ2Η).
Both the isotopic composition of the rainfall and the rainfall amount are
important. The former yields information on source areas, transport paths, and
dynamics taking place as moisture travels from source to sink (large-scale
circulation). The latter provides information on changes in rainfall amount at
the local to regional scale. Usefulness of these proxies depends on knowing what
scale is expressed in the reconstruction. This research builds on past work,
focusing here on leaf wax δ2Η. A 640,000-year record of leaf wax δ2H from the
South Asian summer monsoon at Andaman Sea Site U1448 will be reconstructed at a
nominal 2,000-year sample resolution. Supporting records, benthic δ18O
(chronology), and leaf wax δ13C (vegetation structure) will be generated at the
same resolution. The resulting records will be quantitatively assessed using
time-series analytical techniques to determine the sensitivity to insolation,
ice volume, sea level, and greenhouse gases as well as their timing (phase)
relative to existing seawater δ18O, speleothem δ18O and leaf wax δ2Η records
from the South- and East-Asian monsoon systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.