* 2126534
* EAGER International Type II: Synchronized cloud-based collaborative platform
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Yakov Cherner, ATEL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,957.00

Part 1. Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has forced
international collaborations, as part of science and engineering research and
education, to move to remote communication using Zoom and other platforms. The
ultimate goal of this EAGER proposal is to design, implement, and test a novel,
immersive, cloud-based platform that will facilitate international
collaborations of researchers and allow them to interactively perform remote
experiments. The platform will immerse remote participants into a holistic
virtual environment imitating an actual facility where they can interactively
perform authentic experiments using digital equipment. Real-time teamwork is
facilitated by synchronizing digital equipment and processes on participantsâ€™
devices. Incorporated augmented reality (AR) through wearable Smart Glasses
enables partners to combine synchronous group work with asynchronous individual
exploration. The project involves foreign partners from Mexico, Australia,
United Kingdom, Russia and Africa.&lt;br/&gt;U.S. scientists and students of
diverse cultural, ethnical, educational and language backgrounds will work as
teams with their foreign counterparts exploring the efficiency, applicability
and scalability of the pilot platform. The collaboration will initially cover
education and research on applications of X-Ray diffraction methods for studying
nanostructures and dynamics of macromolecules. This materials research area is
of interest for many other science and engineering disciplines and domains.
&lt;br/&gt;The envisioned idea represents high risk/high pay-off exploratory
work in its early stages on untested concepts as such a platform currently does
not exist. Should it succeed it will be a real game-changer in distant
international collaboration by essentially lifting the difference between an in-
person and remote online collaboration. The platform combines the most advanced
features of videoconferencing, group computer games, flight and race simulators,
and augmented and mixed reality into a single system. This way, international
collaboration will become global and fast, relevant and meaningful, efficient
and scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2. Technical description&lt;br/&gt;The
project will innovatively integrate current and emerging telecommunication and
computer technologies into a futuristic collaborative platform that incorporates
numerous innovations. The most significant of them are: (i) orchestrating an
interactive teamwork of the partners from different countries by synchronizing
simulated virtual processes and digital equipment operations on their devices;
(ii) connecting digital equipment with science/engineering modeling software;
(iii) combining synchronized performance of experiment as a group member with
individual exploration and skills training using augmented reality objects; (iv)
connecting and synchronizing interactive augmented reality (AR) objects,
provided through Smart Glasses, with relevant virtual processes simulated by
cloud-based software objects and presented on a computer or smartphone screen;
(v) connecting and synchronizing digital and physical equipment; (vi)
integrating automated project and collaboration tools/features with video
conferencing; and (vii) real-time voice translation. &lt;br/&gt;The efficiency,
applicability, and scalability of the proposed system is instrumental for
connecting scientists and students of different cultural and educational
backgrounds, and for facilitating their work as a team. The project platform
technology has a great potential to dramatically change the way scientists and
engineers collaborate internationally as well as student participate in
educational and exchange programs. Being developed and tested for the specific
area of studying crystal structures, the technology and approach can be easily
generalized and expanded and applied to virtually all science and engineering
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.