* 2126527
* SBIR Phase I: Hermetic, Expeditionary Sailing Vessel
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Mark Ott, SUBSEASAIL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 255,923.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project is to leverage technical innovations in multi-
hull sail management and autonomy to design a sailing vessel that provides fast,
economical delivery of supplies to remote locations. This technology seeks to be
able to use multi-hull sailing vessels more reliably for the delivery of
supplies such as fuel, water, food, and medicine. Current options are limited by
cost, lack of supporting infrastructure (ports), and shipper interest. The
vessel is designed to de-risk the supply chain with particular focus on
underserved locations. The key technical innovations address a vulnerability of
multi-hull sailing vessels - catastrophic capsizing - by providing a controlled
submerging capability and a method to right a flipped vessel with the goal to be
able to re-surface and continue a voyage. The surface system will use a pivoting
mast for passive, real-time corrections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project addresses the logistical and
economic limitations of current systems that deliver supplies to remote
locations. Rather than attempting to optimize the elements of the current
delivery systems, the technology seeks to address island inaccessibility to
large vessels, lack of cargo flexibility, increasing weather risks, and capital
and operating economics by addressing the capsizing vulnerabilities of a surface
sailing vessel and managing ballast system. Capsizing occurs when the center of
gravity (CG) is higher than the center of buoyancy (CB). In mono-hull vessels,
the keel is the primary design element that maintains this ratio. Multi-hull
designs introduce different challenges. Vessel surface control will be managed
by a passive wing sail control system that provides real time corrections.
Submerged performance will be managed by pumps and ballast for corrective
action. The primary research objectives are to design, evaluate, and optimize a
heeling wingsail system (pivoting masts and hull involvement), and to design,
evaluate, and optimize a ballast system for controlled submerging as well as to
right capsized vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.