* 2126628
* SBIR Phase I:  Full surface angstrom-level contamination and defect detection on thin glass samples
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Steven Meeks, LUMINA INSTRUMENTS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve yield and reduce the costs of
glass-based semiconductor processing and packaging. The project develops a novel
optical scanning technology for high throughput, full surface inspection of
glass panels. Glass is increasingly finding application in semiconductor
processing, packaging, and AR/VR (augmented/virtual reality) applications, with
the global glass wafer market expected to increase significantly in the next few
years. However, nearly all process control tools are designed to inspect silicon
rather than glass. Current pain points in glass inspection include detecting
atomic-sized organic contamination on transparent surfaces, distinguishing
contamination on the top or bottom surface of very thin glass, detecting
microscopic particles on glass, and detecting internal defects within a glass
block. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops an innovative scanning polarization imaging technology
to enable rapid, full surface scanning and imaging of sub-nanometer film
coatings and defects. The full-surface inspection capability with a 100-mm field
of view in this Phase I project will allow manufacturers and producers of
augmented/virtual reality, high frequency, and biomedical devices to perform
incoming inspections of the substrates and perform process monitoring through
the sampling of their substrates throughout the fabrication processes. Compared
to other thin-film defect measurement systems, this technology offers shape-
independent full surface scanning (as opposed to spot checks provided by current
technologies such as ellipsometry, optical or Fourier-transform infrared
microscopy), detection of film defects as small as 5 angstroms on glass, and
top/bottom surface distinction capabilities on thin glass substrates. These
combined capabilities are critical in industries where small particulate or film
contamination on glass can lead to failure of downstream steps and a faulty
final product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.