* 2126097
* Tracking Urban Nitrous Acid (HONO) Emissions and Secondary Production in the Great Lakes Region during Michigan-Ontario Ozone Source Experiment (MOOSE)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Meredith Hastings, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2024
* USD 754,830.00

This project contributes to the Michigan-Ontario Ozone Source Experiment (MOOSE)
field campaign scheduled to take place in the summers of 2021 and 2022 over
metropolitan Detroit. MOOSE is a collaborative effort sponsored by the Michigan
Department of Environment, Great Lakes, and Energy (EGLE), and includes
participation from the Canadian government, NOAA, NASA, USEPA and the USFS. The
goal of the campaign is to improve the understanding of the sources and
chemistry associated with the production of ozone air pollution in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research in this project supported by NSF
includes the testing of hypotheses to better understand heterogeneous pathways
to HONO formation and includes the measurement of stable isotopes that will
serve as a unique tool to rigorously constrain sources, chemical processing
pathways, and sinks of reactive nitrogen species based upon their respective
isotopic signatures. This effort is expected to help to clarify the role of HONO
in ozone production. The project includes improvements that will be made to the
Community Multiscale Air Quality (CMAQ) chemical transport model that will
benefit users of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.