* 2126469
* EAGER: Identifying Methodological and Ethical Challenges in Online Research of Hard-to-Reach Populations during the COVID-19 pandemic
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yeon Jung Yu, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 29,858.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has necessitated the retooling of techniques for
collecting human behavioral data, in ways that present new challenges to the
reliability and validity of that data. But it has also provided an opportunity
for innovating methods of data collection and analysis, particularly with
respect to the analysis of social networks. This project pilots a new
methodological technique, asking whether digital platforms have a higher degree
of efficacy in engaging more vulnerable populations. Findings from this research
will disseminated in a way that aims to benefit public health efforts. This
scientific study will also broaden the participation of the underrepresented
groups in the co-production of scientific knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
broader scientific question proposed is whether valid and reliable data can be
gathered virtually from a marginalized population. It pilots a new digital
ethnographic method for identifying social networks among marginalized
populations by coupling the social network mapping of personal (egocentric)
social networks with qualitative data collection methods (semi-structured
interviews that are focused on ensuring data valid through the building of
rapport between research participants and the research team, and observational
techniques within social media and other online platforms). If the combination
of social network analysis (SNA) and digital ethnographic techniques can
reliably yield valid data for marginalized/stigmatized populations, digital
venues may prove to be a safer and more efficient space for engaging with
vulnerable populations, which in turn may potentially allow for the rapid
accumulation of data of hard-to-reach populations. This exploratory project
intends to make methodological contributions to social science research methods
in regards to studying hidden/marginalized populations through the
identification of network properties, cluster boundaries, and the social spaces
of various marginalized groups. As a result, this project will enhance the
intellectual debates on social network theories and methodology, and may come to
serve as a model by providing alternative research methods to study hard-to-
reach populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.