* 2126668
* OCE-PRF Predicting OMZ and seasonal microbial activity from community structure using machine learning and novel measurements of ATP turnover
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kaycie Lanpher, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 297,994.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marine microbes, including single-
celled bacteria, archaea, and eukarya, are the main drivers of carbon and energy
transformations in the ocean. The efficiency of the microbial loop at
transforming dissolved nutrients into biomass and up the food web is defined by
the individual activities of the microbial community. Unfortunately, current
methods for characterizing microbial activities in the marine environment are
biased, with most direct measurements focusing on heterotrophic microbes that
respire carbon dioxide in oxygenated waters. These measurements exclude a large
diversity of microbes that play major roles in ocean nutrient cycles, including
photosynthesizes and chemotrophs as well as microbes in low oxygen, anoxic
waters. This project will measure the activity of microbial organisms through
novel applications of the adenylate energy system, which is used by all
organisms and in almost all metabolic pathways. This work will focus on sites in
the California Current Ecosystem with a wide range of oceanographic conditions
and variable microbial communities. These locations include low oxygen canyons
representative of oxygen minimum zones (OMZs), upwelling locations reflecting
eastern boundary currents, and temporally dynamic coastal sites. Within the
planned sampling, support will be allocated for undergraduate students to join
shipboard efforts to help with seawater sampling and gain experience conducting
oceanographic research. The datasets produced from these sampling efforts will
be used to develop predictive models of microbial metabolism (activity) that can
be applied to other oceanographic regions, based on community structure,
abundance, and geochemical parameters across time and environmental
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly productive California Current
Ecosystem is subjected to seasonal successions of phytoplankton communities,
with diatom and dinoflagellate dominance coinciding with upwelling. The ability
of these phytoplankton groups to convert nutrients into biomass have impacts on
primary productivity, biogeochemical cycles, and the microbial loop. Hypoxic
environments shift the microbial community towards anaerobes and chemotrophs,
which have unique metabolisms and differential efficiencies converting acquired
carbon sources into biomass and energy. Therefore, the microbial loop efficiency
in OMZs is likely to be directly impacted by microbial community structure, but
precisely defining these differences in microbial activity has been hampered by
biased sampling techniques. This project will address the hypotheses that
microbial activity, in terms of energy storage, metabolic rates, and growth
rates will be directly liked to and predicted by phytoplankton community
structure and abundances in seasonal upwelling systems. Additionally, microbial
activities in OMZs are linked directly to the implementation of anaerobic
metabolic strategies and can thus be predicted by changes in community
structure. Microbial activity will be characterized using high throughput
applications of novel measures of the energy charge and adenosine triphosphate
(ATP) turnover rates while the microbial community structure will be defined
with 16S and 18S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing. Two dedicated, single day
cruises to the La Jolla and Scripps Canyons located within the California Bight,
and containing known OMZs will be conducted. Additionally, microbial activity
measurements will be incorporated into an on-going time-series that is sampled
for microbial community structure twice-a-week at the Scripps Institute of
Oceanography pier in La Jolla, CA. Measurements from the cruises and time-series
will be used to develop predictive models of microbial metabolism based on
community structure, abundance, and geochemical parameters across time and
within known OMZs using self-organizing maps (SOMs) and random forest
regression. Therefore, this project will produce predictive models that can be
generalized to broader ocean regions in addition to datasets with unprecedented
resolution of natural microbial activity across time and environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.