* 2126253
* CC* Compute: RAPTOR - Reconfigurable Advanced Platform for Transdisciplinary Open Research
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yuepeng Li, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 416,000.00

Building resilient, sustainable, livable, and environmentally safe dynamic
systems (natural or human built) requires on-demand computing resources,
facilitating machine learning, data processing, and data analytics. These
systems rely on computation to support simulation, modeling, and analyses to
enable discovery, facilitate understanding, and make decisions. This project
implements RAPTOR (Reconfigurable Advanced Platform for Transdisciplinary Open
Research), a reconfigurable compute environment to address dynamic and diverse
computing needs of science drivers––coastal resilience, sustainable
environmental research, and systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
RAPTOR is to increase research production by enhancing computing capabilities at
Florida International University (FIU), both at the campus level and through
participation in a resource-sharing federated distributed computing community.
For that, RAPTOR integrates with the Chameleon Cloud Infrastructure for on-
demand resource allocation and the Open Science Grid (OSG) for opportunistic
preemptible resource sharing allocation. The result is a platform capable of
connecting with a rapidly deployable sampling system that can assimilate and
transmit data in real-time to facilitate actionable intelligence and drive
adaptive environmental monitoring decisions, and respond as conditions change.
The integration of knowledge, tools, and modes of computation proposed by RAPTOR
builds upon the expertise of domain researchers, computer scientists, and IT
practitioners towards a “smart cyberinfrastructure” to foster and develop
transdisciplinary approaches. RAPTOR not only introduces new computing
modalities at FIU to support its researchers, but also benefits a broader
federated community of researchers and scholars sharing resources through OSG
and Chameleon Cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.