* 2126641
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Defending Against Social Engineering Attacks with In-Browser AI
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Roberto Perdisci, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

Web-based social engineering attacks represent a growing class of cyber-attacks
that exploit weaknesses in humans' decision-making processes via pretexts,
baiting, and phishing. These attacks aim at deceiving users into performing
online actions that may have critical cyber security and privacy implications.
For instance, users may be deceived by malicious websites into revealing
sensitive personal information or installing malicious software in their devices
because they believe they would get something for free (e.g., a gift card). This
project makes the Internet safer by building novel and robust real-time in-
browser defenses that use artificial intelligence methods to dynamically detect
and block such kinds of web-based social engineering attacks before users are
affected. The project artifacts have immense potential to transition to
practical use via collaboration with Google and AARP. Furthermore, the project
involves activities across three institutions to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing web defenses
often rely on reactive approaches (e.g., blocklists) that do not address social
engineering attacks. Unlike previous approaches, this research introduces a
novel framework for discovering, modeling, and defending against web-based
social engineering attacks on both desktop and mobile environments. On the
discovery front, this project introduces a web-crawler to automatically harvest,
analyze, and categorize instances of social-engineering attacks, considering
different browsing devices. Given the discoveries of the crawler, this project
uses machine-learning approaches to model the in-browser behavior of the
attacks. Finally, to defend users, the project introduces real-time in-browser
defense systems that track how web pages and web push notifications are
delivered to users, monitor how they are executed within the browser, and
extract visual features as well as network and web-content metadata. Overall,
this project's outcomes improve the research community's understanding of web-
based social-engineering attacks and exerts practical impact in protecting users
against these attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.