* 2126190
* Tuning the Frequency Response of Fractional-Order Microsupercapacitors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Chunlei Wang, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 08/31/2024
* USD 379,215.00

Electric double-layer capacitors (EDLC) are a subset of electrochemical
capacitors that can store and deliver electrical energy at dc and relatively
far-from-dc frequencies with effective capacitance between that of aluminum
electrolytic capacitors and secondary batteries. They are mostly employed in
conventional energy storage applications as secondary power source, such as
microprocessors and solar batteries. They have also been demonstrated as
efficient energy devices in oscillators and filters circuits, fractional-order
controllers, and fractional-order resonators. However, because of the nature and
porous structure of their electrodes and the interfacial electrochemistry of
their electrodes/electrolyte phase, many fundamental aspects of their
performance metrics are still not well understood, and rational design is
practically nonexistent. In particular, EDLCs exhibit a dissipative, resistive-
capacitive behavior when operating away from dc with an impedance angle anywhere
between -90 and 0 deg. In this project, miniaturized EDLCs based on structured
2D and 3D electrode arrays will be designed and fabricated with the objective of
understanding and controlling their non-ideal, fractional-order behavior. We
will develop and study the effect of doped electrolytes in order to tune the
electric-field-induced ionic transport in the presence of physical obstacles.
The expected outcome is a general procedure and design rules to apply in order
to fine-tune and control the impedance phase shift of EDLCs and their energy-
power performance. Modeling and simulation using mean-field Poisson-Nernst-Plank
model will be carried out in order to provide a fundamental understanding of the
frequency response of the devices. System-level modeling using fractional-order
mathematical tools and equivalent circuit models will also be developed in
connection with RC-based circuitry. The controllable fractional-order behavior
of the EDLCs will be verified and their frequency-domain application will be
demonstrated. This project will contribute to the research, education, and
diversity goals of Florida International University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are to tackle the lack of knowledge on the frequency-
domain metrics and performance of factional-order capacitors using both
experimental and modeling approaches. We aim to investigate the following: (1)
electrode-electrolyte interface specifications and electrolyte parameters that
enable the tuning of the electrical characteristics of an EDLC over an extended
frequency bandwidth; (2) the electro-kinetic effects taking place in the
supporting electrolyte of an EDLC, and how they affect the frequency-domain
metrics of the device; (3) modeling using 3D-circuit interconnects and finite-
element methods to understand the overall electric characteristics; and (4) the
frequency response of the EDLCs and their application in (frequency-domain)
filtering and (time-domain) memory applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.