* 2126364
* SBIR Phase I:  Prototyping a Wearable Device that Continuously Monitors Biometrics using Machine Learning to Predict Meltdowns in Children with Autism
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Brent Chase, PRODUCTS FOR ANY LIFESTYLE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in its ability to use machine learning and
wearable technology to reduce uncontrolled destructive episodees, known as
meltdowns, in children with autism. Meltdowns are highly distressing events for
these children and their families and may require intervention on behalf of
emergency response personnel and healthcare providers. Treating individuals with
autism by proactively detecting meltdowns will allow caregivers time to
intervene, mitigate, and prevent the onset of destructive behavioral episodes.
The ability to predict a meltdown, and then implement strategic intervention to
prevent the meltdown, may have positive life-changing effects for the children,
their families, and their caretakes by reducing social stigma, enabling more
mainstreaming of school and family activities, and reducing significant
financial healthcare burdens. This technology may also be used to mitigate panic
attacks in individuals with post-traumatic stress
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to develop a wearable device that detects, predicts, and
helps prevent meltdowns in children with autism. Wearable devices that measure
physiological parameters are available in the market, but none of them are
specific to autism, and none of them proactively predict behavior episodes. A
unique feature of this wearable device is that it uses machine learning to
predict meltdowns. Incorporating machine learning allows each device to learn
the unique biometric signature of the wearer so it can predict meltdowns with
high accuracy. When a child is at high risk for a meltdown, the device will
detect the relevant physiology and alert caregivers and therapists in time to
intervene. The objectives of this project are to create a prototype which
includes the wearable product and the individualization enabled by machine
learning to correlate a childâ€™s biometric measures with behavioral states. The
goal is to achieve decreased frequency and/or severity of meltdowns. By enabling
caregivers of children with autism to take control of and prevent meltdowns,
this project has the potential to eliminate the stigma these children face
during a meltdown in public, and empowers the children to become more
independent as they age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.