* 2126449
* Collaborative Research: EarthCube Capabilities: ICESpark: An Open-Source Big Data Platform for Science Discoveries in the New Arctic and Beyond
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jia Yu, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,452.00

The Arctic climate system is undergoing rapid change with rising air and sea
surface temperatures, accompanied by declines in Arctic glaciers, sea ice and
snow cover on land. Increases in global air temperatures and ice-sheet mass loss
are driving sea level rise around the globe. Meanwhile, as the Arctic melts,
maritime and commercial activities in the region are expanding, presenting new
opportunities, as well as societal and cultural challenges. As Arctic regions
are largely inaccessible to traditional observation techniques, satellite remote
sensing systems play a key role in monitoring their essential climate variables.
However, the unprecedented volume and variety of geospatial big data collected
by new satellites have reached far beyond the capacity of computing platforms
accessible to most geoscientists. This gap between data growth and data
discovery capacity significantly undermines the value of emerging big datasets.
Moreover, most existing software for geospatial big data do not offer advanced
analytical capabilities to facilitate geoscience discoveries. The project aims
to remove these barriers by developing a low-cost and large-scale system, namely
ICESpark, to seamlessly support the lifecycle of big data enabled geoscience
research in the New Arctic and beyond. The results may improve the well-being of
citizens by addressing key climate change questions, including extreme events,
natural disasters, sea-level rise, drought, and wildfires. It will also improve
science and engineering education via development of new course materials,
cross-training of students from computing and geosciences fields, as well as an
ICESpark webinar series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ICESpark is a distributed platform
that can combine local commodity computers into a powerful environment that is
ready for geospatial big data (GeoBD). Built on Apache Sedona, ICESpark first
develops data integration and cleaning tools to harness a wide variety of GeoBD
across geoscience domains including oceanography, cryospheric science and
ecology. Moreover, ICESpark provides a scalable data discovery layer to
efficiently identify all coincidental data across streams from heterogeneous
sensing platforms (e.g., ICESat-2, Jason-3, Sentinel-3, GEDI) under various
conditions. Third, ICESpark offers advanced data analytics capabilities,
including a geo-feature identification system and a geo-pattern mining package,
to equip geoscientists with geophysical or statistical tools to examine complex
relationships and patterns embedded in GeoBD. To enhance research
infrastructure, ICESpark will provide a variety of pre-packed front-ends
including Jupyter notebooks as well as interoperation with EarthCubeâ€™s
QGreenland, improving the accessibility to the system across broad disciplinary
communities. The system will also be open-sourced and follow the EarthCube
GeoCODES Dataset schema for long-term sustainability. The multidisciplinary team
will work together on the design and development of ICESpark and optimize it to
harness GeoBD and tackle challenging geoscience
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.