* 2126500
* OCE-PRF Unraveling Southern Hemisphere westerly wind variability through the last ~150 ky using Tasman Sea sediments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jordan Abell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 07/31/2024
* USD 280,721.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Southern Hemisphere westerly
winds, commonly referred to as the “westerlies”, play a crucial role in regional
and global climate. Modern observations suggest that these winds are moving
towards Antarctica and becoming stronger in response to anthropogenic warming.
Shifts in the position and intensity of these winds can potentially impact ocean
circulation, the distribution of natural and anthropogenic aerosols, and the
carbon cycle. As such, developing a better understanding of how the westerly
winds change when conditions on Earth were different from today is critical to
enhancing our constraints on their future variability. The research proposed
here seeks to reconstruct the characteristics of the Southern Hemisphere
westerlies during climate states both colder and warmer than today over the last
150,000 years. To accomplish this, PI Abell will develop records of dust fluxes,
sea-surface temperatures, and Australian vegetation regimes utilizing marine
sediments from several cores in the Tasman Sea. It is the combination of these
independent proxies related to the westerly winds, along with sampling multiple
cores that cover an ~10° north-south transect, that will allow for information
on both the position and strength of the Southern Hemisphere westerlies to be
ascertained. As an NSF Postdoctoral Fellow, PI Abell will mentor high school and
undergraduate students through several programs. One of these is the Southern
Arizona Research, Science, and Engineering Foundation S.T.A.R Labs Program,
where he will guide a local high school student through developing and executing
a research project related to this proposed research. Additionally, PI Abell
will work with a University of Arizona undergraduate student to prepare them for
graduate school through the Ronald E. McNair Achievement Program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will focus on reconstructing the
characteristics of the Southern Hemisphere westerly winds during various climate
states over the last ~150 ky. PI Abell will utilize samples from three marine
sediment cores spanning ~10° latitude in the Tasman Sea, along with four
independent (organic and inorganic) geochemical methods, to investigate shifts
in the position and intensity of the westerlies. Specifically, PI Abell will 1)
produce constant flux proxy-derived dust flux records based on inorganic dust
proxies, 2) use n-alkanes as a dust proxy to develop additional records of dust
fluxes that are not influenced by volcanic inputs, 3) generate records of plant-
wax carbon isotopes to gain information on C3/C4 vegetation boundaries, and in
turn precipitation seasonality, in Australia, and 4) reconstruct shifts in the
Subtropical and Tasman Fronts by utilizing the alkenone UK’37 SST proxy.
Combined, information from these various proxies will allow for the
reconstruction of both the position and intensity of the Southern Hemisphere
westerlies during key climatic intervals such as the Holocene, the Last Glacial
Maximum, and the last interglacial period. These datasets will be useful to the
climate modeling community, as they will provide constraints on the natural
variability of the westerlies to changes in potential driving mechanisms such as
ice volume and atmospheric temperature gradients, thus aiding essential modeling
of future changes in the westerly winds. Interpretations and conclusions drawn
from this work will be brought to the public via non-technical settings such as
public talks and presentations/activities at The Science Center at the Tucson
Festival of Books.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.