* 2126953
* SBIR Phase I:  Oral delivery systems for sterilizing strains of a sexually-transmitted insect virus
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Bruce Webb, Lepidext LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The Broader Impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to support widespread distribution and adoption of sterilizing
biopesticides that are effective and efficient to control Lepidoptera.
Lepidopterans, such as the corn earworm, circumvent insecticidal properties of
certain crops by developing resistance. Models show that incorporating sterile
insects in a corn earworm population can suppress the incidence of resistant
individuals in the populations. Enhancing oral infectivity of this sterilizing
insect biopesticide will improve product manufacturing, distribution and most
importantly, ease of use to support farmer adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project develops a functional orally-infectious formula of a specific
strain of the sexually-transmitted, sterilizing-virus, Helicoverpa zea nudivirus
2 (HzNV2). The resulting technology will be suitable for prototyping and testing
oral formulations for sterilizing adult corn earworm moths. Genetic selection
and candidate gene approaches are proposed to improve stability of the virus
entry complex required for oral infectivity. This project will decorate viral
envelopes with genes absent from HzNV-2 and thereby improve virion stability.
The pseudotyped virus will be assayed for increased oral
infectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.