* 2126982
* SBIR Phase II:  Reducing Claims Denials in Healthcare Through Blockchain and Machine Learning
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Sarah Brown, BRILLIANTMD, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project is focused on improving
healthcare reimbursement and revenue cycle management. Two key concerns are that
errors in healthcare claims result in frequent payment denials, and failure to
obtain prior authorization can make those services non-reimbursable. These
issues can lead to inappropriate direct billing to patients and/or a write-off
by the healthcare provider and cost-shifting to cover losses. In addition,
complexity within the rules for payment and prior authorization require
considerable administrative overhead for claim submission, reconciliation, and
rework, inflating administrative costs. The proposed project addresses these
inefficiencies in the health care reimbursement system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to use advanced
analytics, machine learning, and blockchain technologies to address the
following research objectives: (1) analyze and predict healthcare claim risk for
denial of payment; (2) predict the likelihood of a prior authorization
requirement before a clinical intervention is undertaken; and (3) incentivize
accuracy in the claim submission process and decrease associated administrative
burden and cost. The research will conduct advanced claims parsing, data
extraction, modeling, and machine learning to define specific patterns of risk,
and build reproducible, efficient, and accurate predictive algorithms. These
approaches will be applied to both claim denials and to clinical data predictive
of prior authorization. Blockchain technology will be utilized to incentivize
demographic and clinical data collection and claims processing workflows for
improvements in data accuracy, efficiency of collection, and predictive quality.
The technical result will be an accurate, predictive, continually learning,
highly efficient machine learning toolset integrated with a productivity
engine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.