* 2126765
* SBIR Phase I:  Plastic Waste Oxidation to Soil Carbon Amendments
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Kelsey Sakimoto, BIKO BIOLABS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project will be to recycle certain
plastics into soil amendments to improve both environmental degradation and
agricultural health. Plastic waste is a persistent environmental pollutant
partly due to the lack of comprehensive technologies to reduce the in-
circulation inventory of these petrochemical products, and comparably low value
of plastic-derived and recycled products. The carbon contained within mixed
plastic waste represents both a significant pollutant, but also a potentially
valuable alternative feedstock for domestic agriculture and regenerating
degraded soils. Soil carbon is a key driver in building soil health,
agricultural productivity and food security, as well as a significant reservoir
for long-term carbon sequestration. This project remediates traditionally non-
recyclable, low-value mixed plastic waste and transforms it into a high value
compost-like material. The proposed research develops a low-cost, distributed,
decentralized process suitable for small, remote, rural, marginalized and
underrepresented communities to achieve sustainable, domestic solid waste
management as well as build and regenerate soil health for self-sufficient local
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will scale and
optimize a plastic oxidation process that employs a novel high efficiency
intramolecular modification of Fenton oxidation. The aqueous process utilizes a
low-cost, green catalyst that does not require high temperatures or organic
solvents to cleave and oxidize a wide range of commercial polymers into
bioavailable long-chain fatty acids suitable as a soil microbe substrate and
soil organic carbon amendment. Compared to the highly variable process of
natural biodegradation, this reaction ensures complete remediation before
environmental application through controlled chemical oxidation. This research
will aim to characterize this novel process towards a scalable technoeconomic
model to guide translation at scale. Methods include near-infrared spectroscopy
to track the elimination of microplastics and other toxic components common to
plastic waste processing. The plastic-derived, environmentally beneficial soil
amendments will be further studied in greenhouse and field trials to evaluate
key agronomic indicators, such as amendment-microbe interactions, soil health,
productivity and others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.