* 2126106
* NSFDEB-BSF: Sources, controls, and significance of soil geosmin emissions in dryland ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Nichole Barger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2024
* USD 823,149.00

Those who have spent time in deserts are likely familiar with the 'smell of
rain' - the earthy scent characteristic of soils moistened by recent
precipitation. One of the key compounds contributing to this scent is geosmin, a
compound exclusively produced by soil microbes. Geosmin was discovered over
fifty years ago. What is its biological function? This is as yet unknown, as are
which soil microbes produce geosmin and how its release from soil varies across
time and space. These knowledge gaps are unsettling given that geosmin is likely
to have critical roles in desert systems, influencing the growth and activity of
soil microbes and plants. This project will study soils collected from deserts
in Israel and the U.S. to determine how and why rates of geosmin release from
soil vary, identify the microbial sources of geosmin, and determine how geosmin
can influence the growth of plants and microbes. This work will provide insight
into a widely-observed phenomenon that is key to understanding how rain storms
influence desert systems and how to best monitor and manage the health of desert
landscapes under changing environmental conditions. The study of geosmin also
provides a unique opportunity to introduce students to the field of soil
ecology. This project will leverage research activities to enhance educational
opportunities for groups typically under-represented in scientific disciplines
(high school-aged Bedouin students in Israel and Native American undergraduates
in the U.S.) with activities focused on desert soil ecology. In addition, as a
collaboration between U.S. and Israeli researchers, this project presents a
unique opportunity to foster international research and educational training
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are
increasingly recognized as being important in belowground systems, the specific
nature of these emissions and the associated consequences for soil biota remain
poorly understood. This project focuses on one such VOC, geosmin - a
microbially-produced metabolite often emitted in high concentrations from desert
soils following rain events. This project will examine geosmin emissions across
aridity gradients in southern Israel and the southwestern U.S., pairing gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry analyses with DNA and RNA-based approaches to
identify the specific taxa responsible for the production of this VOC and the
controls on its emission rates. This project will also use a series of
experimental assays to test the hypothesis that geosmin acts as a signaling
molecule with wide-ranging effects on the germination, growth, and activities of
microbes and plants in desert ecosystems. Together, this work will advance our
understanding of a poorly understood, phenomenon in desert systems that is
likely to have important consequences for understanding biotic responses to
rewetting events in arid environments. As such, this work will be relevant to
researchers in disciplines ranging from ecosystem ecology to microbiology to
soil science, and is very relevant to understanding the impacts of climate
change. Training opportunities that broaden participation in science will be
incorporated into different aspects of the project, and information will be
disseminated to K-12 students and the public via science-based graphic
novels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.