* 2126731
* SBIR Phase I:  Leveraging machine learning to enable generalized phage therapy for pulmonary infections
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Robert McBride, FELIX BIOTECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a new therapy for bacterial
infections, especially those resistant to current antibiotics, which have
generated antibiotic-resistant “super-bug” bacterial infections that cannot be
treated easily. Bacteriophages (‘phages’) are viruses that only infect specific
bacteria and cannot infect humans. Phages kill harmful bacteria, but they
currently do not work well as general solutions that can be prescribed broadly
because each phage only kills a subset of bacteria; therefore a unique phage may
be required for different people with the same infection. This project develops
new technology to understand how phages target bacteria. It uses machine
learning to determine the parts of each phage responsible for killing specific
bacteria, in order to make phages for broad use in treating infections. This
innovation is a key competitive advantage, and helps both national health and
defense by creating new treatments for antibiotic-resistant infections, which
cost &gt;$64 billion annually and may become the next major pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will develop machine learning algorithms that identify genetic
determinants of host range in phages in order to engineer phage to have expanded
host range. The widespread evolution of multidrug-resistant infections is a
major threat to global health, and traditional antibiotics have significant
adverse effects on patients and their microbiomes. Phages can solve this global
health challenge, but the inability to expand and tune phage host-range to
create a generalizable therapeutic remains a key barrier to commercial success.
This project will leverage machine learning and proprietary high throughput
phage characterization methods to generate maps of phage-host interactions to
identify genes that determine phage host range, and use novel engineering
techniques to validate these genetic determinants of host range. The expected
outputs are twofold: 1) a machine learning model for predicting variants, genes,
or genomic regions that determine phage host range and 2) an engineered phage
with expanded host range. This work will further scientific understanding of
phage biology and phage-host interactions, while also providing a platform to
develop phages with tunable host range for therapeutic, agricultural, and
environmental applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.