* 2126273
* ISS: Chip-Based in vitro Modeling of Endocortical Microenvironment with Reduced Gravitational Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kim Mansky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

This project will study bone loss in in microgravity. Bone loss occurs during
spaceflight, long-term bedrest and osteoporosis. Utilizing an environment that
amplifies the rate of bone loss, such as low earth orbit and ground-based
microgravity simulation, will accelerate our understanding of the metabolic
mechanisms involved in bone maintenance. Increased understanding of the
mechanics of bone loss will help identify affected mechanism(s) and pathways
that can be addressed to mitigate bone loss in reduced gravity environments as
well as on earth. Educational benefits from this investigation include
incorporating the results into the training of undergraduate and graduate
students for research careers as basic scientists or clinical investigators. The
research will also be a component of the Multicultural Summer Research
Opportunities Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent retrospective multi-omics
analysis of hundreds of biological samples flown in space identified
mitochondrial dysfunction as the probable root cause for most of the observed
physiological changes in a microgravity environment which includes the loss of
bone and muscle mass. Monocultures of anabolic cells, i.e., osteoblasts (OB’s),
and catabolic cells, i.e, osteoclasts (OC’s), and an OB/OC co-culture will be
grown in a collagenous carrier combined with hydroxyapatite as a slurry. These
cultures will be maintained by slow perfusion of media flowing through
microphysiological chips. Once initiated, the experimental apparatus is
autonomous and will be maintained at 37 degrees Celsius/5% CO2 for up to 21
days. The proposed osteogenic microphysiological system, will allow real-time
non-contact monitoring of oxygen and pH within the chip to yield OCR (Oxygen
Consumption Rate) and ECAR (Extracellular Acidification Rate) metabolic data.
These measurements will permit the evaluation of cellular response, i.e.,
mitochondrial function, to environment or interventions much sooner. At the
conclusion of the experiments cell cultures will receive RNAprotect for later
transcriptomic analyses. Spent cell media will be analyzed by spectroscopy to
determine if glucose metabolic pathways change in microgravity. Utilizing an
environment that amplifies the rate of bone loss, such as low earth orbit, or
microgravity simulation utilizing a unique magnetic levitation apparatus,
provides a setting to accelerate our understanding of underlying genomic and
metabolic mechanisms. Validation of a ground-based model of spaceflight may
permit a platform to test interventions potentially valuable to the development
of therapies beneficial to the treatment of human disease resulting from
skeletal unloading, such as paraplegia, bedrest, and metabolic
osteopenia/osteoporosis. This work is jointly funded by the Biomechanics and
Mechanobiology program and the Engineering of Biomedical Systems
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.