* 2126240
* CC* Networking Infrastructure: Cyberinfrastructure improvements for multi-disciplinary data-intensive scientific research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Kostas Orginos, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 491,051.00

This project addresses four areas of improvement in the College of William &amp;
Mary networking that expands its research capacity throughout its two campuses
and aims at modernizing the data transfer capabilities. These areas are: Greater
transfer speeds between main campus and the Virginia Institute of Marine
Science; a Science DMZ for high-speed connectivity for research computing and a
dedicated data transfer node which are monitored for quality of service with
perfSONAR; addition of dedicated 10Gbps ports for offices and labs of major
research network users; and the addition of a Globus license to enable efficient
transfers to/from the campus research network. This work upgrades William &amp;
Mary’s research computing network to continue supporting multi-disciplinary
research which demands higher transfer rates for larger data files needed to
support state-of-the-art research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These network
enhancements support cross-disciplinary transformative research and discovery by
investigators from W&amp;M’s School of Marine Science (Virginia Institute of
Marine Science or VIMS) and W&amp;M’s Global Research Institute, as well as by
researchers from Physics, Computer Science and Data Science. The research from
this group of scientists contributes largely to the advancement and
transformation of various frontiers of knowledge and discovery. Projects like 3D
Environmental Flow Modeling, Lattice Quantum Chromodynamics (LQCD, Coastal
Biogeochemical Modeling, Deep Learning for Estimates of Development Indicators,
Location AI for National Security, the building of novel ML model execution
optimizations, and simulations of accelerator designs are examples of the
projects with great potential to advance knowledge and dependent on the faster
network this new cyberinfrastructure expansion
provides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.