* 2126729
* OCE-PRF: Understanding substrate mobility as a disturbance in hard rock marine communities
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Allison Cramer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 03/31/2024
* USD 319,295.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human actions impact marine
ecosystems in a variety of ways, including shifting wave and current dynamics
through global warming and altering the composition of the ocean floor. These
changes, in turn, affect the location and distribution of marine communities.
For soft-sediment communities, such as sandy beaches, the interaction between
fluid forces and sediment disturbance is well understood. This allows scientists
to measure sediment mobility and to create detailed predictions of the impact of
human activities on these ecosystems. To date there are no measurements
analogous to sediment mobility available for marine hard rock ecosystems. This
research will investigate a potential measurement system which connects the
forces of waves and currents to the resulting erosion of hard rock substrates
and will test and evaluate how these disturbance patterns govern the
distribution of communities themselves. By developing and testing this substrate
mobility metric, this research will open new avenues of investigation for core
ecological hypotheses. In addition, this work will allow managers,
conservationists, and engineers to better predict the impact of human-generated
change on hard rock marine communities. This project will also support the
training and education of groups underrepresented in the geosciences through (1)
field and data analysis experience via Research Experiences for Undergraduates
summer programs, (2) professional development via mentoring relationships
between the fellow and undergraduate trainees, and (3) the expansion of their
professional network via cross-institutional
coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Disturbance, including fluid forces via waves
on rocky shores, is well understood as a community organizing and structuring
force. Foundational concepts within ecology, such as Connell’s Intermediate
Disturbance Hypothesis and Menge and Sutherland’s
Competition/Predation/Disturbance model, recognize that communities exist within
a complex mosaic of physical and biological disturbance. This mosaic presents
challenges when measuring disturbance regimes since the scales, causes, and
consequences of disturbance vary between systems. However, in the marine
environment, substrate mobility represents an explicit measure of disturbance
impact present across marine ecosystems. This project will determine how to
measure substrate mobility on hard substrates through collaboration with USGS
geologists. In addition, this research will investigate a mechanism for
disturbance via substrate mobility on benthic organisms through lab experiments
and use field surveys to compare patterns of substrate mobility with the
distribution of benthic communities and species functional groups. Explicitly
quantifying the realized movement of hard substrate in response to fluid forcing
integrates hard substrates into the already well understood sediment disturbance
paradigm. This results in a universal framework of marine disturbance that is
potentially revolutionary as it allows for comparative questions spanning a huge
diversity of marine ecosystems, from coral reefs to the abyssal plain. This
mechanistic framework provides a new connection between the disciplines of
geomorphology and marine ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.