* 2126074
* I-Corps: Digital platform to manage the care of the elderly by utilizing long-term services and support resources
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Marcia Ory, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a digital tool that connects the elderly and their family
caregivers to resources, education, and services in the eldercare assistance
industry. The proposed technology is designed for family caregivers to access
the device through a smartphone application where they may connect with service
providers for assistance with various aspects of eldercare, including home-aids,
medical providers, elder law resources, and many other commonly sought services.
The technology may improve caregiversâ€™ experiences by providing tailored
information that helps connect them with the community of support services
appropriate for them. The aim of this technology is to increase caregiver
confidence and utilization of community and remote resources available to them.
Numerous resources for family caregivers have been developed previously.
However, the adoption rate of these resources remains low due to lack of easy
access, non-personalized information, information complexity, and a poor user
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a novel Care Personalization Algorithm (CPA) that creates a user-
specific intervention best suited for each caregiver. The demands of caregiving
change over time and each caregiver's financial, legal, geographic, and familial
situation is unique. This requires that digital services to assist caregivers be
highly personalized. The proposed technology addresses this issue by developing
a digital platform based on logic decision trees (based on key caregiver
characteristics input by the user) and geolocation (automatically obtained from
the mobile phone). The technology will generate personalized information,
recommendations, and interactive checklists for each caregiver to assist with
the legal, financial, health, social assistance and other challenges of
caregiving. The proposed design may provide caregivers with a customized
caregiver plan that may narrow the information they seek and provide a listing
of resources and service-providers directed to their
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.