* 2126407
* HCC: Small: Neural Network-based Solvers for Integral Equations in Light Transport
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthias Zwicker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 497,194.00

Neural networks are commonly associated with applications in artificial
intelligence such as computer vision, natural language processing, or robotics.
They are attractive for these applications because they can model highly complex
relationships, such as how colors of millions of individual pixels in an image
are related to a high-level description of the image, including the types of
objects that are shown etc. This project, however, will leverage the capacity of
neural networks to solve numerical simulation problems, with a focus on light
transport as the application domain. Novel techniques will be developed to model
the complex relationship between 3D virtual environments and corresponding
photo-realistic images. This work will enable numerous innovative computer
graphics applications, for example in augmented and virtual reality. The new
techniques will have broad impact, because they can be adapted and applied to a
vast range of related scientific simulation problems. The benefits of the
project outcomes include improving the achievable accuracy and enabling the
solution of problems at a larger scale and with more complex geometries than is
currently possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop novel
numerical techniques for neural network-based function representations to solve
integral equations for light transport problems. The approach will represent
continuous solutions using neural networks, and leverage gradient-based
numerical solution techniques that minimize appropriate norms of the residuals,
after which advanced techniques that improve the performance and accuracy of the
baseline approach will be developed and evaluated, including novel neural
network architectures that are suitable to effectively represent multi-
dimensional functions such as the spatio-angular radiance fields required to
solve light and radiative transfer equations, and efficient Monte Carlo sampling
and curriculum learning strategies for the residual norms in the numerical
problems to allow robust estimation of gradients at lower computational cost.
Finally, novel few-shot learning techniques to further accelerate convergence
will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.