* 2126537
* OCE-PRF: Cliff Hangers: Investigating Effects of a Submarine Canyon on the Distribution and Behavior of Midwater Animals and their Predators
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Astrid Leitner, Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 10/31/2023
* USD 325,738.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep open ocean waters house
the largest animal communities on our planet. These communities remain largely
understudied but are known to provide critical services including carbon export
from the surface ocean into the deep-sea and feeding economically and socially
important fish stocks and marine mammals. These midwater animals are the key
link between the base of the marine food web and important predators, which rely
on finding and exploiting dense prey aggregations. However, relatively little
information currently exists about the oceanic mechanisms or the ecological
drivers that shape the distribution patterns of these important prey. Submarine
canyons are common features along coastlines that link the deep open ocean with
the nearshore ecosystem. They are hotspots of both biological and human
activity. This project will examine the role of a submarine canyon on the
distribution, density, and diversity of the midwater community and subsequent
impacts on the abundance and habitat-use of top predators with a combination of
acoustic, visual, and biologging techniques. This project will support the
training of a post-doctoral researcher and support the recruitment and retention
of women in STEM by providing resources to further the development of a
continuous support network for local female-identifying STEM community college
students transferring to the local public 4-year university. The results of this
project will also be shared with the public through a bilingual digital exhibit
at the Seymour Marine Discovery Center in Santa Cruz, CA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The deep midwater (200-5000 m depths) is the largest
habitat on our planet and represents over 90% of the entire biosphere, yet it is
still one of the least understood and most mysterious ecosystems. Deep pelagic
communities are now known to provide critical ecosystem services including
carbon export from the surface ocean with sequestration in the deep-sea and
provisioning predators like economically and socially important fish stocks and
marine mammals. However, relatively little information currently exists about
the oceanic mechanisms or the ecological drivers that shape the distribution
patterns of these important mid-trophic level animals. Submarine canyons are
common abrupt bathymetric features that bring together normally separated deep
oceanic and shallow nearshore communities and have profound influences on
coastal ocean dynamics and ecosystems. Canyons are often hotspots of both
primary production and predator activity. This project will investigate the role
of submarine canyon bathymetry on the distribution, density, diversity, and
composition of the midwater community linking these two trophic levels and the
subsequent impacts on the abundance and habitat-use of top predators. This
project will compare communities at a canyon wall site and at a midwater time
series site, identify the oceanographic drivers and mechanisms driving
variability in the near-wall community, and determine the relationships between
predator distribution and canyon bathymetry through a combination of acoustic,
visual, and biologging techniques. Current knowledge of the linkages between
deep midwater and shelf communities remains limited, but increasing
anthropogenic stressors like fishing, pollution, and climate change demand
ecosystem-based solutions fundamentally based on understanding these
interconnections. By investigating the mechanisms and drivers of the
relationships between bathymetry, oceanographic conditions, deep water pelagic
prey, and their predators, this project will help to address this knowledge gap,
and the results will have important implications for the management and
conservation of groundfishes and marine mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.