* 2126637
* SBIR Phase I:  A robotic system for removal of invasive plant species
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Nancy Marek, BIRDHABITATBOT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 240,060.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase I project is to improve habitat for native
plants and wildlife by removing invasive plants with a mobile robot. Worldwide
invasion by non-native plant species is a primary concern in forest ecosystem
health and biodiversity. Within the highly fragmented landscape of the
Connecticut forest, two invasive plants significantly contribute to the
degradation of habitat: Japanese barberry and multiflora rose. Current methods
to eradicate them are time-consuming, expensive, and ultimately ineffective.
This project presents a novel method of detecting and removing Japanese barberry
and multiflora rose. Deep learning technology enables additional use with other
invasive species, increasing the system's value throughout natural resource
management. Additionally, once programmed, the robots will be easily operated,
making them usable for a variety of personnel. This SBIR phase I project will
advance current robot prototypes being tested for weed detection and removal.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no mobile robot designed and programmed
to remove understory invasive shrub species in a deciduous forest ecosystem. The
technical challenges that will be addressed in building a feasible robot
prototype include navigating over the unstructured terrain of the forest floor,
developing a cutting attachment for the robotic arm, and creating a hybrid soft-
rigid platform to withstand forest floor hazards while averting tree seedling
damage. The proposed system will operate as follows: (1) an unpiloted aerial
system (UAS, i.e., drone) flies over the canopy to capture images of the forest
understory; (2) images are then labeled and converted to species location maps;
and (3) utilizing these maps, a semi-autonomous mobile robot navigates to the
invasive species locations for removal. The robots will be programmed for semi-
automated missions monitored by an operator nearby at a safe distance to ensure
worker safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.