* 2126885
* SBIR Phase I:  Security Evaluation Platform for Automating Inclusion of Hardware Security in Integrated Circuit Design
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Mahdi Orooji, SECURESEMI CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 10/31/2022
* USD 255,957.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to secure Integrated Circuit (IC)
Intellectual Property (IP) against untrusted parties in the globalized IC supply
chain. Outsourcing of IC foundries creates risks of IC reverse engineering,
overproduction, theft, and even piracy. A promising method of achieving hardware
IP security is by logically locking the functionality of a design by replacing a
subset of the design components with programmable elements. The correct content
of these elements forms the key for unlocking/activation of the design in a
secure facility and/or via a secure protocol after manufacturing. A technical
challenge in commercializing this technology is the long time period typically
needed to assess the security of a locked design against state-of-the-art attack
algorithms at the design phase. This project will address this technical
challenge by developing an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-assisted design security
analyzer tool to instantaneously provide an accurate attack runtime estimation
on a locked design, significantly reducing the design
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will significantly shorten the time required to assess attack
resiliency of an obfuscated (locked) Integrated Circuit (IC) design. Running the
state-of-the-art Boolean Satisfiability solvers (SAT attack) on a state-of-the-
art computer server to de-obfuscate a locked design can take time - ranging from
days to months. Such a long security analysis time is prohibitive for deployment
in the design process where iterative design optimizations are needed for making
power, performance, area, and security (PPAS) trade-offs. This project aims to
address this challenge by introducing a novel approach that will bring the
security assessment time down to near zero using a machine-learning based model.
Based on recent advancements in graph and geometric deep learning techniques, an
innovative end-to-end security assessment framework is proposed that directly
and losslessly ingests the original design as a graph-structured input, and then
automatically learns the discriminative features that influence logic locking
security. To support sufficient data for the proposed data-driven method, a
logic locking macro-database will be developed that encompasses the required
PPAS, attack and defense information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.