* 2126701
* SCC-PG: Development of Resilience Roadmap for Rio Grande Valley
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Venkatesh Uddameri, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,922.00

Located along the US-Mexico border in the southeastern corner of the state of
Texas, the Rio Grande Valley (RGV), has long experienced major flooding due to
its low-lying lands and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico. The flooding problem is
rooted in a number of issues across the built, natural, and social environments,
including rapid urbanization and associated increase in impervious cover as well
as the prevalence of older developments that do not account for hydrology, and
unincorporated communities known as colonias that are without drainage
infrastructure. These typically low-lying communities, not ideal for residential
development, have been home to thousands of families with deep social attachment
to place. Despite multiple mitigation efforts by local authorities, the flooding
problem persists. Because of future climate variability, flooding events like
these are more likely and will continue to present challenges. A lack of a
thorough resilience plan and an integrative decision support system to cope with
natural and anthropogenic hazards, coupled with insufficient resources, have
made the area more vulnerable, particularly to consecutive disasters. This study
holistically approaches the flooding problem through convergence research that
brings together community stakeholders and an interdisciplinary research team
with the objective to develop a resilience roadmap focused on viable adaptation
strategies. The project aims to be as inclusive as possible of the community by
providing multiple opportunities for community participation in the project
ranging from community forums, focus groups, and
surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this planning grant is to establish a
foundation for convergence and inclusive problem-solving across researchers,
practitioners, and stakeholders through transdisciplinary research aimed at
addressing complex problems from the lens of societal needs. This is to be
achieved through various community data collection methods from residents and
policymakers to collect data on their needs, challenges, priorities, flooding
perceptions, and openness to adaptation strategies. Parallel to community
survey, technical data related to flooding including morphology of the
subsurface will be collected to facilitate analysis of technical feasibility of
potential adaptation strategies tailored to community needs as extracted from
stakeholder preference analysis. Results from this planning grant would form the
foundation for development of a spatially-explicit decision support
systems/community adaptation plan capable of integrating climate, hydrology,
land use, and socioeconomic data with quantitative models to help decision-
makers evaluate flood risks under various future development scenarios and
establish a knowledge base that can be used by other regions experiencing rapid
urbanization and climate change threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.