* 2126530
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of New Time and Spatially-Resolved, Near-Infrared Photoluminescence Techniques Detecting Trapped Charge in Inorganic Sediments for Geochronology Dating
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Amy Scott, BETA ANALYTIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a rapid,
Pulsed Near-Infrared Photoluminescence (P-NIR-PL) and Stimulated Luminescence
(SL) technique with micron spatial resolution, as a state-of-the art
photoluminescence dating method for inorganic sediments, with substantially
improved precision, accuracy, and turn-around time for sample processing.
Picosecond-NIR-PL is a next-generation analytical platform for inorganic
sediments. The team seeks to capture geochronological data from ~1 to 200,000
years prior. The approach addresses challenges with sample processing through
the rapid detection of overlapping PL signals that will be deconvoluted and
correlated to age. If successful, this project will provide new capabilities to
geologists and archaeologists working on new geochronological methods for dating
volcanic soils, charred materials, and sand/rock materials from future
extraterrestrial sites. A sizable niche market and strong commercialization
opportunity exists if optical dating measurements can be performed rapidly and
non-destructively, repeatedly with differentiation on the sub single-grain
level, and reliably with minimal sample pre-treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project focuses on instrument development to address
the immediate demand for an accurate tool for differentiation of quartz and
feldspar detection in sediments using an advanced spatial and time-resolved
microscopy method with an attached dosing/dating capability for geochronological
dating. Separation of PL and SL decays that are previously unexplained will
establish a novel geochronological method achieved by expanding the detection
into the near-infrared. A picosecond pulsed laser source with picosecond-to-
second resolution in kinetic decay will be combined with high spatial resolution
to cover a wide range of excitation/emission profiles that uniquely shorten the
time required for a single measurement, from 13 hours to 20 minutes.
Specifically, the combined time-resolved and spatially-resolved components
create a powerful technique to distinguish molecular and crystalline
environments as well as to distinguishing emissions from similar spectra and
unique elemental microstructures. The proposed activities may advance
engineering and science innovation in pulsed optical/NIR dating methods with a
focus on high performance, commercial instrument development for rapid sample
screening. Establishment of both the state-of-the-art instrumentation and
analytical testing service for optical dating will be performed by a new
diversified customer segment with implementation of an online geochronological
library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.