* 2126105
* Collaborative Proposal: Developing argon techniques to elucidate earthquake chronologies (DATEEQ)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Pratigya Polissar, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,944.00

Our understanding of how earthquakes start, propagate, and stop is hindered by
the fact that they occur deep underground where we cannot directly observe
faults before, during, and after the quake. To better study what faults do at
depth, one can drill through them or look at faults that used to be buried deep
in the Earth but have been exposed at the surface. In this study, the
researchers look at rock samples from drill cores through faults to identify
areas of the fault that have experienced earthquake slip. Because individual
earthquakes can slip along zones with small thicknesses - just millimeters
compared to the total fault thickness of 10s-100s of meters) - it is unlikely
that the whole fault will have experienced earthquakes. The goal of this study
is to develop a new technique to determine not only where earthquakes have
occurred in a fault, but when. This is important because longer earthquake
records (on the million-year timescale) allow to better understand earthquake
cycles and develop better earthquake forecasts. Here, by measuring the ratio of
radioactive potassium to its decay product argon in the fault rocks, the team
determine how long it has been since the rock was heated by earthquakes. This is
a novel application of one of the best-established geological dating techniques.
The study takes advantage of the fact that earthquakes generate a lot of heat
from friction; the generated heat can reset the potassium-argon clock, thereby
recording the time of the earthquake in the rock record. The project supports
graduate and undergraduate students at University of California â€“ Santa Cruz
(UCSC, a Hispanic serving Institution) and Columbia University. It broadens
participation in Earth Sciences by involving students from underrepresented
group at UCSC and from the City University of New York. It also fosters outreach
to local schools and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To characterize past
earthquake occurrences, the researchers first run a series of experiments to
determine how fast the argon is liberated from its host mineral when heated by
an earthquake. They run these experiments on several different rocks at
different times and temperatures (up to several hundred degrees in just a few
seconds). The experiments allow quantifying how fast argon diffusion occurs.
Next, the team measure potassium and argon in drill core rocks from major faults
including the subduction zone off of northern Japan (which hosted the 2011 Mw
9.1 earthquake) and the Hikurangi subduction zone off of the North Island of New
Zealand. Previous work on these cores using a geochemical method for measuring
rock temperature has demonstrated that hot earthquakes have occurred on these
faults. However, this previous method, using the change in molecular structure
of organic matter when heated, only provides a temperature estimate with no
indication of when the earthquake occurred. By combining dating and geochemical
methods, the researchers create dated records of earthquake slip over millions
of years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.