* 2126004
* Climate Change, community dynamics, and long-distance migratory birds
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Nathan Senner, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 04/30/2023
* USD 349,864.00

In an era of rapid environmental change, conservationists, ecologists and
resource managers are faced with two fundamental questions: (1) Which species
are most vulnerable to environmental change? and, (2) What mechanisms will
enable individuals and populations to respond to these environmental changes and
thus avoid extinction? Some wildlife species migrate thousands of miles each
year and thus face environmental changes in many different parts of their life
cycle. These species may thus be especially susceptible to environmental change.
To address these important conservation questions, the proposed research will
follow individual long-distance migratory birds, in particular Hudsonian Godwits
(Limosa haemastica), throughout their entire lives, from their breeding grounds
in Alaska to their nonbreeding grounds in southern Chile using novel
miniaturized tracking devices and on-the-ground efforts by an international team
of collaborators. Following individual birds throughout their lives will provide
insights into how changes occurring during different time periods or in
different locations may act separately or synergistically to influence the
ability of entire populations to successfully survive and reproduce. Then, to
aid the conservation of migratory species such as Hudsonian Godwits and deepen
engagement with local communities, this project will focus on developing K12
curricula in collaboration with local schools in rural Alaska and established
educational media producers, facilitating international collaborations by
holding online scientific symposia, and revising existing conservation plans to
incorporate recent findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global environmental changes
driven my human activities are diverse and ubiquitous. Wildlife species migrate
thousands of miles each year thus face environmental changes in many different
parts of their life cycle. These species populations may thus be especially
vulnerable to environmental change. This study will utilize a study site that
has been maintained since 2009 in Beluga River, Alaska, to address the
simultaneous effects of biotic and abiotic pressures acting throughout the life
cycle of the long-lived, long-distance migratory bird, the Hudsonian Godwit
(Limosa haemastica). Godwits face multiple separate, and potentially
synergistic, environmental changes throughout the year as they migrate from
southern Chile to Alaska. In this study, individual-level information on the
ability of godwits to alter their migration timing over the course of their
lives will be coupled with population-level information about how godwit chicks
may be forced to trade off foraging and safety to help inform a species-level
assessment of how well godwits will be able to respond to future environmental
changes occurring throughout their annual cycle. As a consequence, this
project’s results have the potential to illuminate not only long-held questions
in migration ecology, but fundamental questions about how individuals,
populations, and species are able to respond to environmental change.
Ultimately, the project’s aim is to provide critical, broadly applicable
information to inform assessments of species’ vulnerability to future global
change. The PI will work with the USFWS to advice on species vulnerability and
with local villagers to educate and engage local citizens in conservation and
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.