* 2126256
* Collaborative Research: Investigation of the molecular and cellular bases of the maize/Puccinia sorghi interaction
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2026
* Eunsook Park, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 762,886.00

Puccinia sorghi is a fungal pathogen causing common rust, which is one of the
most destructive diseases of maize. Genetics and molecular biological approaches
made significant progress in the identification of the host-resistant protein.
However, characterization of effector proteins secreted from the fungi, which
facilitate the pathogenesis process and are recognized by host resistant
proteins, remain elusive. This research will elucidate an important defense
mechanism in maize, a model species for plant quantitative genetics and the
number one crop in the U.S., using complementary approaches, including
bioinformatics, functional genomics, and advanced cell biological methods. Since
the hypersensitive response is a general defense response found in all
multicellular plants, this finding will be relevant to improving other important
crop species, particularly other grasses. Graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students will be trained in the fundamental understanding of crop
research and cutting-edge methods on cell biology, biochemistry, and molecular
genetics in plant-microbe interaction at the University of Wyoming and North
Carolina State University. Students will participate in this project as part-
time student researchers and more intensively during summer via the summer
research program. Additional outreach activities are planned with the NCSU
Science House to educate the public on genetics, plant breeding, biotechnology,
and associated societal implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project employs
Nicotiana benthamiana as a model to elucidate the molecular and cellular basis
of fungal pathogen Puccinia sorghi and maize interaction. The maize Rp1-D gene
encodes an NLR resistance protein that confers resistance to common rust disease
caused by the fungus Puccinia sorghi. Molecular genetic studies using an auto-
active derivative of the Rp1-D gene identify several host regulatory components.
However, pathogen effector protein recognized by Rp1-D triggering hypersensitive
responsive programmed cell death (HR-PCD) is elusive to date. This research will
1) identify effectors associated with the control of host cell death and
suppression of the host defense response, 2) define how these effectors
influence essential physiological changes in host cells, such as changes in pH,
reactive oxygen species production, and calcium flux, and their subcellular
localizations, and 3) examine the maize HR regarding these physiological changes
and organelle dynamics, such as stromule formation and inter-organellar
communication in the cell. Ultimately, this research will characterize the
physical interactions of all the host- and pathogen-derived components that
interact with Rp1-D and are likely to constitute cellular components of the
Rp1-D mediated immune signaling complex. This will result in an understanding of
the control of the NLR-mediated response that is unique in maize and among the
most detailed in any plant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.