* 2126303
* CC* Compute: The Arizona Federated Open Research Computing Enclave (AFORCE), an Advanced Computing Platform for Science, Engineering, and Health
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Gil Speyer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 399,997.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing upon its mission to enable
access to discovery and scholarship in science, engineering, and health, Arizona
State University (ASU) is deploying the Arizona Federated Open Research
Computing Enclave (AFORCE). AFORCE provides cutting-edge technology to support
research and education while advancing the knowledge and understanding of
deploying 21st-century cyberinfrastructure in a large public research
university. Specifically, this state-of-the-art system is supporting
multidisciplinary research and education in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics domains including computational genomics, molecular dynamics,
computational materials science, robotics, and imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
increase computational capacity, AFORCE comprises a pool of multiple graphical
processing unit (GPU) accelerated computing nodes accessible to extramural
researchers through federated authentication provided via InCommon. Moreover,
the AFORCE system itself is part of the global Open Science Grid computing pool.
ASU also promotes and enables the use of Open Science Grid by incorporating its
capabilities into regular training sessions and faculty engagement events.
Finally, AFORCE is configured to also provide cloud burst capabilities allowing
compute jobs to be scheduled on commercial clouds. Early career faculty will be
specifically targeted for workshops and tutorials, helping encourage their
participation in the AFORCE system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.