* 2126280
* CC* Planning: Undertaking a Process that will Create a Comprehensive Blueprint for Improving Cyber-Infrastructure at John Jay College, CUNY
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2022
* Anthony Carpi, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;John Jay College of Criminal
Justice, a senior college of the City University of New York that is both a
Minority-Serving and a Hispanic-Serving Institution, is creating a comprehensive
blueprint for improving cyber infrastructure to advance instruction, learning,
and research in the critical areas of forensics, cyber security, and
bioinformatics. An interdisciplinary team of faculty, research staff, and
information technology professionals is convening to identify, enumerate, and
prioritize the college’s cyberinfrastructure needs, and produce a blueprint for
meeting them. The goal of John Jay’s Campus Cyberinfrastructure planning
initiative is to facilitate the development of a John Jay College Research
Campus Cyber Infrastructure Resource Cluster. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team is
undertaking a comprehensive needs assessment focusing on the college’s overall
management of cyberinfrastructure resources; requirements for hardware and high-
performance computing; requirements for software, database, and simulation
applications; applications specific to the college’s unique criminal justice
focus; and professional development training needs for faculty, staff and
students. This rigorous set of planning activities will produce an investment
plan for an improved set of research computing resources to facilitate
sophisticated faculty research across the disciplines. It further ensures the
continued competitiveness of John Jay students in computing-focused career
fields, particularly within the justice and security realms. Project
deliverables include a five-year cyberinfrastructure investment plan that forms
the basis for future proposal submissions to the NSF MRI and CC* programs to
seek partial support for implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.