* 2126592
* PlantSynBio: Chassis design for sustainable production of high value terpenoids in the crop species tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Carol Buell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,399,994.00

Plants produce a diverse set of chemicals that are of use to humans as
pharmaceuticals, fragrance, food additives, and agrichemicals. One class of
compounds are terpenoids which can be used as agrichemicals as they are active
against many insects but non-toxic to mammals, biodegradable, and compatible
with methods used in sustainable agriculture practices. However, production of
these compounds directly from plants can be challenging due to low yield as well
as the time, space, and costs required to grow the plants and extract the
compounds. Through advances in biotechnology, it is now possible to engineer
production of high value chemicals in plants in a crop species which is simple
to grow thereby providing a sustainable approach to production of plant-derived
agrichemicals. In this project, we will use biotechnology approaches to engineer
tomato to produce high value terpenoids in fruit and demonstrate that merging
chemistry with biotechnology and agriculture provides a platform for sustainable
production of chemicals with limited availability from natural sources. We
anticipate that access to a sustainable bio-engineered platform for terpenoid
production will be of broad use to both the academic and industry sectors. In
this project, we will train personnel in technologies critical to a 21st century
workforce. Through annual events and modules at the State Botanic Garden of
Georgia, Michigan State University, and University of Minnesota, we will inform
the public of the potential of plant systems for sustainable production of
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 50,000 plant terpenoids are known which are
synthesized from universal C5 building blocks via the activity of terpene
synthases, cytochrome P450s, and glycosyl transferases and function in plant
defense, and as attractants to pollinators and symbionts. However, heterologous
expression of terpenoid biosynthetic genes in plants is problematic due to the
tendency for conversion of the activated products into conjugates or other
derivatives via endogenous cytochrome P450s and glycosyl transferases. Using
cutting edge gene editing and transformation technologies, this project will
develop new experimental platforms and a paradigm for plant synthetic biology by
generating two novel tomato chassis with minimal terpenoid biosynthetic capacity
that will enable engineering of high value terpenoid molecules in tomato fruit.
Our scientific aims are to (i) Rapidly confirm cytochromes P450 and glycosyl
transferases involved in tri- and tetra-terpene biosynthesis in tomato fruit
using de novo meristem generated gene-edited lines; (ii) Develop two chassis in
tomato that are depleted of tri- and tetraterpenes (carotenoids) in fruit using
state-of-the-art gene editing and transformation methods; and (iii) Construct
bioengineered tomato lines that synthesize two high value terpenoids as a proof-
of-concept. Within this project we will train scientists in state-of-the-art
synthetic biology to facilitate new paradigms in plant synthetic biology.
Through annual events and modules with three institutions, we will engage the
lay public in the power of plant systems for sustainable chemical
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.