* 2126910
* STTR Phase II:  Complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) integrated piezoelectric vapor sensors
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Ioannis Kymissis, LELANTOS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,031,251.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve personnel safety from flammable
gas leaks in industrial, commercial, and residential facilities. Additionally,
the technology contributes to combating climate change by tackling one of the
leading sources of carbon emissions, methane emissions from oil and gas
facilities. The technology enables the mitigation of methane and refrigerant
leaks that constitutes a significant market opportunity in the oil, gas and
HVACR (heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration) markets. The
innovation may solve important technical bottlenecks that have prevented
widespread adoption of pervasive gas sensing in Internet of Things (IoT)
applications. As an enabling system, it may be utilized in a variety of other
applications area such as the detection of explosives, narcotics, chemical
weapons, indoor air quality monitoring, and diagnosis of disease via breath
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II
project seeks to develop a gas sensor with an unparalleled combination of size,
power, and cost while offering high detection performance. The proposed
architecture fabricates high-frequency bulk acoustic resonators directly on the
backend of CMOS (Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor) integrated circuit
chips which permits low-cost, mass-production and improved noise characteristics
of the sensors. The direct co-integration also allows the fabrication of a
receptor array to obtain responses from multiple target analytes that can be
used to classify materials and for real-time calibration against environmental
confounders. The objective of this project is the development of a single-chip
gas sensor based on co-integrated piezoelectric materials. This effort will
consist of the design, fabrication and characterization of integrated resonator
arrays onto silicon circuits; integration of the chips with receptor materials,
allowing selective adsorption of target gas molecules; and testing to assess the
gas sensing performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.