* 2126732
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Structure for Efficient and Reliable Medium Voltage Silicon Carbide (SiC) Power Devices
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,02/29/2024
* Adam Morgan, NOMIS POWER GROUP LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 255,909.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to improve the efficiency and reliability power conversion
systems (PCSs) while also reducing the complexity and cost. System builders and
end-users of power electronics for PCS may benefit from proposed advancements in
power semiconductor technology that are translated to cheaper and more resilient
and sustainable electricity generation, distribution, and consumption. The
interconnections of distributed energy resources and energy storage systems
within DC (direct current) micro-grids and interfaces between DC micro-grids and
legacy AC (alternating current) distribution grid networks will be made simpler,
more efficient, and more reliable when the proposed power semiconductor devices
become ubiquitous within future PCS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve advanced power
semiconductor processing techniques. Specifically, the project focuses on: 1)
developing a reliable semiconductor-based, high power electronic switch in the
form of a SiC MOSFET (Silicon Carbide Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor Field-Effect
Transistor), 2) optimizing the electronic switch parameters to achieve the best
trade-off between efficiency and reliability, and 3) fully characterizing the
electrical performance of the electronic switch. The research will involve the
design of experiments to determine the optimal set of electronic switch
parameters that take into account manufacturing limitations of the semiconductor
processing equipment. The teams seeks to produce a functioning semiconductor-
based, high power electronic switch that is capable of operating more reliably
and more efficiently than what is presently available in the market. The team
also seeks to enable even higher power electronic switches to be made by means
of scaling the resultant SiC MOSFET technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.