* 2126752
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Floorplan Reconstruction
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Shahrouz Alimo, OPAL AI INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is a novel tool to visualize indoor spaces. Emerging “property
technology” (PropTech) plays an increasing role in the development of new large
commercial buildings; it is anticipated that such PropTech will save billions of
dollars per year and stimulate remodeling projects that might not otherwise even
be undertaken, once it is made more broadly accessible, and may thus be adopted
for the remodeling of small businesses, restaurants, and residences. This
project develops a simple, rapid, and affordable generation of accurate floor
plans of existing structures, leveraging commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) camera
technology (implemented in modern tablets and smartphones) coupled with advanced
AI software and algorithms that model and identify common features (walls,
doors, windows, furniture) in the 3D images generated by such devices. The floor
plans so generated will provide an accurate, easily generated framework upon
which substantial renovations can then be more easily designed. This is
anticipated largely replace the labor-intensive and error-prone manual processes
of floor plan generation, thereby reducing operating costs and stimulating new
remodeling projects in various markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop an AI-driven app that
quickly and autonomously reconstructs digital spatial layouts of indoor spaces
based on walk through calibrated image capture with modern smartphones or
tablets, leveraging time-of-flight or structured-light imaging systems together
with embedded motion sensors and advanced data analysis. The key intellectual
merit of this project is the deep neural networks and optimization algorithms,
together with advanced user-interface/user-experience (UI/UX) to provide an
intuitive human interface to this data analysis engine. This enables adjustment
of the reconstruction rules and visualization of the generated model. The
technical hurdles include accurate 3D scene reconstruction and 2D floor plan
generation based on sensor-generated point clouds and feature recognition in
cluttered environments, and the synthesis of multi-room maps from several
single-room models. Rules can be specified by the user as appropriate (defining
room adjacency, wall thickness, orthogonality assumptions,
etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.