* 2126110
* Collaborative research: From Community to Practice: Evaluating How Open Educational Resources Facilitate Implementation of Vision and Change Principles Across Diverse Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Michelle Smith, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2026
* USD 773,789.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by examining how open
educational resources (OERs), which are educational materials available in the
public domain, have enabled implementation of Vision and Change (V&amp;C)
principles. The V&amp;C report called for biology departments to transform their
programs by using student-centered teaching approaches and integrating core
concepts and competencies throughout their curriculum. This report also
recognized that course transformation represents a major undertaking for
individual instructors and that achieving widespread change would require a
distributed effort across biology educators. The biology community has responded
to this call in a variety of ways, including supporting peer-reviewed OER
journal articles that describe structured lessons with demonstrated potential to
improve undergraduate student success. However, there has been little work to
understand the composition, implementation, and impacts of the V&amp;C
principles in OERs. By characterizing the existing resources, describing
community OER engagement, and measuring OER implementation and student learning,
this project has a unique vantage from which to understand at a national level
how the V&amp;C call has been realized by the community for the benefit of
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The unifying goal of this project is to advance
undergraduate biology education by examining how OER articles have enabled
implementation of V&amp;C principles across a variety of undergraduate
institution types. Despite the potential usefulness of OERs, the field lacks a
comprehensive understanding of the scope of existing lessons described in
articles, how instructors implement them, and whether these resources
consistently lead to positive student outcomes. This project will address this
gap using an array of data sources, from published OER articles to present day
student learning. The project aims to conduct a scoping review of OER article
content from a variety of journals. The scoping review will address questions
about the coverage of V&amp;C core concepts and competencies; the use of active
learning practices; and the advancement of diversity, equity, and inclusion.
This project will also survey authors and users to determine their engagement
with OERs. For authors, the focus will be on how they construct their lessons
with V&amp;C principles and how their institutions reward OER contributions. For
users, the focus will be on how they modify lessons for their courses. To
further determine how implementation affects student learning, instructors who
teach pre-selected OER lessons aligned with V&amp;C core concepts and
competencies will share course artifacts (e.g., lecture slides), video
recordings of their instruction, and student assessment results. Taken together,
these data will provide insights into the range of ways that instructors adapt
V&amp;C-aligned OERs for their own contexts and determine the extent to which
lesson components influence student learning across institution types. Drawing
from emergent research, instructors from a variety of institutions will meet
regularly in faculty mentoring networks (FMNs) to identify and enact strategies
to improve the OER sharing process. These strategies will promote V&amp;C
principles through mechanisms such as issuing community calls for specific
resource development; reflecting on how OER articles can promote diversity,
equity, and inclusion; hosting workshops at home institutions to help colleagues
adopt and implement OERs; and identifying suggestions for departmental
incentives and community supports that encourage increased OER growth. This
project will benefit society by understanding how V&amp;C aligned OERs can be
used to promote student learning in undergraduate biology courses. This project
is funded by the Program Description 21-7412, Vision and Change that supports
projects that study the impact of the Vision and Change movement in
Undergraduate Biology Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.