* 2126633
* SCC-PG:  PILOT FOR EQUITABLE ELECTRIC MOBILITY: Smart Charging, Smart Parking, and METRO Pass System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Ramanan Krishnamoorti, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,999.00

This S&amp;CC project in southwest Houston establishes a collaborative process
with community and commercial technology partners with an overall aim to
leverage early Electric Vehicle (EV) adopter regional markets to accelerate
equitable development of accessible fast charging infrastructure and EV
ownership for low income families. The novelty of the project lies in a
community-driven participatory approach that integrates both social and
technical dimensions bringing transformational change to EV ownership and
electrification of smart public transportation. This will be achieved by a data-
driven model that integrates of real-time data for micro-transit, fixed-route
transit, and carpooling services can predict and overcome the uncertainties of
traffic conditions resulting in uncertain travel times and poor reliability. An
engaging process establishes collaborative relationships, identifies adopter
indicators, and incentives for equitable EV ownership and transit ridership. The
project will result in a templet and framework for implementing smart transit
hubs that can be reapplied at other Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris
County (METRO) facilities or to other transit systems as best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Greater access to new electric mobility
technologies requires reduction in economic barriers to EV ownership and
transportation services. Communities need to proactively plan for transportation
technologies to improve the lives of low-income communities while lowering
emissions, increasing transit use, and reducing congestion. The intellectual
merits include application of emerging data analytics, smart technologies, and
machine learning to tackle a national challenge of equitable access to EV
ownership and electric mobility. The project builds a model using artificial
neural networks to capture complex, non-linear phenomena and parameterize data
for real-time decision making. The broader project impacts include developing a
digital ecosystem and incentive programs reflecting the national need to
stimulate equitable access to EV ownership; regional policy impact demonstrating
collaborative partnerships between cities, EV companies, fast charging
developers, and ridesharing services; and research that opens up opportunities
to use the data for EV impacts on the energy grid and future smart grid
research. This project will identify how the deployment of smart technologies
can improve the reliability, comfort, and affordability of transit
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.