* 2126059
* BCSER: Characterizing How Teachers Design Engaging Learning Environments in STEM Education: Examining Teachers’ and Students' Conceptualizations of integrated STEM
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Paul Asunda, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 325,009.00

This STEM education research capacity building project combines a research
project aimed at examining teachers as agents of change in STEM education and a
professional development plan focused on facilitating the principal
investigator’s acquisition of competencies in conceptual frameworks and research
designs for exploring integrated STEM (iSTEM) learning environments in middle
school settings. The research project will investigate teachers’ conceptions of
iSTEM teaching and learning and how these conceptualizations influence them to
design classroom experiences that engage students in these learning
environments. The study will also employ a phenomenographic lens and mixed-
methods approach to conduct a two-group randomized trial to explore students’
engagement in these learning environments. The project will extend the
investigator’s methodological and subject matter expertise in teacher
preparation practices that inform student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted in the state of Indiana with rural and diverse K-12
school populations that are enrolled in STEM teaching schools as designated by
the Indiana Department of Education. The investigator will examine two research
questions: (1) What are middle school STEM teachers’ conceptions of iSTEM? and
(2) How do teachers’ instructional practices affect the quality of students’
classroom opportunities to engage in learning? The study sample will include 100
teachers based on years of experience, specific STEM discipline, and school
setting. Data will be collected through a Qualtrics survey, interviews, and case
study of an experimental group that includes classroom observations.
Constructivist learning theory and The Opportunity to Learn framework will be
utilized to interpret findings for the second research question. The project
will identify critical methodological issues and theoretical links between iSTEM
instruction and learning environments that support student engagement for future
research and provide contextual factors that may promote iSTEM teaching
effectiveness. The anticipated outcomes of the project are new knowledge toward
a definition of iSTEM and new design principles to guide iSTEM instruction and
teacher preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the EHR:
Building Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core
Research (ECR) program. ECR funds fundamental STEM education research that
focuses on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening participation in
STEM fields, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.