* 2126085
* I-Corps: Simulation-based Decision Support Platform for Regenerative Medicine Manufacturing and Distribution
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Ben Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a simulation-based decision-support platform to assist
regenerative medicine manufacturers, including cell, gene, and tissue-engineered
products. The proposed technology aims to address the challenges facing the
manufacturing and distribution in regenerative medicine products. The goal is to
assist manufacturers in the identification of problems early on and throughout
the overall manufacturing process. The proposed platform may lead to improved
access, improved quality of the product, and reduced costs, which may benefit
the millions of people suffering from terminal diseases as well as those in need
of tissue and organ transplants.

This I-Corps project is based on the development of a simulation platform to
provide decision support for regenerative medicine manufacturers. The simulation
platform is designed to create digital twins of a single manufacturing facility
or a manufacturing network throughout a large region. The platform incorporates
two types of manufacturing modes: a patient-specific, personalized manufacturing
process for autologous products and a batch manufacturing process for allogeneic
products. The platform enables manufacturers to devise system-level decisions to
improve facility design and predicts “what if” scenarios to plan for unexpected
disruptions. The proposed technology may enhance knowledge in regenerative
medicine manufacturing, supply chain, regulatory, and decision science realms by
addressing a wide range of challenges. The proposed technology may help to
ensure accuracy, reliability, and timeliness in the manufacturing and
distribution processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.