* 2126923
* Understanding and Controlling Ionic Behaviors in Heterostructured Metal-Organic-Frameworks for Selective Magnesium Ion Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Udayan Mohanty, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 395,063.00

Non-technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling ionic transport in
solid-state materials is of fundamental importance. For example, being able to
selectively move ions in a solid-state film may enable the utilization of cheap
and safe materials (such as magnesium) for next-generation batteries. A critical
challenge limiting research progress in this area is the difficulty in achieving
the desired selectivity. That is, it is exceedingly difficult to promote the
movement of one type of ion and to suppress others. A promising solution to this
problem is to combine multiple material components into a single solid-state
structure. The resulting material greatly expands the possibility of selective
ion transport. With funding from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, Drs. Wang, Bao, and Mohanty from Boston
College build and study a new type of architecture in solid-state films that has
the potential for fast and selective magnesium ion transport. They chose a
versatile metal-organic framework as a model platform, which includes multiple-
component structured layers. The overall structure is expected to promote
magnesium ion transport while suppressing the movement of unwanted species. To
enhance the impacts of the project, educational opportunities are provided to
engage undergraduate researchers in the research project. Moreover,
complementary outreach activities are developed to inform the general public of
the implications of materials research for a sustainable future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in the Division of
Materials Research, this project investigates fast and selective transport of
multivalent ions (e.g., Mg) in metal-organic framework (MOF) based materials.
Drs. Wang, Bao, and Mohanty from Boston College leverage their expertise in
synthesis, electrochemical characterization, material design, and theoretical
and computational toolsets for ionic transport. They collaborate to test the
hypothesis that fast and selective transport of multivalent ions through MOF-
based materials can be achieved through tuning the structural components. The
distinctiveness of the study is the design of a MOF-based heterostructure
platform that consists of multiple-component layers, suitably tailored to enable
Mg2+ transport, suppressing the movement of the solvent molecules and the
anions, while maintaining reasonable conductivity. The research efforts are
complemented with educational plans aimed at broadening the impacts by engaging
undergraduate researchers in the project, and the researchers’ activities to
educate the general public about the significance of materials research for a
sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.