* 2126142
* National Academies Space Weather Operations and Research Infrastructure Workshop, Phase II; 2021-22; Washington, District of Columbia
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Colleen Hartman, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 09/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The National Academies (NASEM) Space Studies Board will hold a workshop on the
future research agenda and infrastructure needed to improve understanding of
space weather phenomena, their origins and impacts. Space weather is generated
by intricate interactions among the Sun, Earth’s magnetic field, and Earth's
atmosphere. The effects of space weather include not only picturesque auroras
but also unwelcome hazard to the electrical power grid, disruption of radio
communication, and damage to space-based assets including GPS satellites.
Therefore, the origin and effects of space weather are of interest to the
research community, forecasters, utility companies, satellite operators, and
national and international policy makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Space
Weather Operations and Research Infrastructure Workshop, Phase II is cosponsored
by NSF and NASA and will be held in the latter half of 2021. NASEM will convene
a broad, diverse swath of the space weather and solar and space physics
communities, including those from academia, government, non-profits, and the
commercial sector. Discussions during the workshop will examine trends in
available and anticipated space weather observations, including the use of
constellations of small satellites, hosted payloads, ground-based systems,
international collaborations and data buys; review existing and developing
technologies for research and observations; and consider needs, gaps, and
opportunities in space weather modeling and validation, including data
assimilation and ensemble approaches. NASEM will publish a proceeding
summarizing the workshop presentations and discussions, which will be useful to
the research and policy communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.