* 2126533
* OCE-PRF Detecting signatures of multigenerational plasticity in a marine forage fish
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Christopher Murray, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 01/31/2024
* USD 378,315.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal marine ecosystems face
multiple anthropogenic stressors including increasingly severe events of co-
occurring acidification and hypoxia. These periodic but acute environmental
stressors can directly impact the abundance, diversity, and commercial value of
coastal fish stocks. Rapid acclimation of key physiological processes can
provide short-term protection against extreme conditions. Importantly, these
phenotypic modifications can be passed on to subsequent generations thereby
priming offspring for increased tolerance. However, for most fish species the
scope for phenotypic plasticity and the precise mechanisms of action are poorly
understood. This severely limits our ability to anticipate responses in the
majority of ecologically and economically important marine species. The
overarching objective of this proposal is to investigate the potential for
within-generational and multigenerational plasticity in response to co-occurring
hypoxia and acidification in the forage fish Atlantic silverside (Menidia
menidia). The Atlantic silverside is a foundational species and an essential
trophic component of coastal food webs along the North American Atlantic coast
and serves as key prey item for many seabirds and commercially important fish.
Understanding the long-term bioenergetic impacts and the potential for rapid
adaptation in this species will therefore fundamentally advance our
understanding of the ecological consequences of rapid environmental change in
coastal marine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be centered
around a series of laboratory exposure experiments and state-of-the-art
metabolic assays utilizing wild-caught Atlantic silversides collected during
their spring spawning season. The PI will investigate how parental environments
influence offspring phenotype by conditioning mature wild Atlantic silversides
(F0) to contrasting fluctuating CO2/O2 treatments. The F1 generation will be
then reared in a reciprocal transplant experiment to quantify how parental and
offspring treatment levels affect key life-history traits including survival,
growth, and aerobic performance. Surviving F1 offspring will be reared until
maturity to evaluate how environmental stress experienced during early
development affects adult reproductive capacity. Furthermore, the PI will
investigate the role of biological memory in multigenerational plasticity by
exposing F2 offspring to factorial combinations of grandparental and parental
environments. In parallel, the PI will investigate how molecular mechanisms may
mediate rapid adaptation to changing environments using transcriptomics (RNAseq)
and genome-wide DNA methylation profiling (Methylseq). Linking molecular changes
with whole organism phenotypic responses will broaden our understanding of the
effects of multiple stressors on an ecologically important species which will
provide clues for developing mitigation plans to protect coastal food webs from
various climatic factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.