* 2126660
* Data-Enabled Theoretical Understanding of the Structure and Properties of Solvent-cast Polymer Nanocomposites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvio May
* 08/31/2025
* USD 390,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From sport shoes to credit cards,
materials consisting of synthetic polymers are ubiquitous in present-day
society. Adding a filler material to the polymer can lead to novel properties
that enable specialized applications such as extraordinarily hard coatings,
fire-resistant fabrics, or modern car tires. Filler materials consist of small
nano-sized particles that are intended to distribute homogeneously within the
polymer. However, like water and oil, the nanoparticles and polymers are known
to have an intrinsic tendency to separate from each other and form undesired
nanoparticle agglomerations instead of a homogeneous nanocomposite.
Interestingly, there is experimental evidence that the process of creating the
nanocomposite can nevertheless lead to the formation of homogeneous dispersions,
with desired properties. The goal of the proposed work is to quantitatively
understand the science behind how processing determines the dispersion states
and the ensuing mechanical properties of polymer-nanoparticle mixtures. To this
end, the project will combine data-rich methods, theoretical calculations, and
computer simulations. In a first step, a machine learning algorithm will be
trained on the available, large database of polymer-nanoparticle composites,
their preparation methods, and the resulting dispersion states. These tools,
when implemented, will be able to identify critical regions of parameter space
where interesting phenomena occur, e.g., where the material goes from well-mixed
to agglomerated nanoparticles. The work will then focus on these regions and use
a combination of computer simulations and theoretical calculations to delineate
the physical mechanisms that control the nanoparticle dispersion states and the
ensuing mechanical properties of the nanocomposite material. This integrated
data science-theory-simulation-experimental data workflow will enable the
determination of what the optimal nanoparticle dispersion states are for a set
of desired mechanical properties and how processing can be manipulated to
achieve these states. The project will train students in integrated design and
modeling of next-generation materials, develop online learning modules related
to nanocomposites and their applications, and implement a shared, open source
repository of research data and machine learning tools for wide dissemination in
the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is now well-accepted that adding nanoparticles
(NPs) to commodity polymers can lead to hybrid materials with substantially
improved properties. The most significant complication encountered, which
frequently prevents these property improvements from being realized, is that
inorganic NPs are hydrophilic while organic polymers are hydrophobic. These
physical mixtures thus have a strong propensity to phase separate. In contrast
to these expectations, a large body of experiments has shown that the process of
creating these nanocomposites, e.g., by solvent casting, can leverage a variety
of non-equilibrium phenomena to yield dramatically different but temporally
stable NP dispersion states. A canonical example is the competitive sorption of
the polymer in solution to the NP surface; this leads to the formation of a
long-lived bound polymer layer which sterically stabilizes well-dispersed NPs.
The goal of this proposed work is to quantitatively understand the poorly
enunciated science underpinning solution-based processing protocols so as to
obtain NP dispersion states with optimized mechanical properties at
will.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will synergistically combine data
rich methods and theory/computer simulations on two inter-related tasks: (1) An
ML algorithm will be trained on the available, large database of polymer/NP
composites that have been experimentally cast from a range of different solvents
and the NP dispersion states that result after solvent removal. After training,
these ML methods will be able to identify critical regions of parameter space
where interesting phenomena occur, e.g., where the material goes from well-mixed
to agglomerated NPs. The work will then focus on these regions and use a
combination of computer simulations and theory to delineate the physics that
control the solvent casting process. (2) The role of different NP dispersion
states on linear and non-linear mechanical properties will then be
quantitatively enumerated. This integrated data science-theory-simulation-
experimental data workflow will enable answers to several key scientific
questions: (1) What is the space of polymer-NP-common solvent interactions that
yield different NP dispersions? Previous work has suggested that the critical
parameter is the effective solvent mediated polymer-NP interaction energy. Is
this description accurate, and can effective NP-NP interactions be derived
through known metrics such as solubility parameters and measured NP surface
potentials? (2) What is the structure of the bound layer formed when polymer/NP
interactions are more favorable than solvent/NP interactions? How does the
structure of this bound layer depend on solvent quality and how does it yield
good dispersion? (3) Going beyond casting from one solvent, how does the
addition of a second, non-solvent allows for the precipitation of a NP-polymer
composite with well-dispersed NPs? Does this process really only utilize
entropic factors in effecting NP dispersion? (4) Under what conditions do
kinetic issues, such as solution viscosity, become important determinants of NP
dispersion? (5) How does NP dispersion state affect mechanical properties in the
linear and non-linear regimes? Can the optimal NP dispersion states (and the
associated solvent casting conditions) for mechanical properties be located and
understood?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.