* 2126386
* EarthCube Capabilities: Reducing Time-to-science for Terrestrial Sensor Networks by Integrating Field Notes, Management, and QA/QC into Data Curation
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Collin Bode, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 827,001.00

Climate change and the increasing incidence of extreme weather events (e.g.,
droughts, hurricanes, floods) are motivating researchers to initiate monitoring
programs to understand the feedbacks among climate, vegetation response, and
Earth surface processes in order to anticipate future conditions and resulting
stresses on habitat and water resources. This project will make improvements to
Dendra, a data system for environmental monitoring, so that it is available for
broad use by geoscientists. Dendra enables researchers to use a wide range of
field instruments to measure time varying environmental properties (e.g.,
rainfall, temperature, soil moisture, groundwater levels) and to facilitate
making time-series data available from remote locations in real time. The data
are archived, examined for errors, and tools are provided for immediate data
analysis. These collective capabilities enable researchers to manage large
diverse data sets, to quickly troubleshoot and analyze the data, and to test
hypotheses and advance new ones. Dendra, which is currently in use by 8
organizations (e.g., state agencies, non-profits groups, and university
researchers), overcomes the challenge of managing simultaneously large amounts
of data from diverse environmental sensors obtained from several different
manufacturers. This is emerging as a common monitoring challenge now that sensor
prices have dropped (leading to large number of instruments deployed). As a
result, new sensors have been developed, and real-time tracking is now possible
through a variety of networking technologies. To make Dendra more widely
available, this project will conduct outreach efforts and will build and share
data management and development tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
bring Dendra (dendra.science) into the EarthCube toolset as a Software as a
Service (SaaS) system. This cloud-based service will be an expert system for use
by research groups or organizations performing long-term monitoring. Dendra
integrates all aspects of managing, troubleshooting, cleaning, and distributing
time-series data into a single system. Dendra was developed by the Eel River
Critical Zone Observatory in collaboration with the University of California
Natural Reserve System and California Heartbeat Initiative and is hosted by
NSFâ€™s Extreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE). Four
activities will be undertaken to bring Dendra into the EarthCube toolset. First,
back end infrastructure will be built out, providing high availability and three
9 uptime (99.9%) with the web site migrated to static site hosting, and security
will be enhanced with a cross-network virtual private network (VPN). Second, to
enhance discoverability, the project will bring Dendra metadata into compliance
with the EarthCube GeoCODES discovery resource and build a WaterOneFlow
connector to become visible on the Consortium of Universities for the
Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI) Hydrologic Information System.
Third, management improvements will be developed in the form of a Dendra mobile
app, a station wizard to ease the onboarding, and further development of the
Annotation system. The Annotation system allows for data corrections without
modifying the datasets, such that all derived datasets are dynamically corrected
along with the source data. These same corrections can be rolled back or updated
dynamically. Fourth, the project will provide user assistance and training
support, including generation of training materials to make it easier for new
research groups to adopt the Dendra system for their own
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.