* 2126398
* SBIR Phase I:  In-pixel, real-time neural digitizer to restore connectivity in spinal cord injuries
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Alessandro Maggi, ECATE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 02/28/2023
* USD 253,885.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the quality of life for people who
suffer from debilitating forms of paralysis by restoring their lost
functionality. There are 5.4 million people in the United States who suffer from
paralysis. Not only do these patients suffer from the physical pain that comes
with their condition but also, they are afflicted by financial and psychological
burdens. The prostheses that are being used today are either passive and
affordable or active and unaffordable for the majority of these patients. Active
prostheses represent the forefront of brain-computer interfaces development.
Current protheses suffer from drawbacks such as constant patient training, the
necessity for bulky skin electrodes, variability in electrode positioning, and
limited efficacy when worn and operated by the patients themselves. This device
first targets incomplete paralysis by functioning as a neural relay station that
bridges the disconnect between the healthy neural section above and below the
site of injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to overcome the limitations of current brain-
computer interfaces to not only restore functionality in people with paralysis,
but to recreate a real-time, seamless experience for them. Most available neural
probes rely on highly invasive, sharp shanks to penetrate neural tissue. These
probes cause considerable inflammation, ultimately leading to device failure.
Current devices detect signals extracellularly which leads to a low signal-to-
noise ratio making signal extraction very challenging. This project will improve
brain-computer interfaces by introducing nanoarchitecture to the sensing
electrode in order to achieve intracellular sensing. This sensing dramatically
increases the signal-to-noise ratio making signal extraction considerably
simpler. This device is based on an active pixel complementary metal oxide
semiconductor architecture which will turn neural signals into a string of ones
and zeros making signal extraction considerably simpler. This process will
minimize the patient-interface training time. This project will fabricate three-
dimensional, nano-architected sensing electrodes with high-aspect ratio and
high-density nanoneedles, mimicking the natural neural cell environment. The
nanoneedles spontaneously penetrate neurons, achieve superior intracellular
recording, and reduce chronic inflammation to promote device
longevity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.