* 2126077
* Directing the synthesis of complex materials from metal fluxes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Latturner, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 473,751.00

Non-technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, Professor
Susan Latturner and her research group investigate the synthesis of magnetic and
electronic materials using molten metals as solvents. Reactions of elements in
molten metal fluxes take place at temperatures above those used for reactions
carried out in water, and below those used in traditional solid state synthesis.
This unusual temperature range and solution chemistry allows for formation of
entirely new materials as well new compounds that are formed by deliberately
adding a small amount of hydrogen or carbon atoms to flux reactions. The
researchers also study if the properties of these compounds can be changed by
addition of such small atoms. For example, the resulting metal hydride or metal
carbide products may have useful magnetic behavior. Another related research
thrust focuses on using metal flux reactions to partially substitute one element
in a compound by another. This approach could lead to complex semiconducting
compounds that may be useful for applications such as solar cells or conversion
of waste heat to electricity. Additionally, students involved in this
interdisciplinary research gain valuable training in synthesis, a variety of
characterization techniques, and critical thinking, and collaborate with
scientists in the chemistry, physics, and materials engineering fields. They
also make use of National Laboratory facilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary &lt;br/&gt;The research, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of &lt;br/&gt;Materials Research, investigates
the synthesis of new intermetallic compounds from reactions in molten metal
solutions, and explores the substitution and interstitial chemistry that is
possible in these reactions. Synthesis in metal flux allows reactions to take
place in a molten solution, at temperatures below those typically used in
traditional solid state synthesis. This liquid state method enables the
formation of new metastable phases and their isolation as large crystals. The
presence of sources of interstitial or dopant elements in the flux may trigger
the formation of new structures, or enable the tailoring of electronic
properties of known parent compounds by modifying charge carrier concentration.
This aspect of flux chemistry has been little studied; therefore, this project
furthers the understanding and utilization of this synthetic technique.
Professor Susan Latturner and her research group explore two specific systems:
One is the synthesis of lanthanide-rich intermetallic phases in
lanthanide/transition metal (Ln/T) eutectic fluxes, in the presence of sources
of interstitial elements (H, C, N, O, F). They determine whether interstitials
are incorporated and how they impact the structures and magnetic properties of
the products. The second area investigates the synthesis of metal silicide
phases in magnesium-rich flux mixtures and the optimization of their
thermoelectric properties by controlled doping. Substitution of trivalent (Sc,
Y, Dy) or monovalent (Li, Na) metals on Mg sites is explored to modify
electronic properties. X-ray and neutron diffraction are used to determine the
structures of products. Computational work sheds light on how interstitial or
substitutional doping affects the electronic structure of the compounds.
Magnetic and transport properties are studied in collaboration with researchers
at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.