* 2126644
* OCE-PRF: Quantifying Magmatic Influences on the Longevity of Segmented Transform Fault Systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2021
* Thomas Morrow, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 12/31/2021
* USD 44,097.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use numerical
modeling to study the processes that control the geometry of oceanic transform
faults. Oceanic transform faults are large faults that occur throughout the
global mid oceanic ridge system. Transform faults are known to split, segment,
and give rise to new volcanic spreading centers. These shifts can alter the
locations where earthquakes are likely to occur on the seafloor. The proposed
study will focus on the influence of magma supply on the longevity and geometry
of transform faults. New 2-D and 3-D models will be developed, and results
compared with observations of crustal thickness. Project results will improve
the understanding of the controls on formation of new ocean crust on mid ocean
ridges, and on the processes that drive seafloor earthquakes. The project will
support an early career scientist (the PI/postdoc). It will also help broaden
participation by underrepresented scientists in marine geosciences through an
introductory seminar series that will introduce marine geoscience research to
undergraduates at both host institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
hypothesizes that magmatic supply to an intra-transform spreading center is the
primary control on spreading center longevity in a segmented transform system.
As magmatic supply wanes, spreading in the intra-transform region will cease,
and previously-segmented strike slip faults will unify, regardless of imposed
tectonic compression or extension due to changing plate motions. The hypothesis
will be investigated with a series of finite difference, marker-in-cell, 2-D and
3-D numerical tectonic models, constrained by&lt;br/&gt;seafloor bathymetry
soundings and gravity anomaly observations. Changing magmatic proportions of
spreading at both inactive fracture zones and active transform faults along mid-
oceanic ridges in the case studies (Clarion FZ, St. Paul TF, and Gofar TF) will
be estimated from fault and seafloor fabric measurements, coupled with crustal
thickness estimates derived from gravity anomaly observations. Magmatic supply
in the numerical simulations will be systematically decreased over time
according to observational constraints and the responding changes in transform
fault morphology will be recorded. Parameters varied will include the spreading
rate, length of original transform fault offset, and the proportion of magmatic
to tectonically-accommodated spreading within the intra-transform region. The
3-D model produced by this work will be publicly available for use by other
researchers to expand upon this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.