* 2126023
* BCSER: Exploring Faculty Perception and Self-efficacy in Lab-intensive Online Courses
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Garth Crosby, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,948.00

This capacity-building project is designed to develop the investigator's
knowledge and skills as a STEM education researcher through intensive training
followed by the design and implementation of a study to investigate the
perceptions and self-efficacy of engineering faculty members who teach lab-
intensive STEM courses online. The multifaceted professional development plan
comprises coursework in educational research, workshops, and mentoring by a team
of education researchers. The research is designed to use a mixed methods
approach. Data will be collected through a survey of 140 engineering instructors
plus interviews of five of the survey respondents. The research findings will
add to the body of knowledge on faculty members’ perception and self-efficacy in
online teaching. It will also provide insight into factors that may be impeding
the growth of engineering and engineering technology
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Surveys of thousands of postsecondary programs in
the United States indicate that lab-intensive programs show a significantly
lower rate of online implementation. However, study of the factors contributing
to this trend has been limited. Using a sequential explanatory mixed methods
approach, this project will probe the underlying factors influencing faculty
members’ perception and self-efficacy in teaching lab-intensive online courses.
The first phase of the study will survey 140 faculty members on these two
constructs. The second phase will employ convenience and maximum variations
sampling strategies to purposefully select five faculty for participation in
semi-structured follow-up interviews to further explore survey findings. The
researcher will develop his knowledge and skills in STEM education research
through intensive professional development and will hone these through the
experience of designing and conducting the aforementioned
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the ECR Building
Capacity in STEM Education Research competition of the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program. ECR funds fundamental STEM education research projects that focus on
STEM learning and learning environments,broadening participation in STEM fields,
and STEM professional workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.