* 2126672
* SHF: Small: A General-purpose Parallel and Heterogeneous Task Graph Computing System for VLSI CAD
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tsung-Wei Huang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 419,114.00

The ever-increasing design complexity in very-large-scale integration (VLSI)
implementation will soon far exceed what many existing computer-aided design
(CAD) tools can scale with reasonable design time and effort. A key fundamental
challenge is that CAD must incorporate new parallel paradigms comprising many-
core central processing units (CPUs) and graphics processing units (GPUs) to
achieve transformational performance and productivity milestones. However, this
goal is impossible to achieve without a novel computing system to tackle the
implementation complexities of parallelizing CAD, such as irregular task
parallelism, large CPU-GPU dependent tasks, dynamic control flow, and
distributed computing, which cannot be expressed and executed efficiently with
mainstream parallel computing systems. The project investigates a new computing
system to advance the current state-of-the-art by assisting everyone to
efficiently tackle the challenges of designing, implementing, and deploying
parallel CAD algorithms on heterogeneous nodes. The proposed open-source
software and education activities will facilitate technology transfers and
enable diverse industry-academia collaborations in a multidisciplinary
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to streamline the building of
parallel CAD tools on heterogeneous nodes by researching a novel computing
system that consists of three major components: (1) a new parallel and
heterogeneous task graph programming model that enables CAD developers to
express end-to-end parallelism using minimal programming effort, (2) an
efficient system runtime to support the programming model with high performance
optimized across latency, energy efficiency, and throughput, and (3) new
heterogeneous algorithms and frameworks to speed up time-consuming physical
synthesis tasks and timing closure flow. Furthermore, the project is
establishing new formulations and theory results for heterogeneous graph
partitioning and task scheduling that are generalizable and scalable to
arbitrary heterogeneous domains. Outcomes of the project are being made open-
source to encourage a wide range of CAD researchers and developers to
participate in and contribute to the project for sharing new findings, ideas,
educational resources, and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.