* 2126719
* OCE-PRF Ecological consequences of seawater chemistry modification by ecosystem engineers
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Aaron Ninokawa, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 290,149.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine how
ecosystem engineers shape communities by altering local chemistry. Ecosystem
engineers modify the physical properties of a habitat often via the dense
aggregation of individuals (e.g. mussel beds, kelp canopies, etc.)and can harbor
extensive biodiversity compared to unmodified habitats. Such habitats can
control resident communities through a variety of mechanisms including altering
local chemistry. Through laboratory and field experiments, this project will
compare how the altered chemical environments within diverse assemblages of
habitat-forming species can shape long-and short-term community resilience to
chemical stress. Results of this study will directly inform aquaculture,
conservation, and restoration by revealing mechanisms available to prepare
communities for more stressful oceans in the future. This project will
additionally broaden participation in science by groups typically
underrepresented in ecology by partnering with existing STEM recruitment
programs and allocating funds to compensate participants. In collaboration with
local shellfish aquaculture and community education programs, this project will
also serve as the basis for education and outreach materials that are used to
increase peoples’ connection to the environment while educating them on topics
related to environmental stewardship and scientific research in an academia-
industry-community collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small scale alterations
of seawater chemistry within biogenic habitats can be dominated by biological
processes like respiration, photosynthesis, calcification, dissolution, and
their combinations (e.g. macroalgal canopies vs coralline algal canopies vs
mussel beds). Each of these processes has different consequences for the
seawater carbonate system in that they can, for example, either decrease or
increase carbon dioxide concentrations (photosynthesis and respiration,
respectively) or either decrease or increase alkalinity (calcification and
dissolution, respectively). These processes additionally occur against a
backdrop of further perturbations to carbonate chemistry by larger scale
processes like ocean acidification or riverine discharge. This project will
examine the ability of different habitat-forming ecosystem engineers to
ameliorate diverse chemical stresses within the habitat they create and the time
scales over which that amelioration occurs.Short-term amelioration potential
will be assessed by determining whether habitat preference of mobile or settling
taxa differs under acute chemical stress conditions. By measuring growth rates
of residents within diverse types of biogenic habitat this project will reveal
amelioration potential during a resident organism’s lifetime. Lastly, the
ability of these habitats to drive resident adaption to chemical stress will be
determined by tracking how strains of a locally adapted clam originating from
different types of habitats perform in the face of chemical stress events.
Overall, this project, aims to reveal the chemical contexts under which various
types of chemical modification by foundation species can either facilitate or
inhibit the members of associated invertebrate communities across several time
scales&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.