* 2126039
* Collaborative Research: Adaptive, Rapid, and Multifunctional Soft  Robots (ARM SoRo) with Reconfigurable Shapes and Motions Enabled by Tunable  Elastic Instabilities
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Jianguo Zhao, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2024
* USD 409,707.00

Robots made of metals, hard plastics, or similarly high stiffness materials are
restricted in range of motion and shape changes. It would be extremely
beneficial if a robot could be reconfigured on-the-fly to generate on-demand
shapes and motions required for various tasks such as walking, crawling, and
jumping. This award supports fundamental research on how to leverage mechanical
modules with elastic instabilities, e.g., bistable modules that can rapidly
switch between two stable states, to spontaneously reconfigure a robotâ€™s shape
and motion. The research will also develop novel robots with multi-modal
locomotion capabilities that can adapt to environments without modifying their
mechanical structure. The resulting knowledge will advance the national health
and benefit the society in unprecedented ways ranging from search-and-rescue in
disasters (e.g., earthquakes) to monitoring in hazardous environments (e.g.,
nuclear plants). Additionally, this award will offer a unique opportunity to
integrate insights from robotics, mechanics, design, and fabrication into
intellectually intriguing and visually appealing broadening participation
activities to inspire, engage, and educate students and the public alike, with
the science and technology of reconfigurable robots. Examples of activities
include senior design projects, summer program for high school students, and
science and engineering festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is to gain a fundamental understanding of a new class of soft robots
made from soft/flexible modules with elastic instabilities. The goal is to
enable soft robots with reconfigurable body shapes and leg motions for
multimodal locomotion that can adapt to various complex environments. The
strategy is to construct the robots using bistable modules connected in a closed
loop for the body and an open loop for the legs, and then actively tune the
energy landscape of each module on-the-fly to generate desired body shapes and
leg motions for multimodal locomotion. Three research thrusts will be explored:
1) achievement of reconfigurable body shapes through an in-depth understanding
of the energy landscapes of bistable modules via the use of quasi-static
mechanics; 2) achievement of programmable motions through physics-based dynamics
modeling using Cosserat rod theory and model-based reinforcement learning; and
3) validation of the models with the development of a robot with multimodal
locomotion capabilities, such as walking, crawling, jumping, and climbing. The
knowledge generated from this project will provide guidelines on how to
systematically exploit elastic instabilities to generate programmable shapes and
dynamic motions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.