* 2126096
* RAPID: Texas Winter Storm
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2021
* Haoran Chu, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2021
* USD 86,231.00

As one of the first natural disasters striking the continental United States
since the COVID-19 outbreak, the 2021 Winter Storm has caused severe economic
and health damage in Texas as millions of residents lost electricity and water
supply amid the record-breaking cold outbreak and an ongoing pandemic. In
response to these challenges, this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
project assesses the influence of extreme weather, power outages, the COVID-19
pandemic, and online social network use on Texas residents’ access to resources
and information embedded in their social network (i.e., social capital) and
recovery from the winter storm (i.e., disaster resilience). Additionally, the
research seeks to identify if the use of public (e.g., Twitter) vs. invitation-
only social networks (e.g., Nextdoor) alleviates or exacerbates the disparity in
social capital and resilience. Findings from this project on the one hand help
us understand the long-term influence of the COVID-19 pandemic on our society,
while on the other contribute to the design and implementation of future
disaster relief programs targeting underprivileged communities in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing a longitudinal survey targeting residents of
108 counties in Texas with major disaster declaration, this project seeks to
achieve three objectives. First, it identifies the influence of socioeconomic
status, extreme weather, power outages, and the COVID-19 pandemic on Texas
residents’ access to social capital during the 2021 winter storm. Second, the
proposed project pinpoints the extent to which the use of different online
social networks (i.e., public vs. invitation-only online social networks)
facilitated Texas residents’ access to bonding, bridging, and linking social
capital during the winter storm. Third, it seeks to identify the extent to which
online social network use and social capital acquisition mitigated the
psychological, physical, and financial impacts inflicted by the winter storm and
power outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.