* 2126481
* ISS: Thermophoresis in quiescent non-Newtonian fluids for bioseparations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Kelly Schultz, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

There are many natural and industrial processes where nanoscale particles
suspended in a fluid move as a result of a temperature gradient. These particles
generally move from hot to cold regions. This phenomenon, which is known as
thermophoresis, affects a wide variety of processes, such as drug delivery and
bioseparations utilized for detecting viruses. However, the current
understanding of thermophoresis is limited. Experimental studies have
conflicting evidence, making it difficult to determine the fundamental
mechanisms that drive particle motion. Very few studies have considered the
motion of these particles in more complex fluids and gels. The challenge in
interpreting experimental data is that it is difficult to separate effects of
thermophoresis from effects of fluid flow arising from variations in the fluid
density owing to variations in temperature. To overcome this limitation, this
NSF-CASIS project will pair terrestrial experiments with those in microgravity
onboard the International Space Station (ISS) where buoyancy-driven fluid flow
is negligible. The goals are to determine the fundamental physics and chemistry
driving thermophoresis in simple and complex fluids and to use this information
for enhancing viral separation platforms by optimizing fluid properties. In an
era when disease control affects everyone, this project will focus on developing
enhanced and robust microfluidic viral-load detection
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to measure the
thermophoretic motion of particles in complex fluids on the ISS to aid in the
design of next-generation bioseparations devices for label-free viral load
detection. Gravity-driven buoyancy-induced recirculation due to thermal
expansion of the fluid is inhibited in microgravity, which will enable
unambiguous measurements of thermophoresis. The project will use multiple
particle tracking microrheology (MPT) to simultaneously obtain local
thermophoretic and rheological data. Fluids will range from variable ionic
strength Newtonian liquids to non-Newtonian fluids with varying degrees of
linear viscoelasticity or a temperature dependent sol-gel transition. The size
and surface properties of probe particles will be changed and will span
properties of biologically relevant nanoparticles, such as viruses. Terrestrial
experiments will focus on fluid property selection through rheological testing,
particle synthesis, and downstream redesign of microfluidic platforms utilizing
complex fluids to enhance bioseparations. The team will design these experiments
with Tec Masters, Inc. to create a module that remotely performs all operations
of sample manipulation, precision heating, high-speed/high-magnification
imaging, and data transfer on the ISS. This basic research and first
demonstration of the utility of microrheology in space will impact the rheology,
colloid and interfacial science, and bioseparation communities and train
postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate researchers. The promise for enhancing
life on Earth through these fundamental and applied experiments will be
incorporated into outreach activities for K-12 students and underrepresented
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.