* 2126635
* The Impact of Relevance, Belonging, and Growth Mindset on Persistence in Economics
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Caroline Krafft, St. Catherine University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 289,083.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to strengthen capacity in economics
at MSIs through research on the impact of institutional setting on
underrepresented racial/ethnic minority students and women in economics. The PIs
investigate to what extent the past findings on relevance, belonging, and growth
mindset generalize beyond a single institution and how the university context
interacts with students' development of an identity as an economist. Lower
relevance, belonging and growth mindset are linked to worse grades and lower
persistence in economics majors. This project proposes an important addition to
our understanding of relevance, belonging, growth mindset, and persistence in
economics by increasing the institutional and demographic breadth of research.
Broader representation in economics will lead to more inclusive businesses and
policy and accelerate economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
increase understanding of the roles that relevance, belonging and growth mindset
play as potential barriers or levers for change across diverse settings. The PIs
use longitudinal surveys of students and faculty at 18 universities stratified
by educational type to examine if releance, belonging and growth mindset develop
differently in economics classes at MSIs and women's colleges than at non-MSIs
and co-educational institutions. Collecting data on relevance, belonging, and
growth mindset and persistence from approximately 1,800 students at different
points in their educational trajectory at different points in time (a year
apart) will facilitate distinguishing selection into institutions from the
impact of experiences in those institutions. Understanding the role of MSIs and
women’s colleges in promoting relevance, belonging, and growth mindset and
persistence in economics will indicate important directions for interventions to
promote diversity in economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.