* 2126934
* Build and Broaden: Strengthening Social Science Research Infrastructure at the University
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Mara Ostfeld, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 03/31/2024
* USD 220,813.00

Social science research is limited by a lack of high-quality data about public
opinion on numerous minority populations. This lack of high-quality data is
often due to a lack of social science research infrastructure. This lack of
infrastructure is related to crippling debt, consecutive years of catastrophic
natural disasters, rapid population loss, and limited access to support from the
national government. This project is a collaboration between an established
institution in survey research and a MSI to strengthen social science research
infrastructure at the MSI and to improve infrastructure for measuring and
analyzing public opinion about an underserved and understudied minority
population. The project builds infrastructure that will aide in the production
of academic research in and on a minority population and will provide a voice,
through opinion polling, to the heretofore understudied population. In addition,
the survey infrastructure established will provide University affiliates at the
MSI with access to a much-needed research tool to advance their
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will initiate a new, long-term
collaboration between the MSI and the University of Michigan to collect,
organize, and disseminate data on public opinion, political behavior, and
political institutions of an underserved population. The goals of this
partnership are to: (1) provide the MSI's faculty with high-quality tools to
support and advance their research agendas; (2) provide both undergraduate and
graduate students at the MSI with research opportunities and training; (3)
provide researchers at academic, governmental, and nonprofit institutions with
high-quality data that advances research on the population of interest; and (4)
provide a scientifically validated vehicle to accurately capture the political,
economic, and social preferences and experiences of members of the understudied
population. At the end of this first phase of this collaboration, the team
expects to have the following in place: a survey design; a sampling framework; a
data collection plan that maximizes the representative nature of the survey
while minimizing costs; a plan to ensure the financial and logistical
sustainability of the infrastructure; quality control checks; and a plan to
disseminate and archive the data in a way that supports local institutions and
researchers. By building infrastructure to collect, organize, and disseminate
data on public opinion and other political dynamics, this collaboration will
create many new possibilities to support the research of the MSI's students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.