* 2126915
* SBIR Phase II: Smart Robotic Sanding Cells for Composite Parts in High-Mix Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Ariyan Kabir, GRAYMATTER ROBOTICS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,824.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seek to improve the quality
of life for manufacturing workers, help U.S. manufacturers remain cost-
competitive in the global market, and improve the quality of the manufactured
parts. The proposed robotic cells may reduce the need for workers to perform
ergonomically challenging sanding tasks and reduce the risk of worker injuries
on sanding lines. The developed technologies will enable the human operators to
focus on high-level decision making and the creative aspects of the
manufacturing tasks, while the robotic assistants perform the low-level tedious
tasks. Moreover, this technology enables the human operator to guide the team
operation. This ability will improve worker productivity. Currently, there are
more than 3000 companies in the U.S. performing composite fabrication. Most of
these companies face challenges due to a shortage of workers and high labor
churn. These challenges lead to longer delivery times. This project may enable
manufacturers to improve quality and lower costs. Moreover, the technology may
enable manufacturers to reduce time to part delivery by reducing the reliance on
human labor and easily scaling production capacity with the change in demand by
adding or removing robotic cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop a robotic sanding
solution for high-mix applications by providing safety under uncertainty during
robotic sanding and reducing cycle time by fast execution of safe and efficient
trajectories by the robot. This award will make computational advances to enable
robots to program themselves by automatically generating and safely executing
trajectories based on the task description. The project will also enable the
computational algorithms to account for the uncertainties present in the
environment, making robots useful for sanding operations in high-mix
applications. A robotic sanding cell for handling large parts in high-mix
applications will be developed by selecting the appropriate sensors and tools.
Algorithms will be developed for fast and safe workpiece localization in the
robotic cell while the workpiece is secured with a cost-effective, general-
purpose, low-cost fixture. Algorithms will be developed to determine the minimum
number of setups needed for sanding large parts in the robotic cell and to
generate robot trajectories to produce tool motion patterns that ensure
efficient and safe sanding operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.