* 2126080
* ADVANCE IT: OU Elevate-Implementing Equitable Multi-Context Faculty Evaluations and Workload Distributions
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2027
* Georgia Kosmopoulou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Cooperative Agreement
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 07/31/2027
* USD 520,486.00

The University of Oklahoma ADVANCE Institutional Transformation project (OU
Elevate) will address differential retention and promotion rates for faculty
that identify as women and Faculty with Intersecting Marginalized Identities
(FIMI), focusing on the connection between these inequitable outcomes and the
policies and practices present in annual faculty performance evaluations.
Existing annual evaluation systems for faculty performance largely fail to
document the impact of the entire scope of faculty work. This results in faculty
activities that are most impactful and critical to the missions of educational
institutions, such as inspiring and inclusive teaching, synergic and convergent
research, and engaged and meaningful service, being undervalued. While many
academic units or colleges may have attempted to develop faculty annual
evaluation systems that address these challenges, there is lack of resources on
how to identify, measure, and reward faculty impact that is in alignment with
institutional goals and societal needs. OU Elevate will develop a multi-context
toolkit for annual faculty performance evaluation using universal design theory
that values a broad range of activities, including dimensions of faculty
performance that are more difficult to measure and quantify. The implementation
of this toolkit is expected to have positive outcomes for all faculty that
engage in the critical yet previously undervalued work, but particularly for
STEM women faculty and faculty at the intersection of multiple marginalized
identities, groups that research shows are more likely to engage in these
impactful but under-acknowledged activities. The toolkit and tests of its
effectiveness will be shared publicly for implementation and scaling by other
institutions through a webinar, online resources, and peer-reviewed
publications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OU Elevate leverages lessons from prior NSF-
funded projects, literature on faculty evaluation and workload, and extensive
faculty input from across STEM academic units at OU, to develop a comprehensive
and customizable toolkit for equitable and transparent faculty annual
performance evaluation and workload distribution. The toolkit will be piloted,
validated, and institutionalized across all OU STEM units, as well as shared
with other institutions. OU Elevate will collaborate with the Center for Faculty
Excellence to develop immersive, active training for faculty and unit leaders on
the purpose of the changes in the annual evaluation process. OU Elevate
hypothesizes that training, combined with customizing the evaluation tools and
workload distribution within units, will result in annual evaluation systems
designed to value multi-context activities and perspectives, leading to
increased engagement of faculty in these valued and impactful activities. When
policies and accountability measures are implemented, equitable and transparent
workload distribution and annual faculty evaluations can be achieved across
demographic groups, supporting increased satisfaction with faculty workload and
evaluation systems, ultimately impacting retention and promotion of faculty,
achievement of institutional goals, and broader societal impacts. The OU
Provost’s office is committed to supporting the development, testing, and
implementation of revised faculty workload distribution and annual performance
evaluation systems. The OU Elevate organization structure follows a model of
faculty-administrator collaborations on the OU campus to enact institutional
change through shared governance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program
is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.  Organizational
barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and
the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Institutional Transformation"
awards provide support for the development and testing of new systemic change
strategies for gender equity in institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.