* 2126989
* STTR Phase I:  Phage-resistant bacterial therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Breck Duerkop, ANCILIA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,717.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be a new approach to treat gastrointestinal
(GI) diseases, metabolic disorders, and autoimmune disorders, with an initial
application of inflammatory bowel disease, which affects approximately 1.5
million people in the US. The proposed technology will address the microbial
population in the gut, which significantly affects GI health. This technology
uses advanced techniques of microbiology to develop a new set of therapeutics
geared toward sustaining a healthy microbial population in the GI
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I
grant proposes to develop phage-resistant bacterial therapeutics to effectively
alter the gut microbiome and treat disease. A key impediment to the use of live
bacteria as therapeutics is their failure to reliably establish colonization in
the gut. Although most focus to date has been on the bacterial components of the
microbiome, bacteriophages, viruses which directly attack bacteria, make up at
least half of the organisms in the human gut. Significantly, phages have been
shown to influence the colonization dynamics of bacteria in every ecosystem
studied thus far. Virulent populations of bacteriophages in the gut, which
deplete commensal bacterial species, have been identified in patients with
disease. Bacterial therapies with engineered immunity to gut phages will be
developed to drive effective colonization in the gut. The endogenous immune
system of bacteria, the CRISPR-Cas system, will be harnessed to engineer immune
strains and develop targeted bacterial immunity against virulent phages. This
work will enable development of a new class of bacterial therapeutics that
overcome previous challenges and effectively colonize the gut. These therapies
can be applied to treat the wide range of conditions associated with the
microbiome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.