* 2126281
* CC* Integration-Large: Bringing Code to Data: A Collaborative  Approach to Democratizing Internet Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Reza Rejaie, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 988,548.00

Successful application of machine learning (ML) for networking problems depends
on the availability of high-quality labeled data from real-world networks.
Equally critical is the ability to share these datasets, respecting the data
owners' privacy concerns. Unfortunately, short of sharing the data via todayâ€™s
commonly-applied data-to-code paradigm, researchers lack a systematic framework
for working with or benefiting from data collected and curated by third parties.
Consequently, Internet Data Science as practiced today is ill-suited for
applications such as (i) high-quality data labeling, (ii) rigorous evaluation of
research artifacts such as learning models, and (iii) independent
validation/reproducibility of reported research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project brings together
researchers from University of Oregon, University of California-Santa Barbara,
and NIKSUN, Inc., and will investigate an innovative collaborative data labeling
and knowledge sharing framework in three thrusts. First, the project will
investigate a novel code-to-data approach that entails sharing of programmatic
representations of operators' domain knowledge to identify events of interest in
the data. Second, the project will design and develop a new learning framework
to enable the pursuit of Internet Data Science as a full-fledged collaborative
effort. Third, the project will illustrate the capabilities of the proposed
framework in the context of collaborative efforts between two participating
universities (UO and UCSB) and demonstrate its ability to scale to any number of
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting framework will serve as a
driving force for advancing collaborative efforts in the emerging area of
Internet Data Science. In addition to identifying some of the fundamental
changes to how ML ought to be used in networking, the research findings will
benefit both industry and academia and will ensure that tomorrow's workforce has
the proper training to fully exploit the application of ML for network-specific
problems. Also, the outcomes will catalyze the development of a roadmap for the
adoption of Internet Data Science efforts by operators and the deployment of
ensuing research artifacts in real-world production
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will maintain the following webpage:
https://onrg.gitlab.io/projects/emerge.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.