* 2126978
* EAGER: Examining Women STEM Faculty's Participation in Entrepreneurship Programs
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Aileen Huang-Saad, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 277,107.00

This EAGER project engages in research that has the potential to be
transformative in the field of innovation. The project explores entrepreneurship
education programs (EEPs) from a pathways-to-entry perspective to understand the
influencers impacting women facultyâ€™s participation in these educational
programs and to assist in the development of EEPs that engages a broader women
STEM faculty population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation is one of the most
important drivers of economic growth and prosperity in the 21st century, and
universities nationwide are fostering entrepreneurship and innovation in STEM
fields through EEPs. It is imperative to assure that the benefits of EEPs are
reaped by the entire STEM faculty population. While diversity-related issues are
increasingly being investigated, STEM education research fails to examine how
exclusionary structures perpetuate in our education. This also holds true for
entrepreneurship education which significantly lacks research that takes
participation of women into account. To address this gap, the proposed project
will examine faculty participation in EEPs, particularly with an emphasis on
women and the intersectionality of gender and race. It will focus on two
research questions: 1) Why do Women STEM faculty choose to engage, or not
engage, in EEPs? and 2) How do these reasons differ with the intersection of
race? The purpose of the project is to leverage research in entrepreneurship
assessment and education to explore ways to foster a larger, more diverse
community of entrepreneurially-minded, innovative faculty by broadening
participation in EEPs to women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this
project will provide the entrepreneurship education community with research-
based insights for developing EEPs that are inclusive and offer actionable
guidance to EEP stakeholders for promoting the participation of women STEM
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.