* 2126763
* SBIR Phase I:  Rare Earth Element Extraction from End-of-Life Fluorescent Light Bulb Powder
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Vasily Jorjadze, IM TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 275,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to enable new technologies, such as additive
manufacturing and electronics, that require special natural materials known as
Rare Earth Elements (REE). Current REE extraction methods produce large
quantities of toxic materials requiring mitigation. The proposed solution
advances an extraction method that is environmentally friendly and generates no
toxic byproducts, can be used with broad material sources (including recycled
goods), uses less energy, and is readily scalable to deliver at a significantly
lower cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes a reactor
system that incorporates precision ultra-high temperature heating to evaporate
targeted material constituents and subsequently condense to separate REEs. The
approach optimizes thermal energy to efficiently achieve tailorable temperatures
for the extraction and separation of REEs from a broad range of source material,
including recycled Fluorescent Light Bulb (FLB) powder that contains significant
concentrations of Yttrium, Europium and Terbium. This project will engineer a
fully integrated prototype system that ingests waste FLB powder, extracts the
REE constituents via precision heating, and then separates them in high purity
via controlled evaporation and condensation. Research tasks include development
of a reliable calibration procedure that simultaneously sets reactor current,
voltage, and temperature for optimal evaporation. The end goal is to demonstrate
commercial viability that yields an alternative REE extraction and separation
approach that is economically and environmentally superior to existing chemical-
based processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.