* 2126141
* The Neural Mechanism for Visual Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Wen Shen, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In vertebrates, rod vision is the ability to see under low-light conditions with
lower visual quality; cone vision functions at higher light levels and
responsible for all high resolution and color vision. In order to transition
from rod to cone vision, the retina must undergo adaptation to adjust the
responding properties of the neural circuits. However, little is known about the
neural mechanisms for switching from rod to cone vision. This project aims to
identify a key neural process fundamental to the unique mechanism in visual
adaptation. The objectives of the study are to address fundamental questions
concerning how the actions of the network neurons releasing specific
neurotransmitter - glycine, to modify the response properties and light
sensitivity of the retinal circuits. A series of experiments are designed to
systematically investigate this novel process involved in fine-tuning of cone
vision in dim or twilight conditions. The project will also allow the researcher
to continue the important mission of integrating research, education and
training of future scientists in cutting-edge techniques for understanding the
functional interactions of neural circuits and their behavioral manifestations.
Finally, this project will support outreach to local high school, and community
college students as well as the lifelong learning program for seniors in
southern Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to define a
unique mechanism, utilizing network feedback of glycine, that modifies center-
surround receptive field organization and subserves cone vision. Cone
photoreceptors are responsible for high-resolution vision, but are less
sensitive to light compared to rods. Indeed, the sensitivity of cone vision is
suppressed at dusk or twilight. Psychophysical studies indicate that flickering
light stimulation can improve spatial-temporal sensitivity (cone features),
thereby improving cone vision in twilight conditions. Although it is argued that
this process is related to adaptation- dependent changes in the retinal neural
circuitry, the details of the adaptive mechanisms are largely unknown. Previous
work by the principal investigator has shown that a group of network neurons,
utilizing long-range feedback of glycine, can mediate rod-cone interactions that
serve for improving cone visual sensitivity in twilight conditions. This project
is to address the central hypothesis that the function of glycine feedback
regulates the center-surround receptive field organization that is the key
element for spatial and temporal tuning of cone vision. The primary objectives
are to address fundamental questions concerning how the actions of glycine
feedback network modify (i) the lateral inhibition and (ii) synaptic gains and
contrast sensitivity in the distal retina. Multiple advanced techniques,
including electrophysiology, fluorescence imaging and photic stimulation will be
used in the study. The results from the study will extend the current
understanding of glycine functioning solely as an inhibitory neurotransmitter
and shed light on its excitatory actions on retinal circuits. As the retina is a
part of the CNS and shares many neural mechanisms with the brain, the results
from this proposal will reorient concepts about the function of glycine. In
addition, the studies will provide a unique opportunity for undergraduate and
graduate students to participate and conduct research in a high-demand
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.