* 2126648
* SBIR Phase I:  An Easy-to-use Virtual Reality Development Toolkit for Education
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Jeffrey Pomerantz, PROXIMAL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 255,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop an easy-to-use virtual reality
(VR) toolkit to enable rapid development and deployment of educational VR
experiences. The COVID-19 pandemic made it clear that technology to enable
remote learning is critical to education at all levels. However, instructors
often do not use these technologies because they lack understanding of how to
meaningfully deploy it in their courses. In order for VR to be useful in
education, it must not just be easy for learners to use, but also must be easy
for instructors to learn to use it. This project will create a user-friendly
toolkit with which educators can create targeted, subject-specific, VR
educational experiences. This learning tool may become an important part of
future education as it will provide access for a diverse group of students of
all ages and education levels who may be unable to be physically present (due to
illness, location, or other social or socio-economic obstacles) to complete
courses and curricula where on-site attendance is not
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project fills an industry gap and unaddressed demand for educational
simulations. Studies of students and instructors have shown that both want VR
experiences as part of a broader demand for consumable instructional content.
Developing this content, however, presents two interconnected technical hurdles:
(1) developing pipelines by which existing digital resources can be used to
create VR assets, and (2) creating a holistic user experience for non-technical
users in the non-standardized computing environment of K-12 and higher
education. Current state-of-the-art VR systems are often too complicated for
non-technical users, requiring the user to have extensive programming skills,
which many educators do not. This project seeks to develop methods to easily
create VR assets from non-VR digital resources and a user experience (UX)
structured around the “backward design” approach to instructional design. By
building on the latest functionality for gestural interfaces to reflect
interactions with physical spaces and objects, and developing templates to guide
the instructional designer through the process, this project will enable
instructional designers to develop realistic, compelling, and educationally
valuable VR learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.