* 2126285
* CC* Regional: Extended Small Institution - Multiple Organization Regional - OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (ESI MORe OFFN)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Kelly McClure, OKLAHOMA STATE REGENTS FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 414,595.00

The Extended Small Institution Multiple Organization Regional OneOklahoma
Friction Free Network (ESI-MORe-OFFN) connects two under-resourced campuses,
Oklahoma City University and Fires Innovation Science and Technology Accelerator
campus of Cameron University, to the OneOklahoma Friction Free Network (OFFN) in
support of research and education drivers in the areas of engineering and
economics. The project extends existing and creates new and diverse research
collaboration opportunities for faculty and students through fostering broader
and deeper collaborations and expanding research and education activities. The
project provides cyberinfrastructure resources to these two under-resourced
campuses, reaching a diverse student population, including first-generation
students. The project has significant educational impact for both undergraduate
and graduate students at the campuses, providing them with additional STEM and
cyberinfrastructure opportunities as well as exposure to leading researchers and
CI practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ESI-MORe-OFFN project extends the
OneOklahoma Friction Free Network to two under-resourced campuses by
implementing Science DMZs, Data Transfer Nodes and network performance
monitoring capabilities in support of science application drivers at the two
campuses and integrating these capabilities with other similar capabilities
across Oklahoma.â€ In addition, the project enhances the skills and abilities of
technical personnel at each campus and facilitates cross-campus collaborations,
including shared uses of computing tools, scientific equipment, and educational
materials by engaging faculty and students in the larger OneOklahoma
CyberInfrastructure Initiative (OneOCII). OFFN is managed by OneNet, Oklahoma's
research and education network, and scientific leadership is provided by the
University of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.