* 2126940
* SBIR Phase II:  Thermal Runaway Protection and Suppression for Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Kevin Marr, ALTECT, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address fire and explosion safety hazards
associated with lithium ion (Li-ion) battery energy storage technologies. Fueled
by growth in the energy storage and electric vehicle industries, the Li-ion
battery market is expected to grow to a size of several hundred billion dollars
by 2025. Future viability of these clean energy technologies are dependent on
Li-ion battery technology. However, Li-ion batteries occasionally
catastrophically fail, posing thermal hazards as serious as fires and
explosions. The proposed technology has the potential to be an effective, low
cost solution and accelerating adoption of transformative clean energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to improve
the safety of Li-ion bateries. Under certain scenarios, Li-ion batteries can
fail, resulting in an exothermic release of flammable and toxic gases. For
applications including large multi-cell battery systems in energy storage and
vehicle use, the risk of thermal runaway can result in catastrophic fires,
explosions and toxic gas release that can damage nearby infrastructure and cause
injury or death. Thermal runaway poses significant challenges for available
suppression and mitigation systems because the hazardous gas release can
continue despite suppression of the incipient fire. The proposed thermal runaway
protection and suppression technology addresses the source of the hazards by
exploiting a series of novel physio-chemical processes to reduce flammable and
toxic gas species concentrations released during a thermal runaway
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.