* 2126309
* ISS: Mechanisms of microgravity accelerated aging on human brain organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Alysson Muotri, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This project will study brain aging and inflammation in microgravity. Long-term
space exposure creates a series of physiological alterations including cognitive
decline. Studying astronauts' brains before and after their mission can tell
what goes wrong but provides little insight on the mechanisms responsible for
the observed alterations. This, this project will grow stem cell-derived human
brain tissues at the International Space Station to accelerate our understanding
of the mechanisms involved in brain aging. These studies will have profound
implications for improved neurological pre-clinical models for applications on
Earth. Educational benefits from this investigation include incorporating the
results into the training of graduate students and high school students. The
work will also be disseminated to the broader community through a video channel
and podcast episodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microgravity has been shown to evoke
alterations in cell growth, differentiation, cell communication, aging, and
epigenetic/gene expression alterations in various cell types, including brain
cells. Preliminary data, from a previous spaceflight, showed exposure to
microgravity induced a series of molecular changes that mimic aging in human
cells. Such alterations might accelerate or enhance cellular (telomerase
dynamics) and molecular processes (activation of endogenous retroelements) that
are important for neurological disorders. Here, this study will mechanistically
investigate this aging phenotype on human brain organoids infused with
microglia. First, the brain organoids will be optimized for spaceflight
compatibility. Second, the impact of re-activation of endogenous retroelements
will be characterized. And third, brain organoids will be generated with
inducible TERT and modulate their activity at different developmental stages to
determine how telomerase activity affects the development of brain organoids.
The proposed work will advance understanding of 3D brain organoids enabling
improved models of neurological disorders that represent significant health
burdens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.