* 2126045
* SCC-IRG Track 2: Digital Twin City for Age-friendly Communities - Crowd-biosensing of Environmental Distress for Older Adults
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Chanam Lee, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Older adults bear a high risk of multiple chronic diseases and face high
healthcare cost expenditures. Physical activity such as walking is considered
the most effective preventive strategy to reduce health risks and burdens.
Strong evidence shows that built environmental factors such as walkability are
strongly linked with older adults’ walking and overall physical activity, with
frail older adults being more susceptible to environmental barriers/challenges.
However, traditional urban planning/design practices that target the “average
person” have failed to meet the special needs of older adults experiencing age-
related physiological and psychosocial conditions. As a result, neighborhood
environments in most communities can be the source of significant physical and
emotional distress to older adults, thereby inhibiting their mobility and
outdoor physical activity. This project thus aims to (1) create a digital twin
city (DTC) model that reveals older adults’ collective distress and associated
environmental conditions, and (2) leverage the DTC model to develop and
implement technological and environmental interventions that alleviate such
distress and promote older adults’ independent mobility and physical activity.
The DTC model will be constructed by matching or twinning crowdsourced
biosignals (i.e., physiological sensing data from unobtrusive wearable devices
worn by older adults) with street-level visual data from participatory sensing
and Google Street View, enabling the establishment of a city’s affective map.
Thus, this project will leverage the DTC model to design, implement, and/or
evaluate stress-responsive interventions, in collaboration with local
stakeholders and older adults in an underserved neighborhood in Houston, TX. The
empirical outcomes of our work will quantify the experience of community members
on a daily basis, which will promote productive conversations and targeted
interventions at both the individual and the community levels. While this
research leverages Houston, TX as a testbed, research findings are expected to
generalize to other communities in the U.S. and artifacts from this work (e.g.,
DTC model) will be made widely available to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make methodological advancements
in (1) constructing group-specific saliency models from reliable physiological
measures, (2) developing personalized distress prediction using multimodal data,
and (3) formulating distress-responsive routing algorithms. The research team
with community partners will incorporate these outcomes into designing,
implementing, and evaluation three technology/environmental stress-responsive
interventions: (1) providing community affective maps to enhance older adults’
awareness of environmental stressors in their communities; (2) offering stress-
responsive routing plans that optimize older adults’ route plans responding to
individuals’ health and mobility conditions; and (3) implementing environmental
interventions (i.e., promoting age-friendly Privately Owned Public Space (POPS)
redesigning/retrofitting neighborhood infrastructure/facilities) to alleviate
location-based distress. Additionally, the community engagement activities
contained within this project will critically enhance older adults’
understanding of safety risks and of mobility challenges in the community
environment and will contribute to the community’s capacity building in
promoting health and reducing distress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.