* 2126156
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-time Predictions During Water Treatment: An Intelligent and Proactive Pathway to Preventing Environmental/Health Hazards and Reducing Operational Costs
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Young Lee, AdvanceH2O Corp.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I Project is to develop next-generation monitoring &amp;
data informatics for wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). Industry standards to
test WWTP performance typically measure the chemistry of the incoming wastewater
(influent) and finished output (effluent), without insight into the intervening
stages. This lack of data can result in significant environmental and human
health hazards for end-users, as well as regulatory fines for WWTPs. This
project advances advanced microbial analytics specifically for water treatment
to proactively predict and prevent negative impacts at reduced energy, chemical,
and financial cost. This project has global application.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I Project will combine: 1) Advanced
microbial analytics tailor-made for water treatment, including global analysis
of DNA, RNA, and profiles from the system microbiomes; and 2) Artificial
Intelligence (AI)/Machine Learning (ML). This project identifies real-time WWTP
performance predictions based on advanced microbial analytics (key drivers
during treatment) to inform process control measures to optimize plant
operations. For advanced microbial analytics, the objective is to prove reliable
characterizations of microbial ecosystems in WWTP reactors, and to help maintain
consistency and stability of the ecosystems over time. This project will propose
and optimize a sampling, analysis, and reporting plan for infusion at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.