* 2126418
* Collaborative Research: How many routes to the same phenotype? Genetic changes underlying parallel acquisition of mimetic color patterns across bumble bees
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Jeffrey Lozier, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 12/31/2024
* USD 179,228.00

Hundreds of bumble bee species are important pollinators worldwide. They also
have interesting behaviors and morphologies that tell us about evolution. Color
pattern diversity is the most notable of these traits. These species have
hundreds of different patterns of yellow, orange, black, and white hairs across
their bodies. This diversity is related to mimicry, whereby species converge
upon the same pattern to avoid predation. However, that dominant color pattern
differs by region. This repeated evolution of color patterns can be used to
understand how genes are targeted during evolution. In the Western United
States, several bumble bee species undergo parallel changes across the
landscape. This research will examine the genes that drive coloration shifts in
each of these western species and provide a better understanding of how
repeatable evolution is. Broader impacts of the research include training
undergraduate students to develop functional genetics tools. The researchers
will also share their gained knowledge outside the scientific community through
several events for the public and develop color pattern field guides for bumble
bees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will compare genes across repeated color
shifts to tell if the same genes are repeatedly targeted or if there are many
ways to get to the same phenotype. The proposed research uses a combination of
genome-wide trait association analysis and cross-developmental transcriptome
comparisons to determine gene networks for color variation across five sets of
mimetic species in the Western United States. This includes identifying genetic
targets specific changes in final pigmentation genes. It will tell which regions
within genes are most likely to be targeted. It will determine if there are
major developmental genes that get used in new functions or if downstream genes
are more often targeted. It will also tell us how genetic variants inherited and
transferred within and across species influence total diversity. This study will
provide genome sequences for several North American bumble bees, clarifying
species boundaries hidden by mimicry. It will also improve understanding of the
role of developmental and pigmentation genes in animals. Genomes will be
sequenced for species across a clade of mimics to reveal how color-determining
genes evolve. These objectives will provide a case study of how genetic variants
and resulting changes in gene expression evolve across species under
selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.