* 2126293
* Atmospheric and Lateral Inputs of Trace Metals in the Indonesian Through-Flow
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Peter Morton, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2024
* USD 694,515.00

The spawning grounds of the Southern Bluefin Tuna (SBT) lie between the
northwestern Australian coast and Indonesia. Waters from the Pacific flow
through Island Southeast Asia as the Indonesian Through-Flow (ITF) and into the
western Indian Ocean. Nutrient conditions in the ITF are insufficient to support
optimum feeding and growth of SBT larvae, and numerous links between the
nutrient cycles and food chain remain unknown. There are very few measurements
of both major and trace nutrients like nitrogen, phosphorus, and iron made in
the region. These nutrients support phytoplankton that form the base of the food
chain and affect higher trophic levels, including SBT. This work will
investigate the potential sources of major and minor nutrients to the region,
including island inputs, Australian dust, monsoon rains, and sedimentary fluxes
which will help develop a “nutrient budget” and reveal which sources contribute
the greatest to the success of early SBT life stages. This project is a US
contribution to the 2nd International Indian Ocean Expedition (IIOE-2) that will
advance understanding of biogeochemical and ecological dynamics in the poorly
studied eastern Indian Ocean. The project will support an early career
postdoctoral researcher and outreach activities will include participation in
Open House events and REU summer program at home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ITF can undergo potential changes to the
distributions of major and trace nutrients during passage through the straits of
southeast island Asia. Coastal currents can resuspend shelf sediments containing
nutrients like Si and Fe, while the atmospheric deposition of both natural and
anthropogenically derived material from Australia and southeastern Asia can
supply N, P, Fe, and other trace metals. Monsoon rains also supply nutrients via
wet deposition of aerosols and runoff. These inputs introduce nutrients to the
surface ocean of the ITF, where phytoplankton can convert inorganic nutrients to
biomass and in turn fuel the entire food chain. In this research aerosols and
water column trace metals will be investigated, as a complementary component to
another NSF-funded BLOOFINZ project which seeks to understand the N cycling and
food-web dynamics of the southern bluefin tuna spawning grounds. The proposed
research will address three hypotheses: (H1) The ITF receives inputs of
bioactive trace elements from wet and dry atmospheric deposition and resuspended
sediments, and (H2) transports these nutrients across the Indian Ocean via the
South Equatorial Current (SEC). (H3) Inputs of Fe from atmospheric deposition of
mineral and anthropogenic aerosols or continental shelves could help alleviate N
limitation in the ITF. To investigate these hypotheses and understand the
inputs, removals, and cycles of trace metals in the ITF, the concentrations,
elemental ratios, and fluxes of material in aerosols and marine dissolved and
particulate phases will be quantified and compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.