* 2126308
* CC* CIRA: Southwest Higher Education Knowledge and Technology Exchange (SHEKATE)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Lev Gonick, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 197,470.00

The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the deficiencies of long haul, middle mile, and
last mile broadband connectivity in the West. Long distances, sparse
populations, and isolated tribal communities characterized new challenges for
the higher education community. An influx of new federal funding and state
allocations from the CARES Act released new opportunities to plan, build, and
deliver a new foundation for cyberinfrastructure. Whereas planning and
collaboration were needed and required in a pre-pandemic environment, the demand
for regional-scale thinking and planning by leadership organizations is now an
essential element in rebuilding the mountain west. As a regional, multi-state,
multi-institution collaboration, SHEKATE is prepared to engage, plan, and
implement the new cyberinfrastructure that supports and improves science in a
place where connectivity is expensive and isolated from researchers, and where
regional CIOs and state research and networking collaborations work collectively
to solve regional-scale research problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;SHEKATE’s
collaborative planning events introduce and connect researchers from the
region’s research universities to cross state and international boundaries and
to work with federal and state broadband initiatives to establish a new research
core across the region. Led by Arizona State University, the Sun Corridor
Network, and the Utah Education and Telehealth Network as planning leads,
SHEKATE conference events focus on researcher enabled urban biometrics,
artificial intelligence, broadband in the West, cyberinfrastructure
sustainability, and the underlying organizational structures that inform a new
approach to building CI in one of the most complex urban and rural
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.