* 2126224
* OCE-PRF: Effects of increasing temperature and ultraviolet radiation on copepod mitochondria along a latitudinal gradient
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Kyle Heine, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 263,705.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our understanding of the
mechanisms by which organisms respond to climate change is incomplete. As
temperature and ultraviolet (UV) radiation increase, the ability of organisms to
survive and reproduce depends on their ability to adapt to changes in the
environment. The ability of mitochondria to produce energy in animals is
influenced by the movements (i.e., behavior) and structure of these organelles.
The ability of mitochondria to produce energy directly impacts animal
performance, including survival and reproduction. In turn, the behavior and
structure of mitochondria are influenced by the environment. This work aims to:
1) determine if UV radiation influences mitochondrial behavior and structure in
natural populations of a marine organism, copepods, in the same manner observed
in a laboratory setting, 2) determine if temperature affects mitochondrial
behavior and structure in natural populations of copepods, and 3) determine how
much the behavior and structure of mitochondria change in the short-term versus
the long-term in response to changing environmental conditions. The results of
this study will transform our understanding of how environmentally important
organisms such as copepods may respond to climate change. In collaboration with
the Auburn University College of Science and Mathematics, this work will advance
the education and science literacy of students in the state of Alabama. The PI
will develop several outreach programs to fit the pre-existing infrastructure at
Auburn University to increase the science involvement and literacy for 1st – 6th
and 11th – 12th grade students and interact with the community to discuss the
importance and relevance of the research for the general public. These outreach
initiatives will involve hands-on participation of students in learning about
the scientific process, mitochondria, copepods, and the use of microscopes in
scientific research. The general public will gain insight into the importance of
the research in understanding the impact of climate change on one of our world’s
most abundant aquatic organisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is
to integrate observational fieldwork and experimental lab work to further
understand the impact of environmental stressors on the physiological ecology of
copepods along the west coast of North America. This work aims to fundamentally
change our understanding of the mechanisms by which pervasive zooplankton such
as copepods can potentially respond to climate change. The PI will collect data
on copepods from populations in San Diego, CA, Battle Rock, OR, and Friday
Harbor, WA. He will measure their metabolic rate at the point of highest UV
exposure and temperature during the day and lowest UV exposure and temperature
at night. After measuring metabolic rate, the same copepods will be fixed for
transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to quantify mitochondrial behavior and
morphology, including density of the inner mitochondrial membrane, proportion of
inter-mitochondrial junctions, mitochondrial density, and mitochondrial area and
aspect ratio. Additional copepods from these populations will be shipped to
Auburn University to establish lab populations under the same temperatures and
UV radiation as measured in the field. Mitochondrial phenotypes quantified via
TEM and metabolic rate will be measured following reciprocal transplant
experiments in the lab to determine the extent that differences in mitochondrial
phenotype are due to environmental variation versus evolved, genetic differences
in response to temperature and UV radiation. In collaboration with Oregon State
University, transcriptomics will be completed under the transplant experiments
to identify the up/downregulation of genes that may be associated with
mitochondrial behavior and morphology to maintain metabolic rate differently
between the three populations. Copepods are a cornerstone of biological
diversity in aquatic ecosystems. As such, it is imperative that we begin to
understand the physiological responses of these organisms so that we may better
understand the impact of climate change on marine
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.