* 2126291
* CC* Integration-Large:  (BLUE) Software-Defined CyberInfrastructure to enable data-driven smart campus applications
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dijiang Huang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new campus infrastructure called
BLUE is developed to enable efficient and secure data-driven research and
application development based on distributed IoT devices. BLUE addresses three
main challenges for supporting innovative smart campus applications based on
distributed IoT devices: (a) establishing a programable campus infrastructure to
support distributed and ad hoc IoT services, (b) providing strong security and
privacy protection of IoT data, and (c) constructing an edge-cloud
infrastructure to provide computing, networking, and storage resources to
support smart-campus applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BLUE is a new software-
defined infrastructure to support IoT-based data processing, analysis, and
distribution over distributed IoT data sources. BLUE also supports a set of
tangible metrics, such as network QoS metrics, location, resource consumption,
etc., to effectively enable researchers to validate their research models.
Moreover, BLUE takes privacy and security protection as a fundamental enabling
technique by pushing the computation towards the edge computing and networking
infrastructure. Research applications built on this project share a common
requirement for low-latency transfer of ever-larger data sets with collaborators
across multiple geographic sites. This project will contribute to a national
paradigm of campus-level dynamic network services that enables leading-edge
network and domain-specific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BLUE can benefit the
full range of campus scholarly activities, including research activities funded
by NSF and other federal agencies. The outcomes of this project will be shared
with the public based on an open-source license agreement. In addition,
undergraduate and graduate student researchers will receive diverse STEM skills
training, including networking research, big data analysis, and domain-specific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.