* 2126888
* Collaborative Research: Enhancing Speech Science Training through Collaboration: Investigating Perception of a Variable Speech Signal
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Navin Viswanathan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 269,902.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). In recent years, automated speech recognition systems
have become much more accurate and widely used. However, these systems still
cannot handle speech variability as well as human listeners can. Furthermore,
speech technology tends to work less effectively for underrepresented groups.
This project will address these problems by investigating how human listeners
understand variable speech, and by increasing the capacity and involvement of
underrepresented groups in the field of speech science. The research will make
prominent contributions to scientific knowledge of how human speech perception
works. These contributions will be directly relevant to improving automatic
speech recognition systems, which are becoming ubiquitous in technology,
healthcare, and education. The project will also significantly strengthen
research capacity in speech science at North Carolina A&amp;T State University,
which is the Nation’s largest Historically Black University, and will support
increased training and involvement of students from underrepresented groups at
both NC A&amp;T and at Penn State University, the collaborating institution. The
research and training outcomes of the project will help to make speech science
and technology both more effective and more equitable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
critical yet unsolved question in speech science is how human listeners achieve
robust speech perception despite a highly variable speech signal. Theories of
speech perception disagree on basic assumptions: for example, some theories
suggest that speech perception depends mainly on recognizing acoustic patterns,
while other theories suggest that listeners perceive the vocal tract movements
that cause the speech sounds. This project will test and improve these competing
theories by investigating the phenomenon of compensation for coarticulation
(CfC), which is the finding that listeners’ perception of speech segments is
affected by the properties of surrounding speech. Several experiments will be
used to examine how CfC works in conditions of speech variability (e.g., talker
variability, rate variability, and competing speech), and how CfC is affected by
learning. In addition, the project will build capacity at NC A&amp;T along three
dimensions by (a) providing research training for students in speech science,
(b) fostering collaborations between researchers at A&amp;T and Penn State, and
(c) enhancing opportunities for faculty development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.