* 2126206
* MCA: In Flux: The Role of Dynamic Urban Greenspace in Energy, Water and Carbon Cycling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shirley Papuga, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 367,843.00

Urban areas are home to more than half the global population and showcase
powerful synergies between climate and human activity. In urban areas,
modification of the land surface by humans is especially evident and impacts
climatology from local to regional scales. Urbanization causes significant
changes to local and regional climate due to major modifications of surface
energy, water, and carbon budgets. The outcomes of this research project aim to
improve understanding of how greenspace in urban areas impacts energy, water,
and carbon dynamics, which will inform emerging and evolving approaches to adapt
to and mitigate the negative environmental impacts of urbanization. The outcomes
of this work will inform efforts to intentionally modify near-surface climates
through the strategic use of urban vegetation. Furthermore, a workforce that is
trained in the unique science and management of urban areas is increasingly
important. Providing integrated research and learning opportunities for
undergraduate students is a priority of this project, especially for women and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores emergent
questions and hypotheses in urban ecohydrology using an iterative and integrated
combination of local observations, eddy covariance networks, remote sensing data
and modeling approaches to assess the role of dynamic urban greenspace in
energy, water and carbon cycling. Small scale processes investigated in ground-
based field efforts will be linked with large scale processes using modeling
approaches and remote sensing products. These research activities will provide a
better understanding of the controls on land surface-atmosphere interactions and
how they influence larger scale feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.