* 2126559
* OCE-PRF: Determining the depth of fluid infiltration in slow and ultra-slow spread oceanic crust
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Benjamin Urann, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 09/30/2023
* USD 310,285.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Benjamin Urann has been
granted an NSF OCE PRF to work alongside Drs. Barbara John and J. Michael
Cheadle in the Dept of Geology &amp; Geophysics at the University of Wyoming.
The goal of this project is to evaluate the depth to which seawater penetrates
ocean crust, and whether seawater penetration depth varies with tectonic plate
spreading rates across different ocean basins. Research products will promote a
deeper understanding of earth system processes including subduction and the
interaction between the hydrosphere and deep Earth. In addition, this work will
help to constrain the habitability of deep ocean crust for microbial life, which
relies on delivery of organic and inorganic carbon by circulating hydrothermal
fluids. Science outreach and education will be a central tenet of the project
and involve: (1) outreach with UWyoming Office of Diversity, Equity and
Inclusion to promote STEM and geoscience for underrepresented groups (2)
community lectures, both online and in person, including at the Wind River
Indian Reservation (3) creation of a UWyoming Geological Museum exhibit on the
generation of ocean crust, hydrothermal vents and the biological diversity of
the seafloor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep-seated faults expose mantle peridotite
and lower crust across broad expanses of seafloor (more than one third of all
spreading ridges globally) at slow and ultra-slow spreading ridges. Abundant
mylonites suggest that these faults must root below regions of earthquake
activity, however the depth at which these shear zones initiate remains unknown.
These faults act as fluid conduits, yet little is known about the depth to which
seawater infiltrates the mantle lithosphere. The PI will investigate the
geochemical and textural characteristics of a suite of rock samples from several
mid-ocean ridge localities (Mid-Atlantic, Southwest Indian, Mid-Cayman and
Gakkel Ridges) to understand: (1) the depth to which seawater penetrates exposed
mantle peridotite along faults, (2) if seawater penetration depth varies with
plate spreading rate, (3) the effect of seawater intrusion on global volatile
(H2O, F, Cl, C) cycles and (4) the implications of deep seawater intrusion on
the habitability of deep ocean crust. The PI will measure volatile abundances
and B isotopes by secondary ion mass spectrometry, in conjunction with
petrologic and geochemical thermobarometers and phase equilibria modeling to
constrain seawater penetration depths. Taken together, this project will provide
novel insights into lithosphere-hydrosphere interaction and place some lower
bounds on the habitability of the deep lithosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.