* 2126003
* I-Corps: Smartphone oxygenation tool for wound care
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Anuradha Godavarty, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a smartphone-based optical imaging technology to assess wound
healing. The proposed technology provides enhanced patient assessment using
oxygenation levels to increase the standard of care in the wound care domain
(including diabetic foot ulcers, chronic wounds, acute wounds, post-surgery
plastic surgery skin flaps, and other applications in this wound domain). In the
long-term, the technology also may facilitate remote patient monitoring, improve
patient compliance, minimize the need for amputations, and expand the
availability of modern wound care monitoring to communities with health care
disparities. Increasing costs of health care, an aging population, recognition
of difficult-to-treat infection threats, and the continued increase of diabetes
and obesity worldwide make chronic wounds a substantial clinical, social, and
economic challenge. The proposed technology may have a positive impact by
objectively assessing wound treatment progression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development a smartphone-based imaging
technology to be used as a handheld, telemedicine oxygenation device for wound
care prognosis of diabetic foot ulcers and other wounds. Current mobile health-
based diabetic foot ulcer assessment using a mobile phoneâ€™s digital color images
provides only minimal clinical assessment in terms of visual wound coloration,
size (or area), and depth measurement characteristics. The proposed technology
is designed to acquire digital photographs of wounds, measure wound size/area,
and obtain tissue oxygenation maps of the wounds. The device is the only non-
intrusive smartphone optical imaging device that measures 2-dimensional
oxygenation changes of tissues apart from obtaining digital color images. The
use of a smartphone makes the device user friendly and light enough for off
premise use in multiple examinations per day. The preliminary studies on
diabetic foot ulcers demonstrated that the proposed device could differentiate
the physiological contrast between the wound and its surroundings, apart from
obtaining digital color images of the wound. In addition, a smartphone-based app
is under development to allow data analysis and immediate display of digital
color images and oxygenation maps to the clinicians during
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.