* 2126514
* OCE-PRF: What controls the fate of biogenic particulate carbon in the ocean's twilight zone? Global-scale insights from data-constrained models
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Ashley Dinauer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 75,886.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This fellowship project will
address two fundamental questions about the ocean’s carbon cycle: (1) what
controls the efficiency of particulate organic carbon (POC) transfer through the
mesopelagic zone (100–1000 m), and (2) what causes shallow water column
(&lt;1000 m depth) calcium carbonate (CaCO3) dissolution? Our ability to assess
the impact of climate change on the ocean-atmosphere carbon dioxide (CO2)
balance requires a predictive understanding of vertical POC transport, whereas a
mechanistic understanding of shallow-water CaCO3 dissolution is needed to better
predict the future state of ocean acidification. These two key issues will be
addressed in the proposed project via the development of predictive, usable
models that include the main physical and biogeochemical processes thought to
control the vertical penetration of biogenic POC and CaCO3 into the ocean
interior. All models and model output resulting from the proposed activity will
be made available to any investigator who wishes to work with them through BCO-
DMO. The publicly available models will allow the ocean biogeochemistry
community to investigate how oceanic carbon sequestration will change in
response to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
proposed project is to incorporate the effects of biogenic particle transport,
transformation and removal processes into a mechanistic modeling framework that
is suitable for implementation in Earth System models of intermediate
complexity. The focus of model development will be on the treatment of
unresolved processes including zooplankton-mediated particle breakup. The
synergistic approach combines prognostic ocean biogeochemical models, data-
constrained ocean circulation inverse models, and new sources of observational
data to provide both the conceptual frameworks for model formulations and the
model formulations themselves. POC flux and POC concentration profiles derived
from field data, biogeochemical observations made available by the
Biogeochemical Argo program, ocean carbon data from the Global Ocean Ship-Based
Hydrographic Investigations Program, and Global Ocean Data Analysis Project and
World Ocean Atlas data products will provide essential constraints on the
underlying particle dynamics of the mesopelagic zone. The models resulting from
the proposed activity can be applied to important scientific questions such as
understanding oceanic carbon sequestration in a changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.