* 2126496
* How anomalous is the Marion Rise asthenosphere?
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Vincent J. Salters, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Midson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 287,343.00

Mid-ocean ridge volcanism is the largest element flux from the Earth’s interior
to the surface and is an important contributor of carbon to the atmosphere. The
magnitude of this flux is assumed to be controlled by temperature, with high
temperatures causing increased melt production and magmatism, and shallow
ridges. However, compositional differences in the mantle can potentially also
influence melt production, but this has not been convincingly shown yet. The
Marion Rise is anomalous in that melt production is low although the Rise depth
is shallow. This can potentially be explained by a mantle composition that is
more depleted in melt components than “normal” ridges. This research will
investigate through the chemistry of the basalts and the mantle rocks from the
seafloor if the Marion Rise mantle has experienced an ancient melt depletion and
thus the effect of composition on ridge depth and melt production. This project
is in collaboration with researchers at laboratories in Germany, Italy, and
Finland and supports research training and mentoring opportunities for early
career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will investigate, through
use of samples collected with two recent cruises to the Marion Rise as well as
samples from previous cruises, to determine the nature of the Indian Ocean
mantle at the eastern part of the South West Indian Ridge (SWIR). The eastern
part of the SWIR includes the Marion Rise, which has anomalously thin crust for
its axial depth that must be related to anomalous geochemical characteristics of
the mantle beneath. This proposal is to determine the nature and extent of this
anomalous mantle and thereby the cause of the Marion Rise. The Indian Ocean mid-
ocean ridge basalts (MORB) differ in isotopic composition from Atlantic and
Pacific MORB. The differences in Pb-isotopes (207Pb/204Pb) indicates that this
difference is created early in Earth’s history. Model age determinations of the
abyssal peridotites will further determine if the asthenosphere of the different
ocean basins has different ages. Two recent cruises to the Marion Rise, brought
back samples that address the above questions, as well as the recent
availability of the samples from French expeditions further east on the SWIR
allows for new insights and testing of existing hypotheses. The effort is
concentrated on geochemical analyses of abyssal peridotites and associated
basalts and interpreting these data in the context of geophysical
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.