* 2126506
* Collaborative Research: Build and Broaden 2.0: California Alliance for Hispanic-serving Social Science Advancement (CAHSSA)
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Holly Hapke, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 203,155.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California Alliance for
Hispanic-Serving Social Science Advancement (CAHSSA) builds and broadens the low
participation of social science faculty in extramurally funded research with an
examination of systemic barriers and comprehensive professional development
programming and policies. The partnership between three California universities
will serve 28 Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs) of various sizes and
representing unique regional factors in the California State University (CSU)
and the University of California (UC) systems. The outcomes of this project will
serve as a model to advance research in wide-ranging disciplines that impact the
health, prosperity, and welfare of the US public. CAHSSA implements a
comparative content analysis of NSF social science proposal review comments at
HSIs and non-HSIs to identify how social, behavioral, and economic research is
constructed and practiced across institutional types as well as reveal any
existing biases in the review process. Results will inform the project's
interventions that include virtual grant writing webinars and workshops, writing
groups, intensive writing retreats, and social science leader seminars for more
than 700 CSU and UC social sciences faculty and leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The California Alliance for Hispanic-Serving Social
Science Advancement (CAHSSA) will pursue a greater understanding of the
challenges faced by social scientists at Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs)
and Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs) in the extramural funding process at
the micro-level within varied campus types and at the macro-level through the
examination of NSF reviewer perceptions of social science proposals. From a pool
of nearly 4500, the PIs recruit more than 700 social sciences researchers and
leaders from 22 California State University (CSU) HSI campuses and six
University of California (UC) HSI campuses to participate in virtual webinars
and workshops (N=500 researchers), writing groups (N=160 researchers), writing
retreats (N=60 researchers), and seminars (N=100 leaders). Methods include CSU
and UC annual systemwide surveys, pre- and post-intervention participant
evaluation surveys, focus group interviews, and content analysis of grant
reviewer comments on 500 proposals over the prior ten years. The results of this
project will serve as a national model for advancing a new dialogue on faculty
professional development and the science of broadening participation by studying
institutional factors that shape social science grant success at HSIs/MSIs. The
interventions will produce innovative grant proposals to enhance research in the
social sciences as well as the revision of policies and procedures to strengthen
practices that support social sciences grant and research activity at
HSIs/MSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.