* 2126524
* OCE-PRF: Mechanisms of coral resistance to climate change driven stressors in the Tropical Eastern Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Diana Lopez, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 278,481.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs, one of the most
productive and biodiverse habitats in the ocean, are at risk of collapse from
climate change-related stress. Their ability to resist climate change events
such as increasing temperatures is expected to be greater in regions of the
world where substantial variations in climate conditions occur. Some Tropical
Eastern Pacific (TEP) areas experience seasonal winds that push warm water away
and allow cold water from the ocean bottom to the surface. This annual
phenomenon called “upwelling” brings variation in ocean conditions such as
temperature, pH, salinity, and nutrients. While coral populations from upwelling
regions are expected to be better adapted to resist climate change-related
stress, the mechanisms by which corals can cope with changing conditions are
poorly documented. This project investigates why some corals in the TEP may be
more resistant to the damaging effects of climate change than corals elsewhere.,
This study aims to elucidate corals’ physiological responses to changes in
temperature and salinity through extensive field and laboratory experiments,
which can inform coral reef restoration efforts worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are to determine
differences in performance (i.e., photosynthetic or respiration rate) with
thermal reaction norms (TRNs) of coral populations from upwelling and non-
upwelling regions along to the Pacific coast of Panama and assess whether coral
sensitivity varies in response to altered regimes of temperature and salinity.
Differences in coral population performance are investigated in situ across
temporal temperature gradients and from experimental assays combining
temperature gradients and extreme salinities expected under climate change. This
study proposes to use the empirical results in a model of population performance
that includes a new formulation of a temperature-salinity interaction to test
the prediction that suboptimal salinity is likely to exacerbate environmental
warming effects on corals. So far, the synergistic effects between temperature
and salinity as climate-driven stressors on coral populations have not yet been
thoroughly studied. This study is expected to yield important knowledge for
coral reef conservation and restoration efforts. This project is primarily
conducted in Panama, Central America, and it includes training undergraduate
students from underrepresented minorities by fully engaging them in the research
activities. This training is an excellent opportunity to prepare them for a
successful scientific career in an international forum. The research team also
promotes awareness of climate change and its impact on coral reefs through
various activities, including outreach and educational activities for school
children in Panama. Information that can apply to the conservation and
restoration of corals will be disseminated to a wide variety of stakeholders
from the U.S., Panama, and neighboring countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.