* 2126774
* SBIR Phase I:  A Wearable Non-Invasive Deep Tissue Thermometer
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,10/31/2022
* James Pollock, LUMENASTRA
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to measure biological temperatures for many
important problems in health care, by advancing a novel temperature sensor. In
the near term, a wearable, non-invasive sensor can prevent heat stroke and
exhaustion for at-risk cohorts, such as the US military, which suffers from 2800
annual cases of heat stroke in active-duty personnel. Furthermore, heat stroke
early warning could diminish injuries and deaths among U.S. high school and
college athletes and 7.4 million first responders who typically operate under
stressful conditions. Beyond heat stress, this thermometer can monitor elevated
brain temperature during the critical hours following stroke or traumatic brain
injury (affecting 4.8 million patients per year), which can cause additional
brain damage and permanent disabilities. The proposed sensor can directly
measure tumor temperature during heating therapy, potentially improving clinical
outcomes for some of the 1.8 million patients per year by 20-40% while reducing
dosage of debilitating chemicals and radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will demonstrate a novel,
non-invasive temperature sensor capable of accurately measuring deep tissue
temperature several centimeters below the skin, wherever placed. The proposed
sensor detects small microwave signals in a noisy environment by incorporating
20+ signal processing and noise reduction methods with technologies similar to
those used in radio astronomy. Non-invasive brain temperature measurement is
particularly important as the brain generates and manages its own critical
operating temperature, and elusive as it can only be inferred from surrogate
measurements without directly cutting into the skull. Direct brain temperature
monitoring with a wearable device may provide early warning of many health
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.