* 2126416
* Mechanisms of DNA Demethylation: The Molecular Interplay Between Thymine DNA Glycosylase and Chromatin Structure
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jonathan Sczepanski, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 911,535.00

DNA is methylated – chemically modified by a methyl group – at specific
positions throughout the genome. Establishing and maintaining proper patterns of
methylation is a highly choreographed process involving both the addition
(methylation) and removal (demethylation) of methyl groups. This project will
investigate how some enzymes responsible for demethylating DNA are targeted to
specific sites in the genome. This is an important question because accurate
demethylation is critical for cellular homeostasis, and dysregulation of this
process can result in abnormal development of living organisms as well as
diseases such as cancer. The knowledge gained from this research will advance
our understanding of how genome methylation landscapes are established and
maintained under physiological or pathological states, and may prove useful for
future biotechnology applications. Additionally, this project will offer
research training opportunities for a diverse group of graduate and
undergraduate students, enable development of a new educational curriculum, and
provide research opportunities to K-12 students to increase participation in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymatic reversal of 5-methylcytosine (5mC)
back into cytosine (referred to as “active” DNA demethylation) is an essential
pathway in mammals that impacts gene expression and organismal development. As
the only known enzyme capable of removing DNA demethylation intermediates
5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxycytosine from DNA in mammals, thymine DNA
glycosylase (TDG) has an essential role in the demethylation pathway. Yet, how
TDG is targeted to specific genomic loci and how its activities are regulated at
these sites remains largely unknown. This project will employ a series of in
vitro and mammalian cell studies aimed at uncovering the molecular actions of
TDG and how its interactions with chromatin shape genomic methylation
landscapes. In vitro studies using chemically defined nucleosome arrays will
provide molecular-level details regarding the relationship between TDG activity
and chromatin structure. Building on in vitro observations, the biological
relevance of TDG-chromatin interactions will be explored in the context of
estrogen-responsive gene promoters in cells. The outcomes will advance
mechanistic understanding of how chromatin structure impacts TDG activity and
thus contributes to methylation dynamics at important gene regulatory
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.