* 2126939
* SBIR Phase I:  A Manufacturing Monitoring System Using Sound Spectrograms and Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Chandra Nath, MAIJKER CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,833.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to improve manufacturing performance at decreased costs. The project
will develop a smart internal sound sensor- and artificial intelligence
(AI)-based machine and process monitoring system as a simple plug-and-play edge
device. It aims to be a low-cost, versatile, and customizable solution for a
wide range of equipment and devices on production floors. This technology can
significantly reduce the product defect rate, improve product quality, prolong
machine life, increase the overall equipment effectiveness, and enable better
human decisions. While this monitoring system can be deployed by any new/modern
manufacturers, small and mid-sized enterprise (SME) companies can retrofit
legacy equipment/ devices for understanding their machines, process behaviors,
timely maintenance, and remaining life, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project is a stethoscope-like sensor that captures internal sounds across many
frequencies without contamination from external factory sounds. To interpret the
captured sounds into useful information for dashboard publishing in terms of
machine/process events (anomaly, situation, downtime, etc.), this project is
developing AI-based sound classification or ‘machine speech’ recognition
techniques. The sound data can be wirelessly acquired and processed, enabling a
device for non-invasive application on the outside of target
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.