* 2126985
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel nanoformulation drug delivery platform to overcome poorly soluble drug challenges.
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Kay Olmstead, NANO PHARMASOLUTIONS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2022
* USD 275,961.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project accelerates drug development. The proposed
method of producing preclinical drug formulations will accelerate and improve
the success rate of drug development for a variety of disease areas where
existing methods have not yet proven to be effective. Currently, the average
wait time for a researched drug to reach patients at scale is 10-12 years, with
only a 0.0002% approval rating. The proposed technology uses nanoparticles
without additional chemicals or solvents, a mechanism that is versatile and
adaptable for many drug delivery forms. In addition to accelerating drug
development it enables new therapeutics currently administered in clinical
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project creates a platform to overcome poorly soluble drug formulation
and delivery challenges. While great progress has been made in developing drug
candidates, still the majority are insoluble in water (&gt;80%) and have low
bioavailability, resulting in 40% failed preclinical studies due to improper
formulations. This project develops and validates a nanoparticle compound
generation platform that improves the bioavailability of poorly soluble drugs.
The specific work will: (1) Identify the critical technology platform parameters
for robust nanoparticle generation at scale; (2) Explore the delivery properties
of various nanoparticle drug carriers; and (3) Improve the measurement accuracy
of a nanodrug dissolution assay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.