* 2126396
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on Interseismic Locking near the Trench on the Oregon Segment of the Cascadia Subduction Zone Using Seafloor Geodesy (GNSS-A)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Mark Zumberge, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 401,300.00

This project aims to measure the relative movement between the North American
and Juan de Fuca tectonic plates across the Cascadia Subduction Zone to help
quantify the earthquake and tsunami hazards. The Cascadia Subduction Zone, which
is represented by a major fault at the interface of two tectonic plates, is a
potential source of large earthquakes and tsunamis. Recent large earthquakes,
such as the 2011 Tohoku earthquake, have demonstrated that rupture can extend to
surprisingly shallow depths, where large vertical displacements of the seafloor
can generate a tsunami. It is important to learn if the situation is similar on
the Cascadia Subduction Zone, increasing the hazard from a large tsunami along
the US west coast. Determining whether the seafloor in Cascadia moves at the
subducting plate rate or is slowed because the fault is locked locally is also
important to the scientific understanding of the fault mechanics. The technical
challenge is to make these observations on the seafloor, which is both difficult
to access and corrosive to instrumentation. Thus, this effort requires
specialized techniques for making the necessary observations. This project will
support the training of a graduate student and postdoctoral fellow in the use of
seafloor geodetic techniques, and the project will further develop the
engineering human resources and infrastructure needed to advance seafloor
geodesy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The time series of seafloor benchmarks at three
existing sites on the accretionary prism of the Cascadia Subduction Zone
offshore Oregon will be extended using the GNSS-Acoustic method. These seafloor
sites were established in previous years with varying numbers of surveys on
each, yielding initial estimates of tectonic plate velocities at three of four
sites along the margin. Three new surveys will be performed with a GNSS-
Acoustic-equipped Wave Glider during the two-year project. The Wave Glider
approach greatly reduces the survey cost compared to that undertaken with a
research vessel. In addition to undertaking the geodetic surveys, new algorithms
will be explored that improve the data processing, including algorithms designed
to mitigate biases from the acoustic velocity structure of the water column and
by capitalizing on multi-GNSS data. Finally, the amount of kinematic locking at
the trench will be inferred using elastic boundary element models, with the goal
to identify if plate locking varies along strike and correlates with structural
features in the outer accretionary prism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.