* 2126451
* ISS: Collaborative Research: Individual and Collective Behavior of Active Colloids in Microgravity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Jarrod Schiffbauer, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2025
* USD 49,771.00

This NSF-CASIS project involves microgravity experiments on the International
Space Station (ISS), complementary terrestrial experiments and
theoretical/numerical modeling to improve understanding of active colloid
transport. Active colloids move by extracting energy from their surroundings and
transforming it into mechanical work. These materials have similarities with
biological matter, especially for concentrated suspensions where particle-
particle interactions yield collective behaviors similar to those found in
nature such as swarming flocks of birds, schools of fish and bacterial colonies.
Although most theoretical models pertain to an isolated particle traveling in
the bulk, the weight of active colloids on Earth causes them to settle at the
bottom of the experimental chamber where they translate parallel to the surface.
Long term microgravity conditions on the ISS offer a unique opportunity to
mitigate buoyancy and sedimentation and obtain bulk measurements that can be
compared with theoretical models and elucidate the role of particle-wall
interactions, which complicate terrestrial experiments. The results of this
project may transform a variety of applications in biomedicine and applications
at the Food-Water-Energy Nexus including colloidal assembly and bubble/droplet
transport. The project is a collaboration between Colorado Mesa University (CMU)
- a Primary Undergraduate Institution with a diverse student body – and Florida
International University (FIU) - a research intensive Minority Serving
Institution (MSI). It offers a unique opportunity to promote diversity through
exposure of undergraduate students to timely research and industry collaboration
with the implementation partner Space Tango. The research team will develop a
module for FIU’s “Engineers on Wheels” program, which visits local schools, and
will collaborate with the Eureka Science Museum and Maverick Innovation Center
in Colorado.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF-CASIS project will provide a
comprehensive understanding of complex physical mechanisms controlling the
mobility of individual active colloids and their collective behavior with two
distinct goals: (1) optimizing active colloid transport, and (2) understanding
effects of microgravity on collective dynamics and non-equilibrium interactions
of active matter. The absence of buoyancy in microgravity is expected to resolve
a conundrum in terrestrial experiments wherein theoretical models of these
systems are derived for isolated particles in the bulk while experimental
measurements are almost always made near a wall owing to gravity-induced
sedimentation. Proximity to a wall and the accompanying particle-wall
interactions (hydrodynamic, phoretic, electrostatic etc.) are often invoked as
corrections to explain discrepancies between theory and experiment. However, the
precise roles of particle-wall interactions cannot be isolated without
comparable measurements far from the wall. Sustained microgravity conditions
will enable measurement of particle mobility in the bulk, providing an
experimental reference for theoretical models and insight into competing
buoyancy effects and wall-particle interactions. Comparison of particle-particle
interactions on Earth and on the ISS will also elucidate effects of microgravity
on collective behavior in active matter and dense colloidal systems including 3D
phase separation. Microgravity experiments will be complemented with terrestrial
bulk measurements using optical tweezers as an external forcing mechanism, which
will provide insight into other active colloid transport mechanisms (e.g.,
catalytic) and the applicability of such external forcing for future fundamental
studies. The collaboration between FIU and CMU and the partnership with Space
Tango offers a unique opportunity to engage students. Undergraduate students
will participate ithrough capstone projects at FIU, while CMU students will
travel to FIU and gain exposure to a research intensive
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.