* 2126437
* ISS: Understanding the Gravity Effect on Flow Boiling Through High-Resolution Experiments and Machine Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Chen Li, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Flow boiling plays an essential role in energy-water nexus in both terrestrial
and space applications. These applications include thermoelectric power
generation, thermal management of power electronics and microelectronics, water
purification, and heating, cooling and air-conditioning systems. However, flow
boiling is significantly affected by five major forces such as surface tension,
inertia, shear, vapor evaporation momentum, and gravitational force. The
significant changes of channel sizes and working conditions (such as flow rate,
heat load, and temperature) result in various contributions of these five forces
and hence drastic changes of flow boiling patterns and performance. In addition,
it is extremely challenging to conduct experiments of flow boiling in a wide
range of channel sizes and working conditions due to the prohibitive costs and
efforts. In this project, a package of “Deep Models of Flow Boiling” will be
developed to understand the effects of these major forces on flow boiling
through the combined use of ground and microgravity experiments and the machine
learning based techniques. The models are aimed to not only predicting flow
boiling characteristics but also creating synthetic images of flow patterns.
This project will pave the way for performing virtual flow boiling experiments
under a wide range of working conditions. Furthermore, it would provide a
powerful platform to study and design flow boiling-based water-energy systems in
a significantly more comprehensive and economic way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
challenging objective of developing the deep models of flow boiling will be
achieved by three major research tasks. First, high-resolution experiments and
dataset will be constructed. In order to assure accurate and more continuous
inputs for machine learning, a complete and accurate data pool of flow boiling
will be built through high-resolution experiments under a wide range of working
conditions in terrestrial conditions on a test setup that is identical with the
test section of the NASA Flow Boiling and Condensation Experiment (FBCE) on the
International Space Station (ISS). Experimental data on the FBCE in ISS will be
also collected to provide a quality dataset in microgravity. Second, modeling of
the force effect on physical variables will be achieved by machine learning. An
end-to-end Multi-Target Hybrid Deep Regression (MTHDR) framework will be built
to predict physical variables of flow boiling using the collected datasets from
both ground and ISS experiments. Third, image synthesis will be performed for
two-phase flow patterns. A generative adversarial network (GAN)-based model will
be developed to create images of two-phase flow patterns so as to establish a
framework to understand and even quantify the effects of major forces on
extremely complex two-phase flow patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.