* 2126246
* CC* Integration-Large: MAINTLET: Advanced Sensory Network Cyber-Infrastructure for Smart Maintenance in Campus Scientific Laboratories
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Klara Nahrstedt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Studies show that in some industry and scientific environments, between 15 and
60 percent of the total costs originate in maintenance activities, and about 33
cents of every dollar spent on maintenance in the US is wasted because of
unnecessary and preventable maintenance activities. The cost of scientific
instruments’ maintenance is even greater in universities because the scientific
instruments, and associated support equipment, such as vacuum pumps, serve
diverse students, staff, and faculty populations for educational and research
purposes over much longer periods with smaller budgets than in industry.
Instruments’ down-time greatly limits research productivity and programs. Hence,
MAINTLET investigates an advanced sensory network cyber-infrastructure with
modern AI-guided big data methods that helps the campus scientific laboratories
to see patterns that indicate the right time to purchase kits, parts, and
services, and minimize opportunity cost due to down-time and all repairs and
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAINTLET enables cost-effective, scalable, and
sustainable reactive, preventive and predictive maintenance solutions for
scientific instruments. MAINTLET provides two important indicators. For
preventive and predictive maintenance, simulations identify potential instrument
failures, using data from instruments’ surrounding sensors such as acoustic
sensors, water flow sensors, and contact water temperature sensors. These data
help predict in real-time, using AI techniques, when a pump may need condition-
based preventive maintenance. For reactive maintenance, trained failure
detectors detect failures in real-time. MAINTLET includes sensors; edge devices
such as Raspberry Pis executing reactive maintenance services; WiFi and Zigbee
access points and networks interconnecting sensors, edge and cloud devices; and
a private cloud with predictive and preventive maintenance services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impact of MAINTLET is in terms of decreased instrument
failures and down-time and hence speed-up and accuracy of scientific
discoveries, and in terms of security (as uncertainty about failed scientific
lab equipment can cause both cyber and physical harm). MAINTLET’s various
insights are taught in undergraduate and graduate courses to students from
Materials Science &amp; Engineering, Computer Science, and other departments.
MAINTLET is presented at the Advanced Materials Characterization Workshop with
instrument vendors’ exhibit, “Nano at Illinois” event, and other scientific
venues. During the summers, the Worldwide Youth in Science and Engineering
program for high school students, and other outreach programs, organized within
the Grainger College of Engineering, receive a series of MAINTLET
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAINTLET’s website
https://t2c2.csl.illinois.edu/projects/maintlet includes links to data, code,
results, and simulations as they are developed. The project-related information
will be accessible for at least five years after the project
ends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.