* 2126108
* CC* CIRA: Shared Arkansas Research Plan for Community Cyber Infrastructure (SHARP CCI)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Brian Berry, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,592.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHARP CCI creates a statewide
research cyber infrastructure (RCI) Plan for Arkansas that is focused on the
eight degree granting institutions performing science and engineering research.
Participating institutions include: Arkansas State University (ASU); Southern
Arkansas University (SAU); University of Arkansas (UA) Fayetteville (UAF); UA
Division of Agriculture (UADA); UA Little Rock (UALR); UA Medical Sciences
(UAMS); UA Pine Bluff (UAPB); and University of Central Arkansas (UCA). Each
school has a growing demand for federated access to high-speed resources,
managed services and technical training; however, a coordinated plan for
providing these capabilities does not currently exist. Most schools in Arkansas
lack the connectivity, budget and staffing to fully utilize these statewide
resources, and each school is unique in technical capability and expertise.
SHARP CCI assembles the senior administrators and research leaders at each
school to document the environments, capabilities, technology needs and resource
gaps and create an equitable RCI Plan to inform decision makers in the state.
This plan will also provide a necessary resource for each school to apply for
additional NSF support through solicitations that expand school infrastructure
and training capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A statewide RCI Plan is
requisite for organizing and expanding research collaborations and it fosters an
economy-of-scale for building compliant facilities and systems and establishing
a managed service environment for schools with limited resources. SHARP CCI
includes establishing a comprehensive data science training program, Arkansas
Cyber Team (ACT), to provide engineers, educators, researchers and students
access to technical expertise in a broad range of scientific domains. The
project team includes Arkansas Research and Education Optical Network, Great
Plains Network, Open Science Grid and NSFâ€™s Engagement and Performance
Operations Center to provide engineering and training expertise, managed service
experience and help in implementing a statewide RCI Plan for
Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.