* 2126030
* NSF ADVANCE Catalyst: Equity in STEM at Miami University
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Claire McLeod, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 299,947.00

This NSF ADVANCE Catalyst Award to Miami University, Equity in STEM at Miami
University (ESTEAM), will support data collection and self-assessment to
identify systemic inequities that impact STEM faculty related to gender, race,
and international status. These inequities may be magnified during times of
crisis, like the COVID- 19 pandemic. Miami University is an R2 public liberal
arts university located on three local campuses in Hamilton, Middletown, and
Oxford, Ohio. These campuses work to enhance the socio-economic, cultural, and
racial diversity of the student body–something that benefits from diverse
faculty. While Miami creates a vibrant learning community for students, the
expectation for Miami faculty to be both exemplary teachers and research
scholars creates demands on faculty that can lead to burnout. These demands may
disproportionately impact faculty equity on the basis and intersectionality of
gender, race, and international status. This project aims to identify and
evaluate stressors both quantitatively and qualitatively through examination of
institutional data on hiring and salaries; on institutional policies and
practices on hiring, promotion and tenure, parental and family leaves, and
research leaves; and on institutional tools used to evaluate teaching and
research successes. Also, this project will evaluate how inequities may have
been exacerbated during the COVID-19 pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project are 1) to lay the foundation for strategic recruitment and
retention of faculty across gender, race, and international status by
identifying barriers and structural impediments that impact STEM diversity, and
2) to set the stage for institutional transformation beyond the grant period to
reduce inequities that hinder these groups of faculty during and outside of a
global crisis. The research team will examine institutional data, and conduct
surveys and in-person interviews. The results of this assessment aim to help
reshape policies that will support retention and recruitment of diverse faculty.
The data acquired in this study will be reported using multi-media methods,
including technical peer-reviewed journal articles; conference presentations;
and an ESTEAM website. STEM faculty at Miami will have opportunities to be
involved in two programs initiated by this project: 1) An ESTEAM Faculty
Learning Community that will review and discuss literature on equity in higher
education, identify potential solutions for successful recruiting, retention,
and promotion of diverse faculty, and develop ESTEAM Presentation Modules on
STEM-diversity that can be shared with administrators, faculty, and students;
and 2) a “STEM-Equity” mentoring program, which will aim to improve the climate
for all STEM faculty. Results from this mentorship approach will be documented
and distributed to other universities through the university’s ESTEAM website
and through scholarly work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE program is
designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the identification and
elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full participation and
advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions. Organizational barriers
that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes, practices, and the
organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards provide support
for institutional equity assessments and the development of five-year faculty
equity strategic plans at academic, non-profit institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.