* 2126374
* Developing quantitative understanding of adaptor-clathrin coating at the trans-Golgi network
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Elizabeth Sztul, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,199,972.00

All cells contain organelles that are specialized to perform a specific
function. The function of these organelles depends on the correct transport of
proteins into and out of each organelle. This transport is mediated by small
vesicles that carry various cargos around the cell in a highly specific
orchestration of movement. Thus, the formation of vesicles that will
specifically deliver select proteins, to a specific organelle, is critically
important to the normal function of cells. The project seeks to understand how
specific vesicles containing specific proteins form in the cells. The aim is to
unite molecular/biochemical experiments with computational/arithmetic modeling
to understand vesicular traffic with the long-term goal of capturing the
underlying biophysical principles of this essential cellular process. Broader
Impact activities include the intrinsic merit of the research itself, e.g., the
lack of delivery of enzymes to various organelles causes severe diseases. The
project will provide cross-discipline training opportunities and develop
workshops and courses to effectively bridge the gap between biological and
physical fields. Another goal of the project is to advance scientific equity by
actively recruiting and mentoring under-represented groups and by participating
in programs aimed at increasing representation of minorities and promoting and
developing community outreach programs to increase science awareness and
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein transport between the compartments of the
secretory and endosomal pathways is essential for activities such as growth,
division and differentiation. Transport is mediated by vesicles that select
cargo from one compartment, and then deliver the cargo to the next compartment.
Cargo selection is mediated by coating lattices that assemble on the cytoplasmic
aspect of nascent buds in a process involving a hierarchy of subprocesses
systematically linked to one another causally or functionally in time and space.
The goal is to identify underlying principles that govern coating and to develop
a predictive understanding of the emergent properties of the regulatory networks
that facilitate coating. The project will focus on the subprocesses that
assemble coating lattices for sorting cargo at the trans-Golgi network (TGN).
Lattice formation at the TGN proceeds via a complex mechanism, in which an inner
core of adaptors assembles first, followed by an outer layer of clathrin. The
project seeks to understand the dynamics and the biophysical parameters
regulating the formation of adaptor-clathrin (AC) coating modules composed of
the tetrameric AP1 complex or three monomeric Golgi-localized ÔÅß-adaptin ARF-
binding (GGA1-3) adaptors and clathrin. The adaptors assemble on the membrane by
interacting with activated Arf GTPases and the activation of such Arfs at the
TGN is mediated by the BIG1 and the BIG2 guanine nucleotide exchange factors.
The project will use CRISPR/Cas9-modified knock-out (KO) cell lines to identify
the specific Arfs and BIGs that mediate the recruitment of each AC coating
module. Adaptor-clathrin (AC) coating will be modeled by mathematically
describing the behavior of key components: BIG1, BIG2, Arf1-3, AP1, GGA1-3 and
clathrin. The overall coating process is multi-step, multi-component, and
variable. Experiments alone cannot deal with this complexity, and computational
modeling is needed to illuminate the spatio-temporal parameters of the process.
Furthermore, the complexity of AC vesicle formation requires the development of
sophisticated mathematical methods to model the behavior of the system. This
project combines diverse expertise and ultimately seeks to decipher the general
principles of coating module assembly which will define one of the Rules of
Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.