* 2126266
* CC* Integration-Large: In-Network Distributed Infrastructure for Advanced Network Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Douglas Swany, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 938,479.00

This project makes the Internet "smarter". The "end to end" principle of
Internet design states that the routers, switches, WiFi base stations, etc. that
comprise the network should only forward packets. There are many instances in
which small amounts of processing at intermediate stages can make Internet
applications more efficient. Cloud computing services have had a significant
impact on society. Many envision an even more powerful Internet with cloud-like
services distributed throughout and all the way to the edge of the network. This
project is exploring a smart network with small servers embedded in the fabric
of the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a novel
lightweight execution model suitable for efficient in-network microservices, and
a topology aware coordination and control layer, with a policy language to
express desired application services and requirements. The execution model,
called InLocus, is designed to bridge the gap between network packet processors
and stateful network services. InLocus runs on conventional microprocessors and
microcontrollers, as well as on accelerators like Field Programmable Gate Arrays
(FPGAs). This enables necessary functionality with minimal resources. The
coordination framework monitors the network (with extensions to the PerfSONAR
network monitoring system) and can make intelligent service placement and
instantiation decisions. This project will integrate and evaluate two important
application environments, one in Earth Sciences and one applicable to
distributed machine learning. Each of these will work in conjunction with NSF
cyberinfrastructure resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project stands to
impact scientific and commercial applications and their users. Just as the
Internet has touched many lives in the past years, a better Internet will
continue to drive innovation and users' qualities of experience. Techniques like
the ones we are exploring are widely regarded as necessary to fully realize
autonomous vehicles and smart cities, as well as user-oriented capabilities like
augmented reality. Additionally, we teach many of the tenets of this project in
classes and seminars at various levels, as they embody the history and the
future of the Internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's web site is at
http://indiana.open.luddy.indiana.edu/ and a project overview, component
descriptions, and links to source code repositories can be found there. This
project builds, and integrates, previously funded projects. These previous
projects remained open source even after their period of funding ended. Further,
the core functionality has been maintained as other work depends on it. This
project's data and code will be maintained as long as
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.