* 2126109
* Sustaining URGE (Unlearning Racism in Geosciences)
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Vanshan Wright, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2023
* USD 119,188.00

Unlearning Racism in Geoscience (URGE) is a community-wide journal-reading and
policy-design curriculum to help geoscientists unlearn racism and improve
belonging, accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion (Be A JEDI)
in Geoscience. The geosciences remain one of the least diverse of the science
fields with little change in the demographics of the discipline despite decades
of effort. URGE’s primary objectives are to (1) deepen the community’s knowledge
of the effects of racism on the participation and retention of Black, Brown,
Indigenous, and People of Color in Geoscience, (2) draw on existing literature,
expert opinions, and personal experiences to develop anti-racist policies and
strategies, and (3) share, discuss and modify anti-racist policies and
strategies within a dynamic community network and on a national stage. This
proposal supports the community facilitation activities of URGE (e.g., virtual
meetings and events), documentation of the development and operations of the
program, and summarization of the response of the Geoscience community to URGE.
These data are important for later studies focused on identifying what makes Be
A JEDI initiatives successful. The data will also allow us to assess whether the
structure and curriculum of URGE lead to effective anti-racist policies and
strategies and significant short and long-term changes at the institutions and
organizations that participated in the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlearning
Racism in Geoscience (URGE) is a community-wide journal-reading and policy-
design curriculum to help geoscientists unlearn racism and improve the
discipline for all communities. URGE’s main structure brings together the
geoscience community to participate in a curriculum designed to educate, provide
expert opinions, and draft anti-racist policies and strategies in the
geosciences. Throughout eight two-week sessions, geoscientists cover different
topics on racism, including identity, history, justice, accessibility,
inclusivity, and accountability. Each session includes deliverables specific to
the session’s topic and developed by each group through the use of knowledge
from provided literature, interviews from experts in the field, group
discussions, and broader community-wide discourse. URGE will follow this
sixteen-week curriculum by reviewing and distilling the policies developed by
the community, facilitating policy meetings at institutions, and disseminating
the findings at national conferences. Project personnel will analyze data
collected at the end of the sixteen-week URGE session using modified versions of
validated survey tools that focus on assessing behavior change and attitudes
towards improving belonging, accessibility, justice, equity, diversity, and
inclusion (Be A JEDI). This will be followed by longitudinal surveys to evaluate
the long-term impacts of the URGE program. Project personnel will also analyze
data on URGE participants to better understand who took part in the program and
what work may need to be done in the future to bring in more majority identities
into programs like URGE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.