* 2126056
* BCSER Developing a Framework for Action to Promote Black Males Access to Algebra 1 by the Eighth Grade
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sammy Steen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 347,209.00

This project aims to increase the number of Black male youth who can be
successful in advanced mathematics while in public schools. The researcher will
use a mixed-methods design to gain a comprehensive and culturally appropriate
student perspective. The project includes the implementation of a group
counseling program for Black male students beginning in seventh grade and
following them through eighth grade. The researcher will gain the knowledge and
skills necessary to integrate quantitative and qualitative data from students
and stakeholders to provide a theoretically sound foundation for future STEM
education-related research. These data will be analyzed using two theoretical
frameworks to create a baseline of new knowledge to develop culturally
appropriate strategies for math instructors and school leaders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to advance programs,
knowledge, and skills targeting Black male middle school students so that they
can gain access to, and be successful in Algebra 1. This study will be guided by
the following research questions: a) to what extent does the group intervention
model increase the racial identity, resiliency, and mathematical identity scores
of Black male seventh-graders compared to a wait-list control group? b) to what
extent do stakeholders’ perceptions, understandings of structural challenges,
and perceived support contribute to Black male seventh-graders successfully
accessing Algebra 1 in the eighth grade? c) is there a relationship between the
Black male students’ experiences with successfully accessing Algebra 1 in the
eighth grade and their stakeholders’ perceptions? and d) what are the
recommendations Black male students and their stakeholders offer as strategies
for successfully accessing Algebra 1 in eighth grade and persisting to advance
level math courses in the future? Developing a strong racial and mathematic
identity for Black students is necessary for engaging in general school
practices. STEM access, persistence, and other related predictors have been
explored, but identifying strategies to help Black males sustain an interest in
pursuing STEM fields is needed. This study will be among the first to use a
triangulated explanatory mixed-method design to explore both Black students’
experiences, their stakeholders’ perceptions, and the integration of these
findings when accessing Algebra 1 in eighth grade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.