* 2126163
* Fundamental Understanding of Amorphization Mechanism and Intermetallic Prevention in Friction-based Solid-state Additive Manufacturing of Aluminum-steel Bimetallic Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Fengchao Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2024
* USD 478,154.00

Additive manufacturing of dissimilar alloys through depositing specific
materials on a given substrate has the potential to achieve effective
lightweight structures with required performance and functionality. Aluminum-
steel bimetallic components are of strong interest in engineering structural
applications because of their availability and affordability. However, direct
bonding between aluminum alloys and steels using currently existing
manufacturing methods often leads to detrimental intermetallic compounds at the
interface, significantly degrading the bonding strength. This award will tackle
fundamental research of a novel friction-based solid-state additive
manufacturing process, during which localized shear deformation, due to high
strain-rates, at dissimilar metallic interfaces may amorphize the processed
alloys and suppress intermetallic formation. However, how atomic level diffusion
at the bimetallic interface interacts with localized deformations and inhibits
the formation of intermetallic compound is a critical knowledge gap hindering
full comprehension of such a complex physical phenomenon. Thorough understanding
from this research will not only reveal key knowledge necessary to advance
dissimilar alloys joining by solid-state additive manufacturing, but also enable
a rapid transition for realization and commercialization of high-performance
aluminum-steel bimetallic component manufacture. Throughout the project,
research materials will be incorporated into several undergraduate and graduate
level courses in advanced manufacturing to prepare next-generation engineers for
future manufacturing challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research
objectives of this project include: (1) elucidating the amorphization mechanism
and intermetallic formation in high strain-rate solid-state additive
manufacturing, which govern the bonding integrity at the joined aluminum-steel
interface, (2) investigating the roles of key process parameters in determining
aluminum-steel interfacial bond strengths produced by the studied additive
manufacturing, and (3) developing and implementing an effective process modeling
procedure to achieve intermetallic-free aluminum-steel bimetallic structures.
The primary complexity is how to effectively interrelate nanoscale bonding
phenomena between dissimilar metals to a macro-scale thermomechanical
interactions. To address this challenge, the following multidisciplinary
approaches will be pursued: (1) exploring selectively integrated molecular-
dynamic and continuum-mechanics based models to reveal the nanoscale deformation
and material responses at the interface, (2) performing in-situ process
monitoring and interfacial microstructure analysis to guide the multi-physics
simulation model and advance the scientific understanding of solid-state metal
additive manufacturing, and (3) validating computational procedures using a
laboratory setup and evaluating the bond strength of additively produced
bimetallic components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.