* 2126616
* SBIR Phase I:  A software-based tool for beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) drone's connection reliability enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2022
* Kim Mahler, VOLTELA INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,962.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve standards for safety-critical
connectivity of drones flying Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS). The drone
communication market requires superior link reliability to BVLOS drone
applications at an affordable price. The proposed technologies seek to control
BVLOS operations enabling improved safety and increased trust in autonomous
airspace systems from both regulatory authorities and society. Network-based
solutions to improve airborne links require costly enhancements to the network
and a large number of drone devices to be profitable. The team is focused on
solving aerial command and control problems using the current mobile network;
The technology seeks full integration with the 5G network and compatibility with
subsequent network generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop and de-risk the
connection reliability enhancement algorithms for Beyond Visual Line of Sight
(BVLOS) drones, enhancing connection reliability. The technological improvements
allow use of any network generation (2G/3G/4G/5G), delivering connection
reliability to 95% of the global population. The team has three enabling
innovations: 1) voice channel communication redundancy which translates commands
into audio signals transmitted over the voice channel, 2) an algorithm for
handover (HO) optimization which minimizes ping-pong HO, radio link failures
(RLF) and connection losses, and 3) safe route planning which allows drone
operators to select the best route for reliable connectivity given the network
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.