* 2126867
* SBIR Phase I:  Monitoring and Treatment of Urinary Incontinence in Women
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Holly Jimison, LIV LABS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2023
* USD 255,078.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve care for the 27 million American
women with involuntary urine leakage. Such leakage is highly prevalent,
affecting one in three adult women and worsening with age. Most women avoid
medical treatment, either because they accept their leakage as natural or hold
an unfavorable view of treatments like surgery and pelvic floor physical
therapy. This research will explore a scalable, high-tech approach to at-home
treatments recommended by clinicians. Patients will interact virtually with
health coaches and routinely receive personalized, semi-automated help and
encouragement. Health coaches will be able to monitor the simultaneous progress
of many patients remotely. Benefits include (1) helping more women at lower cost
versus current practice and (2) increasing clinician productivity. It could save
individual women up to $1,000 annually and eliminate tens of thousands of
unnecessary surgeries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a healthcare system workflow
technology enabled by AI algorithms for tailoring an incontinence home health
intervention to a wide variety of patient needs, preferences, and idiosyncratic
behaviors. Study use cases will include medical device usage training and
exercise regimen adherence. To address these scenarios, researchers will create
a clinically-valid, user-specific, dynamic incontinence treatment solution
comprising a mobile app for symptomatic women and a health coaching platform
that integrates user data and generates tailored interactions. Solution elements
will be built to (1) collect and manage high quantities of rich user data, (2)
develop and train real-time inference algorithms, and (3) incorporate machine
learning approaches to learn from user responses to system outputs (feedback,
recommendations, encouragement, etc.). Known principles of health behavior
change will be incorporated in adapting interactions for
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.