* 2126818
* Making Sense: Simultaneous Sensor Configuration and Optimal Control for Autonomous Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Raghvendra Cowlagi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 530,029.00

This project will contribute new scientific knowledge for future autonomous
systems in large-scale applications, including emergency response to adverse
events such as natural disasters or industrial accidents. As an example, in a
post-disaster scenario where many roads are flooded, it is important to
determine viable evacuation routes to transport people to safer locations. It is
desirable to automate this process as much as possible: merge information from
various sources and quickly plan the safe route. A network of unmanned aerial
vehicles can visually survey the extent of flooding and identify passable roads.
Information about road conditions, downed power lines, and other environmental
factors may also be gained from diverse sources such as traffic cameras or
social media posts. The current science of autonomy is inadequate because
information-gathering and planning are typically treated as two separate
problems. By contrast, this project emphasizes simultaneous information-
gathering and planning, namely, methods to identify and deploy the most relevant
sources of information in the context of a specific planning objective. With
this approach, optimal plans may be achieved significantly faster than is
possible with current technology. Consequently, the outcomes of this research
may enable faster responses to adverse events, which in turn may help reduce
loss of life and damage to property and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
new autonomous systems, sensors may be exteroceptive, multimodal, and
configurable, e.g., parameters such as location and pan-tilt-zoom may be tuned.
This research aims to close the loop between estimation and control by
configuring sensors to collect data most relevant to an optimal control
objective. This is a departure from the separation principle traditionally used
in control design. With such an integrated approach, it is anticipated that the
control objective can be achieved with less risk and significantly lower volumes
of sensor data, in some cases orders of magnitude fewer measurements, compared
to the traditional paradigm. The research combines new machine learning tools
with control and estimation techniques to execute an iterative sensing and
control algorithm. At each iteration, an optimal sensor configuration is
achieved for a given control design by maximizing a context-relevant information
gain metric, and an optimal control design is then determined from the data
generated by the updated sensor configuration. The fixed point of these
iterations is a near-optimal solution to the coupled
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.