* 2126177
* RUI: Microelectrophoretic and Statistical Tools for Studies of Kinase- and ROS-Based Signaling in Dictyostelium discoideum
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michelle Kovarik, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 293,514.00

Living organisms use a diversity of molecules to communicate information within
and between cells, and scientists are still investigating the interactions
between these molecules. This project will produce simultaneous measurements of
both large proteins and small reactive, oxygen-containing molecules in groups of
cells and in individual cells to better understand the interactions between
these molecular signals. The project will also develop mathematical tools to
analyze the data collected from these experiments and make these tools available
to researchers doing similar work. Finally, this project will engage
undergraduates and high school students in interdisciplinary research involving
cell signaling, separations chemistry, microfluidics, and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum undergoes
a social life cycle, in which individual cells aggregate and differentiate to
form a superorganism. Cell signaling during this process involves both protein
kinases and reactive oxygen species, but the relationship between these
interacting signaling nodes remains unclear. Through microelectrophoretic
separations of peptide substrates and fluorogenic indicators, this project will
simultaneously measure protein kinase B activity and superoxide concentrations
in cells. In addition to characterizing these molecules in cell lysates, this
project will also produce single-cell measurements using custom-designed
microfluidic devices and novel mathematical strategies for data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.