* 2126696
* OCE-PRF-Development of a paired kerogen-pyrite sulfur isotope proxy for organic remineralization
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Selva Marroquin, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 327,228.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Selva Marroquin will start an
NSF OCE funded Postdoctoral Fellowship to develop a new method to track the
recycling of organic matter in ocean sediments. The project will compare the
chemical composition of sulfur within co-occurring organic matter and sulfur
bearing minerals (e.g., pyrite or fool’s gold) within archived ocean sediment
drill cores. The burial and incorporation of sulfur into these different forms
is closely tied to key aspects of carbon cycling within the marine system that
are integral to reconstruct. The results of this study will allow us to better
understand the outstanding questions regarding the chemical and biologic
response of the oceans to rising carbon dioxide levels associated with global
climate change. The research will be carried out at Caltech with Dr. Alex
Sessions in collaboration with Dr. Will Berelson at the University of Southern
California. With this funding, Dr. Marroquin will provide research opportunities
and mentorship to students at different education levels (i.e. high school and
community college) to help build the STEM identities of minoritized students and
broaden their participation in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sulfur
isotope ratios (δ34S values) of marine minerals have been studied for decades to
help reconstruct the global redox history of Earth’s oceans. A significant
limitation has been that the δ34S record of pyrite convolves the fractionation
between pyrite and sulfate associated with microbial sulfate reduction and the
porewater isotopic gradient, both local controls. The primary goal of this work
is to improve our understanding of reduced δ34S records by developing a new
proxy based on the difference in δ34S values between coeval organic sulfur
(kerogen) and pyrite from modern marine sediments. The environmental controls on
this proxy remain unclear, though it is undeniably linked to key aspects of the
marine system that we seek to reconstruct (e.g., organic carbon delivery,
sulfate reduction, sulfurization, and carbon burial). To address these
uncertainties, measurements of TOC, paired kerogen and pyrite δ34S, and Fe
speciation will be made on samples from IODP cores representing a variety of
depositional environments. This work will help determine how the variable
depositional conditions correlate with the recorded δ34S offset between kerogen
and pyrite. The results of this work will refine this proxy for application in
the geologic record which is integral for improving our understanding of how
climate change will impact the future of our ocean
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.