* 2127185
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimizing Assembly of Bispecific Aptamer Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Matthew Levy, DRIVE THERAPEUTICS, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the impact of preventable vision
loss caused by retinal diseases such as the wet form of advanced macular
degeneration (wAMD) and diabetic macular edema (DME). Vision loss has a
significant impact on the lives of those who experience it as well as on society
as a whole. The retinal therapeutics market was $13 B in 2018 and is projected
to grow to $28B in 2025. The proposed project develops a new technology to
address multiple aspects of eye disease, which is expected to improve clinical
outcomes at reduced cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will identify the best approach to combining
anti-VEGF and anti-IL8 aptamers to generate a bispecific aptamer. Two different
approaches will be evaluated: 1) direct chemical synthesis, in which the
individual aptamer components are used to form a bispecific aptamer synthesized
as a single compound, and 2) assembly by hybridization, in which individual
aptamer components are synthesized separately with complementary extensions
subsequently used for assembly. This project will assess the effect of linker
identity and length on function, as well as the inhibitory activity, which will
be compared with that of the individual aptamer components. The best performing
bispecific aptamers will be PEGylated using at least two different PEG variants,
and further evaluated. The biophysical properties of the PEGylated compounds
will be assessed. These properties are key to establishing parameters for
bispecific aptamer formulation and predicting intravitreal half-life. The best
performing PEGylated bispecific aptamer function will be evaluated in vivo, to
confirm its ability to engage its targets in an established animal model of
retinal disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.