* 2127457
* Build and Broaden: Growing Capacity in Research Examining Entrepreneurship
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Carly Offidani-Bertrand, California State University San Marcos Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 215,740.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to
examine entrepreneurship among minority communities and identify how success
varies for individuals who experience discrimination. The proposed research
utilizes interviews and focus groups to better understand the factors that shape
the success or failure of entrepreneurial ventures among entrepreneurs of color
and the ways in which discrimination shapes the pursuit of independent business
ventures. This study will also evaluate how individuals understand their
entrepreneurship as part of their larger social environment and as a strategy
for change. Findings from this project will be useful to policymakers as well as
to organizations seeking to support entrepreneurship within marginalized
communities. This project will create opportunities for collaboration within
minority-serving institutions, provide opportunities for minority students and
community members to build research capacity through training and experience,
and promote examples of the resilience of minority
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct interviews and
focus groups with key informants to construct case studies of minority
entrepreneurs and their businesses. Qualitative data will be collected from
multiple racial-ethnic communities on the practices and experiences of minority
entrepreneurs, and on the extent to which social, legal and racial forms of
discrimination shape the process and success of their entrepreneurial ventures.
Results will contribute to the theoretical understandings of how individual and
environmental factors affect the development of entrepreneurial ventures and
shed light on the relationship between entrepreneurship and social
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.