* 2127879
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Manufacturing Method for Long Length Linear Encoders
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2023
* sergey zakharov, ZS SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore the
feasibility of a novel manufacturing method for producing high-accuracy linear
encoders (sensors used to perform precision position measurements). The encoder
market is expected to grow to $3.7 billion by 2026. The need for high-end
automation, smart manufacturing, and continuous device miniaturization puts
ever-increasing demands on the accuracy and availability of encoders. The
proposed technology will provide more accurate, more robust encoders with
shorter lead times and lower prices than currently available solutions. The
proposed research will help establish a core technology required to produce
precision encoder gratings for a new generation of incremental and absolute
position sensors, helping to secure and diversify the supply chain. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is to investigate a new method
to manufacture encoder gratings. Optical encoder gratings are traditionally
produced by contact lithography. The drawbacks of this process are accelerated
photomask wear, low yield, sensitivity to contamination, and limited accuracy
and resolution. This project is expected to eliminate or significantly improve
all of these drawbacks by developing a novel microfabrication approach. Research
objectives are to address the unique challenges resulting from the substantial
size of the required substrate and the extreme accuracy requirements. Research
tasks include construction of an early prototype, characterizing mechanical
components, design and optimization of the optical system, and several
parametric studies to quantify the performance of the proposed fabrication
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.