* 2127946
* Collaborative Research: The value of Information in Networked Control: a Utility Based Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Massimo Franceschetti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 274,698.00

This project addresses the problem of determining the quality or value of the
information delivered at a given point in space and time in Networked Control
Systems. Modern networking systems often have the capability of sensing and
actuating on the environment in an intelligent way. This capability strongly
relies on guarantees that the right information at the right place
and&lt;br/&gt;at the right time is available to the system for deciding the
right action to take. Failure of these guarantees can lead to catastrophic
consequences in safety critical applications such as industrial processes
control, autonomous navigation, robotics, automatic drug delivery, and so on.
For this reason, adopting a proper definition of value of information in a
networked control system is of paramount importance for national welfare. Our
study has implications beyond the field of control and and information, in terms
of the introduction of new mathematical methods and design tools. In laying a
theoretical foundation, we expect to draw novel, synergistic connections between
control, information, and real systems. The proposed research will also impact
the training of a new generation of students through undergraduate student
involvement, graduate mentoring and curriculum development, outreach activities,
plans for broadening participation in computing and retention of minority
students, and broad dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
importance of delivering the right information at the right place and at the
right time has been recognized in the literature of networked control systems
and it sparked the introduction of several utility functions including the Age-
of-Information and the closely related Value-of-Information and Quality of
Information. In this project our objective is to show that
universal&lt;br/&gt;measures, such as Age of Information, Value of Information,
and Quality of Information, are insufficient to characterize the quality of
information in terms of its utility for control of dynamical systems, and we
characterize a system-dependent and task-dependent utility metric and describe
its applications in the framework of control. On the one side, we consider the
information flow&lt;br/&gt;occurring in feedback loops governed by event-
triggering control policies. We argue that focusing on event-triggering control
will bring key insights on how to provide a definition with an immediate
operational significance, which takes into account resolution, timing,
reliability constraints, and relates them to the parameters of the system under
control. On the other side, we consider a&lt;br/&gt;general, and somewhat more
informal definition, that has been adopted in diverse fields such as information
economics, risk management, and stochastic programming, and we will cast it in a
rigorous control-theoretic framework. This approach is fully compatible with the
insights we get from event-triggering control, and generally applicable to
networked control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.