* 2127188
* CC* Compute: A HPC Cluster for Science Research and Education at Tennessee Tech University
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael Rogers, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,983.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Tennessee Tech
University (TN Tech) are making significant upgrades to the campus computing
infrastructure that will significantly improve the university researchers’ and
students’ ability to perform, enhance, and expand their systems-oriented,
algorithms-oriented, or applications-oriented research activities. This enhanced
new computing infrastructure complements other investments already made, in-
progress, or in-planning at TN Tech. This modern campus cluster will enable TN
Tech to grow and sustain the HPC culture by expanding on its current NSF-funded
CyberTraining activities to include hundreds of faculty and their undergraduate
students from resource-limited institutions from across the southeast. This new
cluster will help TN Tech to build a regional resource for computational
capacity and workforce development expanding opportunities to underrepresented
groups in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award allows TN Tech to procure
a state-of-the-art, cost-effective 10 node GPU cluster supporting 20 NVIDIA A100
GPUs, 1280 AMD Epyc2 CPU cores, and 5 TiB of main memory connected with 100
Gbit/s Infiniband. The cluster provides capabilities not previously available on
campus. This project team anticipates significant research projects in
computational fluid dynamics, biomechanics, and geospatial analysis, which will
engage four partner universities. Seventeen ongoing research projects including
3 teaching projects will directly benefit from the improved infrastructure.
Additional research projects will be enabled over time as the PIs and the
planned internal advisory committee attract additional researchers and students
requiring heterogeneous HPC. The project team expects about 100 of College of
Engineering Ph.D. students will use the HPC infrastructure for their
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.