* 2127630
* Collaborative Research: Design and Discovery of Entropy-Stabilized Perovskite Halides for Optoelectronics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Robert Lad, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 230,209.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Perovskite halides are an
exciting family of materials that can be prepared by low-temperature synthesis
methods and are promising for a wide variety of optoelectronic applications.
With this project, which is jointly funded by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), a collaborative research
team from the University of Maine and the University of Alabama develops,
synthesizes, and investigates a new class of perovskite halides for
optoelectronics. In this combined theoretical and experimental investigation,
the team also evaluates the materialsâ€™ stability under ambient environmental
conditions. Unlike traditional halides with two to three metal elements, these
newly developed perovskite halides consist of five or more principal metal
elements in nearly equal concentrations. The workplan features a closed feedback
loop between theory and experiment and focuses on materials advancement by
performing theoretical predictions, developing synthesis methods, characterizing
optoelectronic properties, and evaluating stability under exposure to gases,
light, and heat. New perovskite halide materials discovered from this project
could lead to a wide variety of optoelectronic applications including solar
cells, light-emitting devices, photodetectors and lasers, photoelectrochemical
catalysts, radiation detectors, and sensors. This research allows project
participants from interdisciplinary programs at these two universities to
interact and contribute to technology development within Maine and Alabama.
Three Ph.D. graduate students and six undergraduates are trained to acquire
skills and competency in the three foundational pillars of computation,
experiments, and data analysis which are key attributes for the next-generation
workforce. STEM outreach and education activities disseminated to K-12 students,
high-school teachers, and the general public within Maine and Alabama are aimed
at conveying how collaborative energy-materials design-driven research is
relevant to addressing societal challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project, which is jointly funded by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), aims to
computationally design and experimentally realize a new class of lead-free
perovskite halide materials with enhanced thermodynamic and environmental
stability along with desired optoelectronic properties. Entropy-stabilized
perovskite halides (ESPHs) containing five or more principal metal elements are
investigated for enhanced optoelectronic properties and stable environmental
performance. The key hypothesis is that the configurational entropy of mixing
plays a dominant role in stabilizing a single-phase crystalline ESPH structure.
The validation of this hypothesis not only provides a new experimentally
controllable pathway to design more stable perovskite halide materials but also
yields unique composition-structure-property relationships that are absent when
chemical order prevails. Specific objectives are to (i) predict the combinations
of metal elements that can give rise to stable ESPHs using high-throughput
first-principles calculations, (ii) synthesize the predicted ESPHs using the
solid-state solution, hydrothermal, and solvent precipitation methods, (iii)
characterize the compositional, structural and optoelectronic properties of the
synthesized ESPHs, and (iv) evaluate and analyze the stabilities of
experimentally synthesized ESPHs under various laboratory environments including
humidity, oxidizing/reducing gases, and heat. New ESPHs from this project are
poised to substantially expand the chemical space of perovskite halides,
providing more capabilities to tune and tailor materials properties of interest
(such as lattice parameter, bandgap, optical absorption strength, and
conductivity) and render high potential for a wide variety of optoelectronic
applications including solar cells, light-emitting devices, photoelectrochemical
catalysts, photodetectors and lasers, radiation detectors, and
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.