* 2127643
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Biosphere and Land Use Exchanges with Groundwater and soils in Earth system Models (BLUEGEM)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniel Kramer, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 621,706.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to explore the evolution of groundwater,
irrigation, and climate during the Anthropocene (1900-2100), to better
understand their interdependencies, foresee their potential changes, and
identify possible social consequences. The team will assess these factors to
identify sustainable pathways with respect to water resources, food security,
biodiversity, and human well-being and socio-economic activities. The team will
combine advanced numerical modeling of biophysical and social systems, as well
as participatory methods with stakeholders, to address establish the fingerprint
of interactions and irrigation on global and regional climate, water resources,
biosphere, and soil carbon pools. The project results will provide improved
projections of global and regional climate, water resources, biosphere and soil
carbon pools, fully taking into account the influence of groundwater irrigation
and groundwater-soil moisture interactions. The team will Integrate local and
regional knowledge and expertise as well as socio-economic data to refine the
land use and irrigation scenarios used in state-of-the-art climate projections
and to explore pathways for sustainable critical zone
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.