* 2127910
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Elites, Organizations, and Movements in Reshaping Politics and Policymaking
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Najja Baptist, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 05/31/2025
* USD 229,860.00

Arguably, the current political climate is the function of three seemingly
distinct, yet interrelated, ongoing phenomena: (1) a contentious, problem-laden
political environment, (2) grassroots organizations driving unprecedented levels
of engagement and turnout, and (3) national movements driving discourse,
preferences, and reform around long-held policy grievances. The combination of
contentious politics and an energized electorate can result in record turnout
despite a raging pandemic. The PIs examine how these features of the American
polity shape public and institutional political behaviors. The project aims to
build a network, and supportive infrastructure, to better understand how
political elites, organizations, and movements in key political locations work
to drive participation, preferences, and policymaking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project examines two broad research questions. The first question is: How do
organizations and social movements mediate political preferences and policy
agendas amongst the mass public? Second, it is interested in the collaboration
between organizations and social movements and how these interactions shape
traditional and untraditional forms of political participation. The study draws
on a comprehensive mixture of quantitative (surveys, survey experiments, voter
data analysis, social media analysis, and social network analysis) and
qualitative (ethnographic observations, content analysis, elite interviews, and
focus groups) methodological approaches to answer these questions. This study
examines political activities during two electoral periods in several
transformative states and municipalities. The broader impacts of the study are
numerous. First, it connects a network of scholars from a diverse set of
institutions. The project builds critical infrastructure at partner institutions
to facilitate data collection and analysis. Namely, it (1) builds mobile
research labs designed to conduct rapid response surveys during protests and
organizational rallies, and (2) establishes data analysis centers at two
minority serving institutions, and (3) provides cutting-edge training, tools,
and professional resources to students from marginalized and underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.