* 2127200
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Flanker: Automatically Detecting Lateral Movement in Organizations Using Heterogeneous Data and Graph Representation Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Engin Kirda, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 249,863.00

In modern cyberattacks, adversaries do not target single computer systems.
Instead, they first set an initial foothold into a company's network and later
amplify their breach by compromising additional assets, until they reach their
final target inside an organization. This process of advancing computer breaches
is known as lateral movement. Detecting lateral movement is challenging, because
attackers can use multiple vectors for infection (e.g., phishing emails) and
computer systems in a network present a large degree of diversity (e.g.,
workstations, network equipment). For this reason, no comprehensive system to
effectively detect lateral movement is currently available. Yet, detecting and
stopping computer breaches as soon as possible is critical to ensure the safety
and the prosperity of U.S. corporations and citizens. The aim of this project is
to fill this gap by developing Flanker, a system able to automatically detect
lateral movement in the network of an organization. Unlike existing approaches,
the goal of Flanker is to operate on a variety of data sources (e.g., data
coming from network and applications) to be able to detect cyberattacks as they
span different online services and computers across the
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of four phases. In the
first phase the investigators collect heterogeneous datasets from a variety of
sources and develop techniques to clean them from noise and anonymize them to
protect the identity of users. In the second phase this data is used to build a
graph that represents network activity, and graph representation learning
approaches are used to build a model for this network activity. In the third
phase this model is used to automatically detect lateral movement attacks, by
either applying anomaly detection or supervised learning techniques. Finally,
the investigators develop visualization techniques to enable a security analyst
to properly understand the detection results and adopt appropriate
countermeasures against the attack.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.