* 2127177
* SBIR Phase II:  An Advanced, Mobile, High-Rate Water Treatment System
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Paige Peters, RAPID RADICALS TECHNOLOGY LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2024
* USD 983,995.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project is to demonstrate feasibility
and determine the capacity of a novel advanced, high-rate wastewater treatment
technology to protect environmental and public health during high-intensity
storm events by eliminating sewer overflows and basement backups. Wastewater
utilities need reliable, cost-effective, decentralized wastewater treatment as
an alternative to expensive long-term plans that emphasize large capital
projects. This project will scale and optimize a novel approach to achieve
treatment equivalent to conventional methods in less than 35 minutes, compared
to the current practice of 8-14 hours. A lower treatment time means a smaller
system footprint and, ultimately, cost savings for the utility and ratepayers.
The technology will identify sewer overflow “hotspots” where raw sewage is
discharged into receiving bodies of water during storm events as an alternative
to basement backups. Implementing this novel solution at overflow locations
would alleviate overburdened collection, conveyance, and treatment systems by
treating wet weather flows and safely discharging them into waterways. This
innovative technology can also be applied at a water reclamation facility to
handle overburden or as a mobile unit during disaster relief efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes the evaluation of
novel concepts including the application of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs)
for wastewater treatment, the combination of rapid solid removal technologies
with AOPs, and the use of a sustainable waste material and custom cartridge
supports with a catalyst for enhanced hydroxyl radical production in catalytic
ozonation. None of these approaches have been commercially implemented. The work
proposed will demonstrate the ability for advanced technologies to be cost-
effectively applied for wastewater treatment, disrupting the standard of partial
combined sewer overflow treatment by providing a viable option for rapid wet
weather treatment that meets or exceeds Clean Water Act discharge standards.
These concepts will be applied at an industry-relevant pilot scale to determine
the technical and chemical scaling factors for a full-scale system and to
demonstrate required levels of treatment while treating real wastewater. Metrics
for success within the research plan include aggressive contaminants of emerging
concern removal goals, increased automation and energy efficiency, and a
targeted cost ($/gallon treated) analysis to ensure competitive edge in the
market. The results of the project will demonstrate that decentralized permit-
level treatment is feasible, reliable, and cost-effective, allowing full-scale
implementations to begin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.