* 2127623
* Collaborative Research: Comparative Taphonomy and Time-Averaging of Mollusk-Echinoid Assemblages using High-Performance Radiocarbon Dating System
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 393,552.00

The goal of this project is to assess what happens after death with remains of
shelly animals (mollusks and sea urchins) that dominate many seafloors today and
are widespread in the marine fossil record. Do those shells last for millennia
or perish quickly? Because shells of mollusks and tests of sea urchins are
abundant in many marine habitats, how fast or slow they perish may affect the
carbon cycle, affect sediments in marine habitats, influence how sedimentary
rocks form, and impact the resolution and quality of the fossil record.
Moreover, there is tentative evidence that mollusks and sea urchins may differ
dramatically in shell durability. Mollusk shells probably persist for centuries
around the seafloor, whereas sea urchin tests only survive months or possibly
years. This project will compare the post-mortem fate of mollusk shells and sea
urchin tests and associated predictions across various types of marine habitats.
By combining field surveys of live and dead animals and radiocarbon dating of
dead remains, the project will quantify the survival time of mollusk and
echinoid remains and use field data to test predictions based on expected shell
destruction rates. The results will advance our understanding of marine
sedimentation processes, formation of the sedimentary rock and fossil records,
possible biases due to variable preservation of different animal groups, and the
temporal resolution of fossil samples. The project will provide a direct
opportunity for testing a new advanced strategy of radiocarbon dating with a
real potential to advance our general ability to date fossil samples quickly and
efficiently. The project will also serve as a platform for training a new
generation of scientists and broadening participation of groups underrepresented
in biology and geology. In addition, educational movies using novel immersive
digital technology will be used to convey the excitement of conducting
scientific research in marine settings. The project will engender international
partnerships with the Commonwealth of Bahamas and provide collaborative bridges
connecting students and researchers from public universities in Arizona and
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve our understanding
fossilization processes that lead to preservation or destruction of benthic
mollusks and echinoids, which are both important components of the marine fossil
record. The main goal is to assess the hypothesis that these two groups of
animals differ in skeletal durability and fossilization potential. By
integrating live-dead field surveys and new generation radiocarbon
instrumentation, we will test three predictions that stem from this hypothesis:
(1) time-averaging, variation in age of specimens, is orders of magnitude higher
for mollusks compared to echinoids; (2) live-dead specimen ratios are orders of
magnitude lower for mollusks than for echinoids; and (3) specimen-fragment ratio
is significantly higher for mollusks than for echinoids. These predictions will
be tested using surface and subsurface samples from present-day seafloors around
Florida and the Bahamas. The project will target diverse carbonate and
siliciclastic settings to assess if the observed patterns are generalizable
across different habitat types. The project will produce 45 live-dead surveys of
mollusks and echinoids at 15 sampling sites across five localities. These field
data will be augmented by radiocarbon dating of 1000 individual specimens of
mollusks and echinoids. This extraordinarily large number of radiocarbon ages is
now feasible using the new NSF-supported MICADAS accelerator mass spectrometer
(AMS) at Northern Arizona University (NAU) . Quantifying taphonomic differences
between two major groups of marine invertebrates will advance our understanding
of sedimentological processes related to formation of biogenic sedimentary
rocks, the role of shell-producing organisms as carbon sinks or carbon sources,
and the quality and temporal resolution of paleontological data. The proposed
approach is designed as a broadly applicable research strategy transferrable to
study systems. In terms of broader impacts activities, the project will advance
STEM careers of one postdoctoral researcher, one graduate student, and ~12
undergraduate students, with specific focus on recruitment and career
development of minority STEM students. The student training will encompass
comprehensive research skills and will be vertically integrated to benefit
mentoring skills of early career scientists. Outreach and education materials
using 360Â° immersive video technology will include 3D-augmented reality movies
of seafloor exploration by SCUBA (freely accessible as immersive 3D YouTube
movies). The partnership between UF and NAU will facilitate networking of
minority students in Florida and Arizona, and the international field work in
partnership with the Gerace Research Centre will engage Bahamian
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.