* 2127597
* AF: Small: Lower Bounds in Complexity Theory Via Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ryan Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Computers have transformed nearly every aspect of life, by automating and
assisting in helping people work more efficiently. But while researchers know
much about what computers can do, there is still comparatively little known
about what computers cannot do. This phenomenon is the problem of proving
"complexity lower bounds". Lower bounds are among the great scientific mysteries
of our time: there are many mathematical conjectures and beliefs about lower
bounds---indeed, the security of the Internet and cryptography relies on such
conjectures being true---but concrete results are few. The major goal of this
project is to leverage humanity's vast knowledge of computer algorithms to prove
new lower bounds: put another way, the goal is to use the power of computers to
prove limitations on them. A secondary goal is to study the scientific
consequences of these connections. It is hard to overestimate the potential
impact---societal, scientific, and otherwise---of a theoretical framework which
would lead to a fine-grained understanding of what computers can and cannot do.
Another goal of the project is to bring complexity research closer to real-world
computing, and to introduce practitioners to aspects of complexity that will
impact their work. A final goal is educational outreach, through online forums
dedicated to learning computer science and collaboration with the media on
communicating theoretical computer science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To give one example of a lower bound, a central
question in computer science is the famous P versus NP open problem, which is
about the difficulty of combinatorial problems which admit short solutions. Such
problems can always be solved via brute force, trying all possible solutions.
Can brute force always be replaced with a cleverer search method? This question
is a major one; no satisfactory answers are known, and concrete answers seem far
away. The conventional wisdom is that in general, brute force cannot be entirely
avoided, but it is still mathematically possible that most natural search
problems can be solved extremely rapidly, without any brute force. The
mathematical theory is hampered by negative results showing that most known
proof methods are incapable of proving strong lower bounds. A primary objective
of this project is to help discover and develop new ways of thinking that will
demystify lower bounds, and elucidate the limits and possibilities of computing.
The major hypothesis of this project is that an algorithmic perspective on lower
bounds is the key: for example, an earlier project led by the same research team
shows that algorithms for the circuit-satisfiability problem (which slightly
beat brute force search) imply circuit-complexity lower bounds. Other
algorithmic problems, such as estimating the acceptance probability of a circuit
without using randomness, and finding "bad" inputs which prove that a piece of
code does not correctly compute a function, also turn out to be useful for
proving lower bounds. The potential scientific applications are vast, ranging
from logical circuit design, to network algorithms, to improved hardware and
software testing, to better nearest-neighbor search (with its own applications
in computer vision, DNA sequencing, and machine learning), and to cryptography
and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.