* 2127941
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Cascading Impacts of the 2021 Texas Winter Storm on Subsidized Housing Residents: A Comparative Analysis
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Jayajit Chakraborty, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2022
* USD 30,401.00

The 2021 Texas Winter Storm included the passage of three arctic fronts from 10
through 20 February. As numerous Texas counties faced record low temperatures,
the independent electric grid for Texas nearly experienced a total collapse and
more than 5 million people lost access to electricity. The cascading effects of
this disaster included water service disruptions, boil-water advisories,
communication and transportation disruptions, food shortages, and residential
dislocation with implications for COVID-19 transmission and treatment. The
purpose of this Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project is to conduct
a comprehensive and comparative analysis of the cascading impacts of the 2021
Texas Winter Storm on residents in eight metropolitan areas. Reliable assessment
of household experiences is time-sensitive, and RAPID funding is enabling the
collection of high quality, ephemeral data from affected households. The project
will advance academic, practitioner, and public knowledge regarding factors
influencing societal vulnerability to cascading disaster impacts during a
pandemic which will be foundational to future efforts that seek to enhance
resilience to such events nationwide. The project team will disseminate findings
via multiple outlets, including by publishing articles in top-tier journals and
delivering webinars to relevant stakeholder audiences. Additionally, findings
will be shared via a website providing stakeholders, researchers, educators and
other stakeholders with access to information about adverse impacts of the 2021
Texas Winter Storm. Through these channels, the project will extend societal
benefits beyond the academic community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
applies a social vulnerability to disasters perspective to the 2021 Texas Winter
Storm to advance knowledge of the socially uneven impacts of cascading
disasters, and the disaster vulnerabilities experienced by subsidized rental
housing residents. We will investigate the following research questions: (1)
What cascading impacts did residents experience in response to the 2021 Texas
Winter Storm? (2) How did cascading winter storm impacts differ based on social
characteristics, housing status, electricity grid service provider (ERCOT vs.
others), and metropolitan area? (3) How did the social characteristics of
residents, their housing status, their electricity grid service provider, and
the local physical attributes of the storm (e.g., temperature and precipitation)
influence the cascading winter storm impacts they experienced? (4) How did the
COVID-19 pandemic amplify the cascading effects of the winter storm on
residents’ well-being? The project involves a social survey conducted by
cellular phone in English/Spanish with households in HUD-assisted multi-family
housing and households residing in private (non-HUD-assisted) homes, in eight
Texas metropolitan areas. By systematically examining the social, physical, and
built environment determinants of this disaster’s multifaceted effects—based on
comparisons between subsidized vs. private housing, residence within vs. outside
the ERCOT grid, and across eight MSAs—our project seeks to transform fundamental
knowledge of social vulnerability to cascading infrastructure failure due to
disasters. Additionally, it will advance knowledge regarding disaster
vulnerabilities experienced by a socially disadvantaged and under-studied
group—residents of subsidized multi-family housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.