* 2127245
* Collaborative Research: NNA Research: Global changes, local impacts: Study of glacial fjords, ecosystems and communities in Greenland
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Patricia Matrai, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2026
* USD 565,180.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security, and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environments,
and the built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents,
Data and Observations, Forecasting, and Global
Impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fjords are long narrow inlets that connect glacier-
covered land to the ocean. The release of meltwater and sediments from the
glaciers makes these waters nutrient rich. These conditions support healthy
marine ecosystems with high densities of seabirds, marine mammals, and fishes.
As a result, many Arctic settlements whose livelihoods depend on fishing and
hunting are located near glacial fjords. Arctic warming is driving the retreat
of glaciers, resulting in a warming of the ocean waters that has decreases the
prosperity of fjord ecosystems. In addition, human activities such as commercial
fishing, resource extraction, and tourism increasingly influence coastal
regions. Research on changes in Arctic coastal margins has focused primarily on
the impact of changing ice sheets, with comparatively less emphasis on the
surrounding fjord systems. Fewer studies still seek to integrate the impacts of
changing natural and social systems on fjords. The goal of this project is to
understand how the combined impact of these changes affect the greater fjord
system comprised of the ice, the fjords, the marine ecosystem, and the local
communities that rely on them for their livelihood. This goal will be achieved
through a detailed study of physical, biological, and social system interactions
in Greenland fjords by an interdisciplinary team of oceanographers,
glaciologists, climate scientists, environmental historians, fisheries, and
ecosystem experts. The focus of this study will be on two different fjords in
Greenland to understand how their unique characteristics influence the ice-
fjord-marine life-local people system. Information will be disseminated to US
and Greenlandic governments, communities, and other stakeholders to develop
adaptive strategies to sustain fjord systems in a changing
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve
understanding of the physical and biological processes that sustain ecosystems
in glacial fjords. This will be achieved through an integrated analysis of
historical data, collection of new data, and model projections. Specific
research activities include: i) sampling cruises to two fjords in Greenland to
obtain physical, biological, and chemical oceanographic measurements; ii) ocean
mooring to measure the seasonal variability of these systems; iii) collection of
fish eggs and larvae for measurement and modeling of transport in fjord systems
using particle tracking models; iv) remote sensing and regional-scale modeling
to assess glacier changes in the fjords; v) use of climate and ice sheet models
to derive future projections; and vi) collation and analysis of local societal
histories through archival and on-site research with Greenlandic partners.
Results will be integrated into a detailed comparative analysis of the climatic,
ecosystem, and societal forces influencing ecosystem sustainability at the local
and national level. The collaboration between US and Greenlandic researchers
will benefit society by generating information that can be used to help develop
adaptive strategies and sustainable practices. Additional benefits to society
result from the training of undergraduate and graduate students, and a
postgraduate fellow Results will be results will be shared not only through
university teaching and academic publishing but also with the broader public in
the USA and Greenland through plain-language publications, new websites, a film
and other multimedia productions, public lectures, and new international
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.