* 2127563
* Chemical Reactions and Chemically-driven Transport in Channels and Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 347,715.00

The principles of equilibrium physical chemistry are well known when modeling
environmental and transport processes at interfaces that occur at the boundary
between a liquid and a solid, between two liquids, or between a liquid and a
gas. Interfacial transport processes are important for handling and studying
colloids in a wide range of industrial or environmental systems, but they are
not understood and may not even be appreciated for systems that are out of
equilibrium, such as when there are chemical gradients that introduce pH and
surface charge effects. In this project, configurations that mimic important
features common to transport of colloids in porous materials will be studied
with experiments, mathematical modeling, and numerical simulations. The project
will examine the integrated effects of pH-regulated surface charge, flows in
micro- and nano-scale systems, material type, and mode of transport (e.g.,
accumulation or dispersion), yielding a coherent framework linking physical
chemistry to transport, from nano- to macro-scales. The broader impacts of the
project include training graduate students and undergraduates to study these
timely problems with experimental and simulation tools of fluid dynamics,
physical chemistry, and transport phenomena so as to develop quantitative
understanding of these problems. The outreach efforts included characterize the
PI’s approaches to engaging with, teaching, and mentoring future research
scientists, including continuing an annual “holiday” lecture that has been
delivered since 2002.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
couple knowledge of physicochemical processes at and near solid-liquid
interfaces to understand, and control, particle transport and fluid flow in a
myriad of small-scale and porous materials. The focus is on non-equilibrium
phenomena driven by pH-induced changes in surface charge, which is coupled to
macroscopic gradients in chemical concentrations, to produce phoretic and
osmotic flows. These ideas will be tackled using experiments, simulations, and
theory based on the principles of electrokinetics, including recent extensions
to the modified Poisson-Boltzmann description that accounts for molecular-level
features important to transport phenomena. The research has the following three
systematic aims: (1) The study of surface reactions and diffusiophoretic
particle motions in the presence of pH and electrolyte gradients, for different
pH, ionic strength, and particle type; (2) The study of surface reactions and
diffusioosmotic channel flows by using microfluidic methods to control the
spatial heterogeneity of the surface charge of the channel walls and so
understand how the induced flows affect particle transport as a function of pH,
ionic strength, and particle type; and (3) the flow of suspensions in porous
materials, where qualitative and quantitative conditions (chemical, particle
type, geometry, etc.) can lead to particle accumulation or dispersion that until
now is poorly understood and poorly characterized. The research themes will
advance the understanding of surface-dominated transport processes, which occur
in a wide range of environmental and industrial problems and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.