* 2127648
* SWIFT: Transceiver and algorithms for multiband mobile communications in co-existence with passive uses at millimeter wave spectra
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mai Vu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Demand on the wireless spectrum by mobile broadband access has driven the need
for expanding spectrum usage to millimeter-wave (mmWave) frequencies and
prompted the question on the feasibility of sharing spectra currently allocated
to passive uses such as satellites and passive sensors. This project will
investigate the possibility of co-sharing such millimeter-wave bands with mobile
cellular services. The project puts forth the analysis of aggregated
interference created to the passive-sensor satellites in these bands as a
function of mobile system transmit power and densities of users and base
stations to assess the feasibility of coexistence. The project will involve the
design of a novel dual-band millimeter-wave wireless transceiver and associated
joint power control, frequency allocation, and connections assignment algorithm
to ensure meeting spectral masks to the passive devices while enabling effective
cellular communications. Research results will serve as a baseline for any 5G/6G
and beyond mobile transceiver design, algorithm design, integration, and
implementation especially at mmWave frequencies, contributing to smaller form
factor and higher power devices as well as expanding spectrum usage in co-
existence with other passive uses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aiming
to advance the fundamental knowledge and have a direct and significant impact on
practical systems in both hardware innovation and algorithm design. On the
hardware front, the focus is to demonstrate new ideas and novel design of a
wireless transceiver that can perform carrier aggregation of both uplink and two
downlink frequency bands in millimeter-wave spectra. This includes innovative
and novel circuit architectures to enable and/or enhance the performance of
mmWave filter, power amplifier, and low noise amplifier. The result of hardware
research will be the integration of all these components into a complete front-
end mmWave dual-band transceiver in a multi-layer laminate substrate, verified
with extensive simulations and prototyping fabrication. On the algorithm design,
the proposed research will address the joint problem of power control, frequency
allocation, and user association (connection assignments) in a mobile mmWave
broadband network in the context of co-existence with passive uses. The
algorithm design takes into account the aggregated interference generated to the
passive-sensor satellites in these bands as a function of the transmit power and
density of mobile users and base stations within the satelliteâ€™s footprint. The
algorithm also provides power levels for biasing the proposed power amplifiers
in the mmWave transceiver and integrates the proposed filters for computing
interference in adjacent bands. These hardware and algorithm innovations have
the potential for immense impact on future mobile communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.