* 2127684
* Changes in Impacts-relevant Climate in the Worldâ€™s Mediterranean Climate Regions: A Mechanisms-based Investigation of Atmosphere-Ocean-Land Processes Across Seasons
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Yochanan Kushnir, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 11/30/2024
* USD 946,792.00

The climate of the Mediterranean features warm dry summers and mild wet winters,
perfect conditions for its world-renowned vinyards and olive groves. But the
Mediterranean climate is not unique to the countries bordering the Mediterranean
Sea, as similar conditions exist on the US west coast, central Chile, southern
Africa, and southwest Australia, all situated along the west coasts of their
respective continents. These Mediterranean Climate Regions (MCRs) are found at
the margins of the subtropics, meaning latitudes low enough to be under the dry
subtropical anticyclones in summer but high enough to receive rain from the
winter weather systems of the middle latitudes. The marginal location of the
MCRs makes them vulnerable to changes in climate associated with both the
midlatitude winter and the subtropical summer: if the winter storm paths shift
to higher latitudes, an expected consequence of greenhouse warming, the MCRs
could see loss of winter rain, while summers could experience heat waves and
wildfires due to the expansion of the subtropical dry zones. The issue of
climate change in MCRs has taken on some urgency given the wilfdires and heat
waves in California and the long-term decline in rainfall over Spain as the
Atlantic storm paths have shifted northward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
examines climate change in the MCRs, examining the issue in the framework of
their shared climatic features and attempting to relate climate change on the
ground to warming-induced changes in the large-scale circulation of the
atmosphere. One issue is the extent to which the regions behave differently
despite their commonalities, for instance California has not experienced a
decline in winter rainfall comparable to the Iberian Peninsula. The specific
goals of the proposal are to 1) identify the changes in storms tracks, jet
streams, subtropical highs, subsidence and seasonal cycles of precipitation and
temperature that matter for each MCR, 2) relate these to changes in the global
atmospheric circulation and 3) determine the induced changes in climatic
conditions relevant to water resources, wildfire, and agriculture. An emergent
constraint methodology, in which aspects of present-day climate in model
simulations, which can be checked against observations, are related to the
behavior of future climate projections from the same models. The methodology
provides a way to use present-day observations to assess the credibility of
future climate projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fate of MCRs in a warming
climate is a question of societal as well as scientific interest given the
hazards facing people and the natural environment in these regions. The
Principal Investigators work with MedCLIVAR, a subgroup of International CLIVAR
that coordinates Mediterranean climate research. Local outreach is conducted
through the biennial Lamont Open House. The award provides support and training
to a graduate student, thereby developing the future scientific workforce in
this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.