* 2127925
* Collaborative Research: Inferring The In Situ Micro-Mechanics of Embedded Fiber Networks by Leveraging Limited Imaging Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Manuel Rausch, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 285,681.00

This grant will focus on gaining a fundamental understanding of embedded fiber
networks and creating the tools necessary to characterize their behavior from
limited available measurements. Embedded fiber networks are ubiquitous in
nature, from the extracellular matrix surrounding biological cells, to branching
blood vessels embedded in organs, to mothâ€™s cocoons. Understanding these systems
is important because these systems are the fundamental mechanical building
blocks of many types of natural and engineered biological tissue, and bio-
inspired advanced materials. It is important not only to understand these
systems, but also to be able to measure their mechanical behavior in a non-
destructive manner so that advances in understanding can be applied in the real
world. This research project will synthesize experiments, theory-based
computational models, and data-driven computational models to elucidate the
fundamental relationship between embedding matrix properties, fiber properties,
and fiber network properties for soft embedded fiber networks undergoing large
deformation. In addition, this research project will develop computational
capabilities for the analysis of these systems where severely limited image-
based data is used to predict both structural properties and characterize
mechanical behavior. The research will be complemented by disseminating relevant
data and code under open source licenses, and releasing online modules focused
on applying machine learning to mechanics research. The research will also be
complemented by establishing educational outreach programs at the middle school
and high school levels that focus on bringing STEM education to underserved
populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
define fundamental structure-function relationships in soft embedded fiber
networks undergoing large deformation and create the tools needed to analyze
these systems given limited available imaging data. Critically, it is necessary
to develop tools to evaluate these systems non-destructively because one of
their most important applications is in living systems. Thus, the research
objectives of this project include: (i) curating an experimental dataset and
implementing and validating a computational model of three-dimensional embedded
fiber networks undergoing large deformation; (ii) understanding and delineating
the different mechanical regimes of embedded fiber networks undergoing large
deformation; (iii) establishing and testing a machine learning framework to
rapidly and non-destructively analyze embedded fiber networks from imperfectly-
paired images taken on the discrete fiber scale. The project will allow the PIs
to advance the knowledge base at the interface of applied mechanics,
computational mechanics, and machine learning, and establish their long-term
careers in the mechanics of materials and structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.