* 2127882
* Collaborative Research: MFB: Deciphering the Logic of PTM Crosstalk via Novel Chemical Technology: Histones and Beyond
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Garcia, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

With the support of the Molecular Foundations of Biotechnology Solicitation
launched by the Division of Chemistry, in collaboration with the Genetic
Mechanisms and Systems and Synthetic Biology Clusters in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Philip Cole of Harvard University and
Benjamin Garcia of Washington University in St. Louis will develop a new method
to decipher the logic of how post-translational modifications (PTMs) influence
each other in cellular proteins. Over the past thirty years, there has been an
explosion in the identification of modifications on cellular proteins using mass
spectrometry and allied approaches giving rise to incredible molecular
diversity. In but a few of these cases is it understood how these modifications,
which often occur in clusters, influence each other within the same protein
molecule. The experimental procedures to be developed under this collaborative
research effort combine the power of designed enzymes, small molecules, and mass
spectrometry to elucidate the language and meaning of these protein modification
clusters that will inform how genes and pathways are regulated and how mammalian
cells develop. This investigation will permit for graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows to acquire specialized training in protein chemistry and
mass spectrometry. The new methods and reagents for characterizing protein
modifications will be shared with the broad community of researchers to push the
limits of what is experimentally plausible. This project also includes an
outreach program to enhance the education of college and high school students
with an interest in STEM. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research
project being conducted under the inaugural Molecular Foundations for
Biotechnology initiative at NSF leverages the power of sortase enzyme design and
deployment for biotechnological purposes with state-of-the-art methods in mass
spectrometry. These two disparate techniques are being leveraged to begin to
address a grand challenge in biology and biotechnology; namely, how do we
comprehensively and completely analyze the expressed proteome and do so, in a
manner that might be tailored to eventually individualize the approach. The
scientific approach taken here is focused on developing a new chemoenzymatic
strategy, labeled CUT and PASTE, to isolate large, purified fragments from
cellular proteins for the purpose of quantitatively characterizing the interplay
among post-translational modifications (PTMs) and their biological outputs. The
Cole/Garcia team strategy exploits the use of engineered sortase enzymes along
with short synthetic designer chemical tags that will drive incorporation of
isotopic labels and affinity or fluorescent moieties to efficiently and
quantitatively determine the PTMs in large, 20 to 300 amino acid peptide
segments of histones and other proteins using tandem mass spectrometry and
computational analysis. This technology has the promise to be transformative and
to potentially redefine our understanding of the protein PTM logic that drives
epigenetic mechanisms and cellular networks and
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.