* 2127521
* Illumination of behavior leading to host exploitation by a context-dependent mutualist
* BIO,IOS
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Rachelle M Adams, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 10/31/2024
* USD 521,914.00

Parasitic lifestyles are more common than all other lifestyles combined and
host-parasite interactions shape food webs, influence behavior, and alter
population size and structure. Because insects are widespread, hyper-diverse,
and abundant, and most are parasitic, they are ideal subjects for species
interaction studies. The proposed study leverages a unique parasite
system—easily studied in the field and manipulated in the lab—to address key
questions about species interactions. The research objective is to identify
behaviors that lead to obligate symbioses (different species living together),
while taking into consideration a network of interacting entities (ants, fungus,
and bacteria). This comprehensive study is original in its scope, spanning
temporal and biological scales, but is also creative in the use of integrative
methods (population genetics, morphology, chemical ecology, behavior) to better
understand symbiotic relationships. The charismatic Megalomyrmex guest
ant/fungus-farming ant host/parasite system has the potential to reshape the way
symbioses are perceived while providing a new model that will serve the needs of
students and researchers now and in the future. Additionally, these efforts will
include students in research and create a bilingual online badge-based
educational summer program, led by diverse role models, and centered on
conservation of symbioses, enhancing accessibility to STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will enable much-needed crosstalk
among the fields of parasitology and sociobiology. Megalomyrmex symmetochus is
an obligate ‘guest ant’ parasite of a fungus-farming ant, Sericomyrmex amabilis.
The costs of hosting guest ants can quickly shift to a net benefit when a more
lethal parasite threatens hosts, because the guest ants offer protection through
their alkaloidal venom weaponry. Integrative approaches in animal behavior,
following a parasitological exploitation framework, will clarify how these
context-dependent mutualists influence symbiotic networks. Aims are organized by
the stages leading to exploitation, from the initiation of an obligate symbiotic
interaction (host-finding/dispersal) (Aim I) to colony integration and species
network maintenance (Aims II and III). Aim I compares dispersal ability and
population dynamics of hosts and their parasites, capitalizing on flight
morphology and population genomics methods. Host-finding strategies will be
identified for the first time in a social parasite (one social organism
parasitizing another) using a reductionist approach. Not only will ant and
fungus garden volatiles be characterized but compounds that attract the host and
parasite ants will be discovered. Aims II and III center on parasite venom
function. Toxicity and behavioral assays will test if parasitized and non-
parasitized ant colonies differ physiologically and behaviorally when exposed to
parasite-derived venom alkaloids. 16S metagenomics, culture-based assays, and
manipulation experiments will distinguish bacterial symbionts and determine
which are susceptible to antimicrobial alkaloidal venom. This work fills a
significant gap by identifying how social parasites solve the challenges all
parasites face to achieve successful exploitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.