* 2127637
* Designing Colloidosomes with Unjammed Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gordon Christopher, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,285.00

Emulsions consist of liquid droplets that are suspended in a second, immiscible
liquid, such as oil droplets in water. Pickering emulsions are a special kind of
emulsion in which the small particles sit at the interface between the droplets
and the surrounding liquid. The presence of these small particles at the droplet
interface ensures that the droplets do not coalesce with each other and break
the emulsion. These emulsions are commonly found in commercial cosmetics,
foodstuffs, and in newer applications like 3D printing. Typically, the interface
of a droplet is nearly completely covered with particles, which stops
coalescence by essentially by creating armor around the droplet. However,
coating the droplets completely requires a large number of small particles,
which poses an environmental challenge, and it limits the ability to make
emulsions with novel properties. To address these issues, this project will
study how combinations of particles with different surface properties can create
interfaces that prevent coalescence at lower particle concentrations. The
research will examine the relationship between the properties of the interface
and the behavior of individual drops and collections of drops to determine the
best optimal interface configuration to stabilize emulsions. Additionally, the
research team will develop several traveling labs for high schools in the region
surrounding Texas Tech University that will educate students about the science
behind common many commercial products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, particle
interfaces on colloidosomes primarily impact droplet behavior due to interfacial
jamming. The hypothesis underlying this project is that colloidosomesâ€™ behavior
can be modified by creating unjammed interfaces with high interfacial
viscoelasticity using particles with bidispersity of charge or wettability. A
series of experiments that combine interfacial rheology, microfluidics, and
image analysis will be conducted to examine this hypothesis. To start, the
project will characterize rheology and microstructure of a range of highly
viscoelastic, moderate surface coverage interfaces. Then, these interfaces will
be replicated on colloidosomes using microfluidic techniques. The resultant
colloidosomes will be forced to deform, breakup, and coalesce using specific
microfluidic geometries. The properties of the colloidosomes will be compared to
interfacial rheology measurements, drops with simple liquid and/or jammed
interfaces, and to theoretical predictions. The resulting data set will
characterize behavior of unjammed colloidosomes and their potential utility.
Creating colloidosomes with controllable interfaces will establish how
interfacial elasticity and yield of unjammed particle interfaces affects
colloidosome behavior, increasing the capability to manipulate colloidosome
systems for important applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.