* 2127732
* CAREER:  Uncovering rare earth elements biochemistry: From enzymes to ecosystems
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Norma Martinez-Gomez, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 10/31/2024
* USD 327,640.00

Rare earth elements are metals that were thought to be too insoluble and scarce
to play a role in biology and therefore were not studied or included in any
biological experimental conditions. However, it is now known that these metals
impact the growth of environmental bacteria, particularly those that consume
compounds such as methane and methanol. This project will describe the extent in
which rare earth elements drive novel cellular functions, from the
characterization of new enzymes and pathways, to identifying the effect of rare
earth element biochemistry on its environment. Results from this research will
lead to technological improvements of biological platforms that already serve
for production of biofuels and bioplastics, and will also expand efforts into
developing biomining and biostimulants platforms, transforming both the energy
and agricultural industries. The development of the project will allow for
training of students, both graduate and undergraduate, by integrating data
analyses in classes and by developing experiments; as well as allow for the
training of two postdoctoral researchers. Further, inclusion of high school
students to develop experiments of the project will provide a unique opportunity
to develop real research that can be included in peer reviewed manuscripts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rare earth metals are highly insoluble and yet bacteria
are able to acquire and use these metals for growth. Research herein will define
how bacteria are able to 1) scavenge these metals, and once inside the cell, 2)
what enzymes and pathways rely on rare earth elements for functionality.
Preliminary results suggest that rare earths recovery involves a parallel system
to the TonB-dependent Fe scavenging pathway, and that the use of rare earths as
cofactors expands beyond the few alcohol dehydrogenases described until now.
Finally, rare earth metabolism affects bacterial interactions with its host
resulting in biostimulation of plant growth. By using a combination of system-
level approaches (genomics, transcriptomics, metabolomics) along with
phenotypic, genetic and biochemical approaches, the metabolic network supporting
growth when rare earths are present will be unraveled.