* 2127051
* STTR Phase I:  Dermatologist-level detection of suspicious pigmented skin lesions from high-resolution full-body images
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Mehran Armand, LUMO IMAGING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer Program (STTR) Phase I project is to improve outcomes in dermatology
and enable improved clinical care in the absence of specialists. The proposed
technology enables cost-effective screening for cancer, psoriasis, atopic
dermatitis, and other inflammatory skin conditions. In the United States,
psoriasis affects about 8 million people while about 31.6 million people in the
United States have some form of eczema, including atopic dermatitis. The
proposed system generates a highly magnified image of the skin for analysis by a
clinician or an artificial-intelligence based automated system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Program (STTR)
Phase I project integrates several subsystems: 1) a scanner and software to
capture and reconstruct super high-resolution (dermatoscope level) model of the
entire skin surface of patients in a matter of minutes; 2) a multispectral
illumination system to provide more information than currently available from a
typical white-light systems, potentially leading to superior sensitivity and
specify in lesion detection and classification; and 3) a system to find and
classify lesions automatically from high-resolution images. This system advances
the automated classification of images beyond those filtered previously by a
clinician. Moreover, the system's UV illuminations system potentially can be
used in a photodynamic treatment regimen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.