* 2127444
* Collaborative Research: NNA Research: Developing capacity for planning and adapting to riverbank erosion and its consequences in the Yukon River Basin
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* A  Joshua West, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Liam Frink
* 12/31/2026
* USD 786,162.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic warming is causing landscape change that is
affecting Arctic communities. Rivers and floodplains are particularly
susceptible to a warmer climate due to permafrost thaw that can lead to
accelerated erosion. This erosion threatens critical infrastructure and disrupts
community life, including by sometimes displacing entire Alaska communities. Yet
the response of erosion to warming, and its implications, are not well
understood. In addition to imperiling infrastructure, erosion exposes frozen
floodplain sediment that contains potential contaminants including heavy metals,
such as mercury, along with nutrients and pathogens, all of which can imperil
water quality and ecosystem health. By affecting community infrastructure and
water quality, Arctic river erosion sits at the nexus of multiple problems that
impact society. Greater understanding of bank erosion and its water quality
impacts will be critical to supporting sustainable Arctic communities. Equally
important will be understanding regional adaptive capacity challenges and
opportunities to allow for the adoption of scientific knowledge into actionable
plans and policies. To meet these multiple challenges important for scientific
knowledge and society, this project unites a research team from the Yukon River
Inter-Tribal Watershed Council, University of Alaska Anchorage, California
Institute of Technology, Los Alamos National Laboratory, University of Southern
California, and three Indigenous partner communities in the Yukon River basin
that are threatened by riverbank erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop numerical models of landscape evolution to understand rates of riverbank
erosion in the warming Arctic and their effects on biogeochemical processes that
affect water quality and community infrastructure. Observational stations will
monitor bank erosion, flow hydraulics, water quality and microbial ecosystems at
three study sites co-located with partner communities in the Yukon River basin.
Floodplain, riverbank and water column sampling will be used with
biogeochemical, isotopic and metagenomic measurements to understand the
abundance, character and process dynamics of fine sediment, nutrients, mercury
and other metals, and pathogens. The project also will include an evaluation of
regional adaptive capacity and an identification of opportunities for and
institutional barriers to adaptation. Natural and social science will converge
to produce Erosion Action Plans that are needed for Alaska Native communities to
plan for climate-change adaptation. Community-based science will enhance this
collaborative effort, and educational activities with our partner communities
will build and fortify process understanding. Web-based modules will illustrate
and inform the public about observed changes in Arctic rivers, future
projections, and how new science combined with citizen-science efforts can lead
to effective planning strategies for sustainable Arctic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.