* 2127495
* Floating Offshore Platform and Wave Energy Converter Integration: Collaborative Platform Stabilization and Energy Conversion
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Wei-Che Tai, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 441,538.00

This grant will support research that is synergistic with the key societal goals
of lowering the cost of wave energy conversion and transforming existing
offshore platforms into renewable energy hubs. Wave energy converters transform
the energy of a moving ocean wave into useful electrical energy. Costs of
installation, mooring and foundation, and operation and maintenance account for
the majority of life costs of wave energy projects. A promising way to reduce
these costs is to integrate wave energy converters with offshore floating
platforms used for oil and gas production and operating worldwide in deep water
areas where wave energy resources are abundant. This award supports fundamental
research that will lay a theoretical foundation for enabling such integration
without compromising the platform stability, thereby promising higher wave
energy production at a significantly lower cost. As the wave energy potential of
North America is enormous, results from this research will benefit the U.S.
economy and society. This research will substantially broaden the knowledge in
the fields of nonlinear vibrations, hydrodynamics, and energy harvesting. This
research will proactively engage individuals from underrepresented groups in
these fields through carefully designed outreach and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional wave energy converters operate
based on the basic principle of linear resonance, whereby a natural period close
to a typical wave period results in a large resonant response and, hence, high-
efficiency wave power production. When integrated with a floating platform, this
large resonant response can give rise to large platform motions, potentially
destabilizing the platform. This research aims to develop a novel wave energy
converter that exploits nonlinearities and internal resonances to promote energy
transfer that mitigates dangerous hydrodynamic responses of the platform and
efficiently converts wave energy at the same time. The work will develop a new
numerical technique that enables computationally efficient bifurcation analysis
of the energy transfer phenomenon in the presence of regular and irregular
waves. Simulation studies will be used to predict the hydrodynamic response,
electricity generation, and wave conversion efficiency and bandwidths of the
integrated system. Finally, in-laboratory and wave tank experiments will be
conducted to validate the numerical predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.