* 2127489
* American Meteorological Society Summer Policy Colloquium 2021-2023; Washington, DC
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* William Hooke, American Meteorological Society
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 282,590.00

This award supports participation of students and early-career scientists in the
Summer Policy Colloquium of the American Meteorological Society. The Summer
Policy Colloquium addresses the need for interaction between policy makers and
researchers who have domain expertise in areas relevant to policy decisions. It
provides an opportunity for researchers interested in decision support to
interact with policy makers and learn about policy making. Each year the
Colloquium brings 20 to 40 participants to Washington DC for two weeks of
intensive interactions with scientist-leaders from the legislative and executive
branches, executives from NGOs, policy analysts, science journalists, and other
stakeholders working in the policy arena. In addition to in-person dialog and
interaction Colloquium participants are given pre-assigned reading and work
through group exercises and case studies to learn about the policy making
process. Funds provided through this award support the participation of 15
graduate students and early-career scientists in the Colloquium. NSF-funded
participants are selected through a competitive process, based on the
applicant's potential and accomplishments and taking into account diversity,
equity and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary broader impact of the
award is the development of a cohort of researchers in discplines related to
weather and climate who can provide decision support for policy decisions in
these areas. Such decision support is increasingly valuable as stakeholders and
decision makers at all levels of government face a growing variety of challenges
related to the management of weather and climate risk. Many researchers are
interested in providing decision support, but the education and experience of
scientists does not adequately prepare them to perform this
role.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.