* 2127355
* SBIR Phase II:  Automation of a Novel Low Cost Aluminum Additive Manufacturing Method
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Alison Forsyth, ALLOY ENTERPRISES INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is to improve aluminum additive manufacturing (AM). AM remains of great
interest to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) for its promise of producing
parts on-demand; however, low throughput and high costs of aluminum powder limit
adoption. The proposed technology produces consistent parts with established
alloys, such as the commonly used 6061 aluminum alloy. These alloys have
immediate commercial applications in servicing legacy equipment parts and for
making vehicles more lightweight, thus improving efficiency and reducing carbon
emissions. Further, this technology can support low-to-medium production
volumes, allowing smaller manufacturers to take advantage of AM as a platform
for innovation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project aims to deliver on-demand production at the unit cost of
casting. The research objectives will optimize core processes for a novel
aluminum metal-to-metal sheet bonding technology, and achieve process
automation. This technology provides on-demand parts with high strength wrought
alloy properties and the capability to design innovative components that could
not be previously considered with traditional manufacturing processes. The
anticipated results are improved material and mechanical properties, system
integration, and increased throughput and part
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.