* 2127085
* SBIR Phase I:  Modular and Updatable Artificial Intelligence (AI) for Robotics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Tsvi Achler, OPTIMIZING MIND
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 274,746.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a novel recognition architecture
to computer vision in the robotics industry. The project seeks to enable
computer learn without rehearsal, allowing corrections for details that are
present in the real world environment. The aim of this project is a solution to
be used by computer vision customers to solve their problems immediately
(without sending data back to retrain the whole network), reducing machine and
customer downtime and disruption while increasing productivity. The initial
focus is on robotics with computer vision limitations though the technology may
be useful to other industries. Success in improving computer vision-based
learning could facilitate disaster responses, augment current physical
abilities, and enable exploration beyond the boundaries of Earth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will help create a framework to overcome rehearsal requirements that
limit automated robots’ utility within life-like, dynamic environments.
Artificial intelligence (AI) remains inflexible compared to humans at quickly
accumulating knowledge without forgetting what they have previously learned.
Robots using AI are currently only used in environments that are very limited
and are very tightly controlled. Everything that might happen in the robot’s
work environment must be included their training set. The proposed AI solution
is suited for learning in dynamic environments without rehearsal while
maintaining scalability as information is encountered. This technology may allow
robots to be trained within their environment. This project may enable visual
capabilities leading to a demonstration of flexible learning without rehearsal
within dynamic robotic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.