* 2127745
* Collaborative Research: Bees of the World - Phylogenomics, Biogeography, and Evolution of Host-Plant Associations
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Bryan Danforth, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 09/30/2025
* USD 303,954.00

Bees are vitally important to agriculture, food security, and the preservation
of natural ecosystems due to their pollination services. Over 85% of the 325,000
flowering plant species on the planet depend on animal pollination and the vast
majority is carried out by bees. In the U.S.A. alone bees are responsible for
the commercial production of 130 crop plants, generating over $11 billion in
annual revenue. The value of bees to nature and human well-being is abundantly
clear. The partnership between bees and flowering plants formed over 100 million
years ago, and since that time, bees have radiated globally into an astounding
20,000+ different species, many of which are specialist pollinators of
particular plant species or families. The study of bee biodiversity is urgently
needed because there is growing evidence that some bee species are in decline
and baseline knowledge of bee diversity, distribution, and family relationships
is incomplete. The Bees of the World project has the potential to significantly
improve knowledge of bee biodiversity and to establish a guide to interpret key
traits of bees, such as their host-plant associations. By utilizing recent
advances in DNA sequencing technology, a comprehensive tree-of-life for bees
will be generated for the first time, providing a framework from which to study
bee diversity and their relationships with plants. To disseminate results and
general bee knowledge, the project will engage in multiple outreach efforts with
professional and non-professional audiences. Activities include creation of a
virtual bee course, teaching of a molecular methods workshop, and, in
collaboration with the Natural History Museum of Utah, development of exhibits
and youth education activities focused on pollinators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use cutting edge molecular and analytical methods and engage a
global network of collaborators to assemble a comprehensive phylogenomic dataset
for bees. The project aims are to: (1) resolve remaining uncertainties in
higher-level bee phylogeny and classification, (2) incorporate fossils to
reconstruct the global biogeographic history of bees, revealing the origin and
spread of bee diversity over time, and (3) analyze patterns of host-plant use
across bees and for targeted clades at lower taxonomic levels, revealing how
host-plant specialization has evolved and impacted rates of diversification in
bees. To resolve the phylogeny of bees with improved confidence, the research
team will use next-generation DNA sequencing approaches and novel laboratory
methods to sequence bee species from across the globe. The project will generate
low coverage genomes for most bee genera and ultraconserved element (UCE) data
for over 3,000 species, filling in sampling gaps. The resulting bee phylogeny
will serve as a framework to study bee classification, biogeography, and host-
plant evolution. Comprehensive databases of bee fossil, distribution, and host-
plant information will be created and made available to other researchers.
Combining results from each component of the project will provide a
comprehensive understanding of how bees have diversified and dispersed over time
and how their partnership with plants has shaped their evolutionary
trajectory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.