* 2127901
* III: Small: From Spatial Language to Spatial Data - a simulation-based approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dieter Pfoser, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 489,141.00

User experience related to spatial information is currently directly linked to
the representation of the data; that is, geographic co-ordinates pinpoint
locations on maps and routing algorithms determine the best route based on
distance and time. In contrast, human interaction with the world is based on
experience, learning and reasoning on qualitative factors, including spatial
concepts, such as near/far, behind, next to, inside. Considering how spatial
information is conveyed in natural language, there is no unique mapping between
the spatial expressiveness and quantifiable spatial concepts. For the most part
this is attributed to the highly contextualized nature of human language; that
is, what human language is interpreted in part by who and where it was said and
what other words surrounded the comment. The challenge in this project is on
devising means to better understand people's perception of space by deciphering
such spatial language terms. This will lead to novel text and audio-based
interfaces for the consumption of geospatial data such as when asking for or
giving directions in a way that is intuitive to people or for systems that more
effectively assist the visually impaired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
aims of the project are divided into two thrusts. The first thrust develops a
simulation to crowdsource geospatial language expression data by having users
interact in a virtual environment. The spatial language expressions and
interactions are captured using quantitative models. The second thrust then uses
these user-generated descriptions to evaluate several modeling approaches that
include (i) studying specific urban settings to identify contextual factors and
(ii) exploring neural approaches to modeling the problem of grounding language
to this spatial context. The resulting models can then be used to automatically
translate language to geospatial information and, in the reverse direction, to
train dialogue agents that can generate enriched, contextualized route and scene
descriptions with natural, useful geospatial language
expressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.