* 2127519
* Towards the Rational Design of Ni &amp; Co free Chalcogen Anion Redox Cathode Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Leela Arava, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 399,849.00

Global energy demands and a desire for decreased reliance on fossil fuels have
intensified research toward large-scale energy storage capabilities. Even though
many years of active research in Li-ion battery technologies, the current
battery materials still rely heavily on conventional transition-metal cathode
materials. These cathode materials have limited capacity, and geopolitical
issues raise concerns over their continued availability. Recently, researchers
have been exploring the so-called “Lithium-rich anion redox” cathode chemistry,
where both transition metals and anions participate in the electrochemical redox
reactions, resulting in significantly higher energy storage capability. Despite
delivering high capacity, these Li-rich cathodes suffer from fundamental
stability issues. This project seeks to gain the fundamental insights necessary
for the design of next-generation low-cost and high-capacity cathode materials
that are free from Nickel and Cobalt metals. For broader impacts, a specific
outreach mission will be formed to provide research experience to the students
in community colleges around Detroit, MI where the majority of students are from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Li-rich anion-redox cathode
chemistry is emerging as conventional cationic-redox of transition metal-based
layered oxides are reaching their theoretical capacity limit. Though the
combined redox of both anion and cation towards higher energy storage
capability, the cathodes suffer from voltage fade, large voltage hysteresis, and
irreversible oxygen release, which originate mysteriously from the anionic redox
activity of oxygen ligand itself. The technical objective of this project is to
construct a structural framework for Li-rich anion redox cathodes by tuning
metal-ligand covalency using commercially viable metal-cations and less
electronegative chalcogen ligands (sulfides and selenides). The proposed
research is based on the hypothesis that the improved metal-ligand covalency can
be achieved by bringing metal cation d-band close to chalcogen anion p-band in
lithium-rich chalcogenide thereby utilizing highly reversible multi-electron
redox chemistry. The successful outcome of the project is to elucidate the core
understanding of lithiation (discharge)-delithiation (charge) kinetics in
chalcogen anion redox compounds and anion redox induced structural
transformation in various metal d-band and ligand p-band environments. Thus,
this research aims to define fresh perspectives on chalcogen redox chemistry to
advance the fundamental understanding of the next-generation cathode
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.