* 2127775
* RAPID: Field investigation to collect snow, debris flow and sediment deposition and the glacier-melt induced peak flows and landslide in the Chamoli region, Uttarakhand, India
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Venkataramana Sridhar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

On 7 Feb 2021, a cataclysmic flood triggered cascading events near Chamoli, in
the state of Uttarakhand in the Himalayan range of India, resulting in washing
away of a bridge and cutting off villages near the border areas of China. About
15 km downstream of the avalanche location, the Rishi Ganga Hydroelectric
project was washed off and the National Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC) Tapovan
project was also damaged. The cause of this glacier melt-induced landslide and
flooding is suspected to have links to global warming and glacial retreat. The
data to be collected for this project will inform whether this natural disaster
was triggered by snowpack and glacial melt versus land-use change and
deforestation, or a combination of these factors, that cause devastating
landslides and floods in the ecologically fragile, headwater region of the
Ganges. Understanding hydrologic and geomorphic processes in high-altitude
environments is essential to closely evaluate if human-induced changes are
contributing to extreme events. Improvements in our ability to predict glacial
outburst/landslide/flooding events in high elevation, glaciated areas such as
the Himalayan region has potential to mitigate impacts of future
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Changing climate and deforestation are impacting
hydrological processes in the high elevation regions of the Himalayan range.
Climate change is causing glacial retreat and changes in snowpack dynamics,
while deforestation and land use change are modifying snow energy budgets and
soil moisture dynamics. These impacts are compounded by one another and may
result in extreme flood events. The data to be collected for this project will
inform gaps in knowledge on snowmelt runoff and soil moisture dynamics and
landslide vulnerability in the hillslopes of the Himalayan Range. The time-bound
perishable data will be valuable for identifying the mass of snow and volume of
runoff, as well as understanding the hydrological and landslide processes
associated with this extreme event. The proposed RAPID project leverages a
unique opportunity to collect information at the site in collaboration with the
Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee (IITR), which is located within 200
miles of the site. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the
Hydrologic Sciences and Geomorphology &amp; Land-use Dynamics programs, as well
as the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.