* 2127721
* SWIFT: Reconfigurable Microwave Silicon Photonics Filters and Passive-User-Friendly Protocols for Spectrum Coexistence
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Samuel Palermo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Wireless passive systems such as radio astronomy receivers, or atmospheric and
geo-space science and climatological observation receivers are extremely
sensitive to other active wireless interferences such as terrestrial cellular
communications signals. As a result, they typically require dedicated radio
frequency bands along with guard frequency bands around them. In many cases,
active users may not physically co-exist in such areas, and many passive user
infrastructures have therefore been built in remote areas. Such scenarios
generally reduce the effective spectrum efficiency hindering the deployment of
passive systems and creating barriers against future scientific discoveries. A
new approach would be to allow both passive and active users to operate in
adjacent frequency bands and in neighboring locations. This will allow active
users to operate in previously unallowable guard frequency bands thereby
significantly enhancing spectrum efficiency. This project introduces innovations
on chip-scale microwave silicon photonics (SiP) adaptive filter architectures on
the passive user side and passive-user-friendly protocols for resource
allocation on the active (mobile) user side and thus addresses effective
spectrum utilization/coexistence between passive and active (mobile) users. The
research proposed in this project on microwave SiP filters along with wireless
protocols can potentially revolutionize the future of wireless communication
industries and provide further technological diversification for the photonic
and semiconductor industries. Besides the technical impacts, the proposed
project also promotes outreach activities to increase participation of students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering, including annual one-
week summer camps for high school students. The research and educational results
of this work will be disseminated to academic, industrial and government
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to develop (1) novel chip-
scale microwave SiP reconfigurable/adaptive filter architectures on the passive
user side, using a Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) optical chip controlled by a
nanometer Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) SOI-chip that both
allows for electrically controlled filter configuration and jammer rejection to
dynamically protect passive users’ bands and (2) passive-user-friendly protocols
for resource allocation on the active (mobile) user side. The research
objectives are the development of: (1) a microwave SiP/CMOS adaptive filter
architecture and its photonics/electronics components, along with
algorithms/hardware for their automatic tuning on the passive user side, (2)
online policies with provable service guarantees for the proposed passive-user-
friendly protocol, and the (3) hybrid integration of the proposed adaptive
filter on the passive user and resource allocation protocols in the active user
sides using a test bench for verification of effective spectrum utilization. A
versatile microwave SiP adaptive filter unit will be potentially connected to a
passive user receiver in room temperature after the main antenna and low noise
amplifier (either in room or cryogenic temperature). This unit includes highly
selective reconfigurable SiP bandpass and notch filters to dynamically select
the desired passive user band within 10-50 GHz range and reject active users as
jammers. On the other hand, a passive-user-friendly protocol for resource
allocation on the active (mobile) user side will be developed. This protocol
will specifically consider both the sensitivity and linearity of the proposed
electrooptic receiver on the passive user side, and the diverse features and
service requirements of heterogeneous active user applications. Online
algorithms with provable service guarantees will be developed for this
protocol.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.