* 2127134
* EAGER: Integrating Fracture Nucleation and Propagation into Optimization: Towards Materials with Optimal Fracture Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Oscar Lopez-Pamies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 135,532.00

To date, the vast majority of topology optimization advancements have restricted
attention to problems where the underlying materials are assumed to deform
elastically without ever fracturing. However, it is well established that even a
simple variation in microstructure can have a profound influence on the
effective fracture properties of materials. Hence, optimization of
microstructural topology has the potential to revolutionize the discovery of
materials with unprecedented fracture properties. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental research to put forth a
theoretical and computational framework that identifies linear elastic brittle
materials whose microstructures have optimized fracture nucleation and
propagation behaviors. This research will explore the topological space to
create microstructures in linear elastic brittle materials that lead to improved
fracture behaviors and enhanced energy dissipation. The insights generated will
contribute to the progress of science by paving the way required to formulate a
theory that systematically discovers novel geometries and mechanisms toward
enhanced toughness. This research will allow advancement in other fields, such
as civil and aerospace structures and medical implants, ultimately contributing
towards a broad range of applications for national health and prosperity. The
project will also enrich the multidisciplinary course curriculum and provide
opportunities to educate and train graduate students in theoretical
optimization, advanced modeling, and experimental techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the research is to create a
transformative and mathematically rigorous approach to optimize microstructures
with maximized fracture properties. A formulation of topology optimization that
integrates fracture nucleation and propagation into the mechanical response of
materials, which can both deform elastically and fracture, will be derived and
implemented numerically. A specific subset of materials, linear elastic brittle
materials with two phases, will be addressed in this project. The derived
formulation will be employed to identify optimal microstructural topologies in
linear elastic brittle porous composite materials with improved fracture
properties. These optimized topologies will be fabricated and systematically
validated by experiments. This work will generate new insights about the optimal
geometries and dominating mechanisms that enhance fracture performance. The
project will also build the foundation of a new ability to manipulate cracks and
opens up possibilities for a wide range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.