* 2127548
* CI CoE: CI Compass: An NSF Cyberinfrastructure (CI) Center of Excellence for Navigating the Major Facilities Data Lifecycle
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 9,000,000.00

Innovative and robust Cyberinfrastructure (CI) is critical to the science
missions of the NSF Major Facilities (MFs), which are at the forefront of
science and engineering innovations, enabling pathbreaking discoveries across a
broad spectrum of scientific areas. The MFs serve scientists, researchers and
the public at large by capturing, curating, and serving data from a variety of
scientific instruments (from telescopes to sensors). The amount of data
collected and disseminated by the MFs is continuously growing in complexity and
size and new software solutions are being developed at an increasing pace. MFs
do not always have all the expertise, human resources, or budget to take
advantage of the new capabilities or to solve every technological issue
themselves. The proposed NSF Cyberinfrastructure Center of Excellence, CI
Compass, brings together experts from multiple disciplines, with a common
passion for scientific CI, into a problem-solving team that curates the best of
what the community knows; shares expertise and experiences; connects communities
in response to emerging challenges; and builds on and innovates within the
emerging technology landscape. By supporting MFs to enhance and evolve the
underlying CI, the proposed CI Compass will amplify the largest of NSFâ€™s science
investments, and have a transformative, broad societal impact on a multitude of
MF science and engineering areas and the community of scientists, engineers, and
educators MFs serve. CI Compass will also impact the broader NSF CI ecosystem
through dissemination of CI Compass outcomes, which can be adapted and adopted
by other large-scale CI projects and thus empower them to more efficiently serve
their user communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed CI Compass
is to enhance the CI underlying the MF data lifecycle (DLC) that represents the
transformation of raw data captured by state-of-the-art scientific MF
instruments into interoperable and integration-ready data products that can be
visualized, disseminated, and converted into insights and knowledge. CI Compass
will engage with MFs and contribute knowledge and expertise to the MF DLC CI by
offering a collection of services that includes evaluating CI plans, helping
design new architectures and solutions, developing proofs of concept, and
assessing applicability and performance of existing CI solutions. CI Compass
will also enable knowledge-sharing across MFs and the CI community, by brokering
connections between MF CI professionals, facilitating topical working groups,
and organizing community meetings. CI Compass will also disseminate the best
practices and lessons learned via online channels, publications, and community
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.