* 2127976
* RAPID: Projecting Possible Scenarios of COVID-19 in the United States
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Shaun Truelove, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,895.00

Models of emerging infections provide invaluable insight into the potential
impacts and trajectories of unfolding epidemics. In a rapidly changing
situation, like that of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, unforeseeable changes in
behavior, control measures, pharmaceutical interventions like vaccination, and
changes in the virus itself make it challenging to provide accurate disease
forecasts more than 3-4 weeks into the future. Many policy decisions require
multiple months of advanced planning, however. Scenario projection models
provide an essential framework for assessing what might happen during an
outbreak in the longer-term, such as 3-6 months, under scenarios with well-
defined assumptions about things like control measures, vaccination, and variant
spread in the future. Because of real uncertainty in how an epidemic situation
may unfold, combining scenario projections from multiple models with different
assumptions about the future can provide a more complete picture of the epidemic
possibilities. The useful production and interpretation of multiple scenario
projections rests critically with the careful definition of questions, the
explicit specification of scenarios, and the concise communication of these
assumptions and findings, tasks that are not always accomplished in the use of
epidemiological modeling for policy. This project will provide training
opportunities for a graduate student. Through collaboration with the U.S. CDC
and other public health agencies, the COVID-19 Scenario Modeling Hub project is
well poised to shape the research and implementation capacity of forthcoming
U.S.-wide epidemic and disease prediction initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the coordination of the COVID-19 Scenario Modeling Hub (SMH),
an effort that aims to provide decision makers with a form of “situational
awareness” under multiple plausible futures by serving as a central, harmonized
source of timely scenario modeling projections. The SMH aims to propel the
science of scenario projection modeling, thus leading the way for future, long-
term coordinated multi-modeling exercises. These efforts are focused on (1)
defining tractable policy questions, (2) designing standardized scenarios for
multiple modeling groups to answer those questions, with specific focus on
limiting uncertainty in scenario-related components, while allowing for
different model assumptions and implementations in other aspects; and (3)
communicating and interpreting model results to help guide policy and highlight
legitimate sources of scientific disagreement. Additionally, this project also
supports ongoing adjustment and improvement of the Johns Hopkins University
COVID-19 Scenario Pipeline model, which both contributes to the SMH and provides
the SMH coordination team with a useful tool for experimenting with scenario
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.