* 2127460
* RUI: Role of the haploidizer gene in genome elimination by a selfish B chromosome
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2025
* Patrick Ferree, Scripps College
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 923,538.00

This project aims to elucidate how selfish genetic elements disrupt normal
genetic inheritance patterns. A certain class of selfish elements – B
chromosomes – are pervasive among plants and animals. In certain cases, B
chromosomes cause harmful effects to reproduction and extreme sex ratio
distortion. In the jewel wasp, Nasonia vitripennis, one such B chromosome
destroys the part of the genome that comes from the father, resulting in all-
male broods of progeny carrying hereditary material only from the mother and the
B chromosome. Recent work has revealed a toxin-like gene expressed by this B
chromosome; this gene is needed for the B chromosome’s genome elimination
activity, making it the only gene known to underlie selfish chromosome behavior
in any organism. This research aims to uncover how this gene functions at the
molecular level, providing insights into how other selfish genetic elements
alter inheritance patterns. The project will facilitate rigorous research
training opportunities for a diverse group of undergraduate students and a
postdoctoral researcher. A new laboratory-based course will be developed around
one of the proposal’s aims; in this course, students will perform the research,
learning the practice of science through hands-on experimentation. Students from
the two-year college level will be involved in the research, helping to enhance
their retention in STEM and the likelihood of their continuation to 4-year
degree-granting institutions. Collectively, this work will help to train the
rising STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An implicit assumption of genetics
is that elements of the genome function cooperatively for organismal fitness.
However, certain genetic elements do not behave in this manner. Such elements,
deemed selfish, disobey the normal rules of genetics to gain a transmission
advantage. This opposition between the benefits gained by a selfish genetic
element and the harm incurred by the organism represents a poorly understood
condition known as intragenomic conflict. This project will utilize a
combination of modern genomic, genetic, molecular, and cytological methods to
study how a B chromosome-expressed gene called haploidizer causes genome
elimination in the jewel wasp Nasonia vitripennis. The main activities include:
(1) using transgenesis and other gene manipulation approaches to test if the
haploidizer gene functions alone or instead with other B-chromosome expressed
genes; (2) using high-resolution fluorescence microscopy to understand the
properties of haploidizer’s encoded protein at the sub-cellular level; (3) using
genetics to identify protein interactors of the haploidizer protein; and (4)
using genomics approaches to determine if a similar B chromosome in a different
wasp species also expresses a haploidizer-like toxin gene to cause genome
elimination. This study will provide a detailed investigation of how B
chromosomes alter genetic inheritance through the expression of individual
genes. Broadly, the study will help to elucidate how B chromosomes behave so
differently from the standard chromosomes in the genome, and it may facilitate
efforts to build more effective artificial gene expression systems aimed at
controlling disease-carrying insect pests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.