* 2127171
* NNA Planning: Collaborative Research: Electric Vehicles in the Arctic (EVITA) - Interactions with Cold Weather, Microgrids, People, and Policy
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Stephen Colt, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2023
* USD 172,794.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is
one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The Arctic research is needed to
inform the economy, security and resilience of the Nation, the larger region and
the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships from local to international
scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhances efforts
in formal and informal education, and integrates the co-production of knowledge
where appropriate. This award fulfills part of that aim by supporting planning
activities with clear potential to develop novel, leading edge research ideas
and approaches to address NNA goals. It integrates aspects of the natural
environment, built environment, and/or social systems, and addresses important
societal challenges and engages with local and Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric vehicles (EVs) are a growing mode of
transportation across the globe, and the Arctic is seeing increased interest in
EV adoption. However, several fundamental gaps in knowledge must be filled to
evaluate where, how, and for whom EVs can provide widespread benefits, and what
might need to change to realize these benefits. For example, little data exist
on the performance of EVs in cold Arctic temperatures and how EVs affect
isolated rural power systems. It is also not clear how electric rates and public
policies will affect EV adoption and use. This planning project brings together
researchers and community members from three Alaska communities to identify
perceived barriers to adoption, mechanisms for facilitating adoption, perceived
usefulness, and use of EVs among different potential user groups (i.e.,
subsistence users, youth, elders, etc.). It also examines potential trade-offs
between conventional and electric vehicles for rural users across specific use
cases, such as subsistence activities. This planning project serves as the
foundation for future research on EV adoption by addressing the identified
knowledge gaps that can provide data and information necessary to achieve just,
equitable, and sustainable energy systems in rural Arctic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this planning project is on
strengthening community connections by conducting planning activities for
convergent engineering and social science research in partnership with three
representative remote islanded grid communities (Kotzebue, Galena, and Bethel,
Alaska). An initial community meeting in these three communities initiates an
open discussion about visions and concerns for EVs in their community. Two more
follow-up community meetings in each of the three communities continue to build
collaborations and ideas. These meetings facilitate the sharing of knowledge to
guide the development of interview questions and discrete choice experiments
planned for future co-produced research, to seek design feedback around tools
for the community to use in EV decision-making, and to strengthen connections
with the communities. During these community meetings, research focuses on
limited data collection on vehicle usage. Additional remote meetings of research
and community project partners solidify how the knowledge sharing informs
research design to address gaps in knowledge around cold weather impacts, grid
impacts, and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.