* 2127333
* NNA Planning: Community-based Mitigation and Adaptive Strategies for River Flooding and Erosion in Alaska Native Communities
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristie Franz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, and addresses important societal challenges, builds significant
educational opportunities, and engages with local and Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many Alaska Native (AN) villages located in
the Yukon-Kuskokwim (Y-K) Delta in Alaska have been affected by a large number
of flooding events due to torrential rains, melting snow packs, and river ice
jams causing erosion along riverbanks. Communities have begun developing hazard
and adaptation plans, however many communities lack accurate models that are
needed to predict flooding and erosion risk. Currently, models required to
forecast flooding and erosion in the Y-K Delta are limited, due in part to the
minimal data in the region, the large number of rivers, and the lack of
monitoring equipment in rural areas. Furthermore, too often climate mitigation
strategies do not incorporate local cultures or community priorities; in fact,
they often reflect technical decisions only. The need is urgent to identify
solutions at the convergence of local knowledge and engineering and scientific
approaches. Convergence of field measurements and data with Indigenous knowledge
can guide better responses to immediate threats, such as relocating imminently
threatened homes away from an eroding shoreline or elevating buildings above
flood lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant is the first step toward a
long-term goal of addressing flooding and erosion risks in AN villages in the
Y-K Delta region. The project creates methodologies and tools at the
intersection of hydrologic modeling, soil characterization and Indigenous
knowledge; these tools are necessary to protect AN residents from the
environmental threats. This project draws from diverse areas of expertise to
assemble a team of researchers that bridge distinct areas, including physical
and engineering systems (civil engineering), natural and ecological systems
(atmospheric sciences, flooding, geomorphology) and social systems
(anthropology). The project team trains students, including Alaska Native
students, in community-based methods for co-generation and co-production of data
and scientific methods. These convergent approaches promise to improve our
understanding of hazard mitigation and adaptation planning due to changing
Arctic conditions, and commence the assembly of a new research community which
is geographically and disciplinarily diverse and
integrative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.