* 2127491
* CNS Core: Small: Rethinking Runtime Software Security Hardening in the Context of Hybrid Instruction Set Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Binoy Ravindran, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Computing is increasingly heterogeneous (e.g., CPU/GPUs, CPU/FPGAs) to meet the
ever-increasing performance demands of applications, necessitated in part by the
end of Moore's law. The latest trend in this direction is CPUs with different
instruction-set-architectures (or ISAs), especially in mobile computing and
Internet-of-Things (IoT) settings. Applications for heterogeneous computers are
often developed by dividing them across the ISA boundary: software for each ISA
is separately developed due to the intrinsic architecture differences. As a
result, application programmers often cannot fully leverage ISA-specific
hardware security features. In addition, existing software security techniques
are largely ISA-specific: threat models and exploit mitigations are usually
developed for a target ISA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses this
problem by developing a software infrastructure that allows applications to
transparently utilize ISA-specific security features. The infrastructure
includes a compiler and a run-time framework that hides ISA differences and
exposes an ISA-agnostic abstraction through code generation for multiple ISAs,
dynamic process state transformations for security hardening across ISAs, and
cross-ISA unified shared memory. Several security techniques will be developed
using this infrastructure to demonstrate effectiveness including adaptive attack
surface reduction, code and data space randomization, and dynamic software
patching. The projectâ€™s software infrastructure will allow programmers to
develop more secure application software for emerging computers without
additional programming effort, and thereby meet the pressing societal need for
secure computing infrastructures. The project's software artifacts and
experimental results will be publicly available under a permissive open-source
license at the project website for at least five years after the project
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.