* 2127743
* Research PGR: The Temperature-Immunity Nexus: Activation of Immunity by Low Temperature
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Michael Thomashow, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,400,000.00

Plant diseases routinely cause significant losses in crop productivity. Thus, a
fundamental goal of plant biology research is to identify genes that impart
immunity against plant pathogens and to determine how they are regulated in
response to environmental stimuli. Much has been learned about the nature of
immunity genes and how they are regulated in response to pathogen attack; i.e.,
in response to biotic stress. However, recent studies have established that
immunity genes can also be induced in response to abiotic stress, namely cold
temperatures. In this proposal, the investigators will study this temperature-
immunity nexus: how plant immunity is regulated by temperature. This phenomenon
has received relatively little attention, but has been observed in crop and
other plant species indicating that it may be an underappreciated highly
conserved “preemptive” survival strategy; i.e., that plant immunity is activated
in response to an abiotic stress that otherwise has the potential to increase
the susceptibility of the plant to infection by pathogens. Given the ever-
increasing concerns about climate change and the possible negative effects that
these changes could have on crop productivity, it is of great importance to
understand the connectivity between abiotic and biotic regulation of immunity
genes as such information has the potential to be used to develop novel
approaches to enhance plant resilience to environmental
stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arabidopsis Calmodulin-binding
Transcription Activator (CAMTA) transcription factors are master regulators of
salicylic acid (SA)-mediated immunity. In healthy plants grown at moderate
temperature (ca. 22C), the CAMTA proteins repress expression of SA-immunity
genes. However, when plants are exposed to pathogens—a biotic stress—or, as has
recently been demonstrated by this research team, low temperature (ca. 4C)—an
abiotic stress—the CAMTA “brake” is “disabled” resulting in the induction of
defense genes. A fundamental goal of this project is to determine how the
repression activity of the Arabidopsis CAMTA3 protein is regulated by
temperature. In particular, a combination of biochemical, proteomic, genetic and
genomic approaches will be used to determine: 1) how the CAMTA3 protein
represses expression of target genes at moderate temperature; 2) how low
temperature suppresses CAMTA3 repression activity; and 3) whether abiotic
factors other than low temperature can inactivate the CAMTA3 brake. An
additional integral component of this project is to extend the studies on CAMTA
regulation of immunity genes in Arabidopsis to a range of important crop species
and to determine the extent to which regulation of immunity in response to low
temperature and other abiotic stresses is conserved in plants. Taken together,
the results from these lines of investigation promise to expand our knowledge of
the basic Rules of Life that govern host defense mechanisms in
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program and Plant Biotic Interactions
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.