* 2127995
* EDGE FGT: Development of fibroblasts and organoids as tools for functional genomics in turtles, applicable to other non-mammalian vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Nicole Valenzuela, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project at Iowa State University will develop genomic tools for turtles to
advance the use of these non-model taxa (and other reptiles) to study genome-to-
phenome mapping, gene function, development, genome architecture, adaptive
responses to climate change, and more. Turtles are an emerging model for
ecology, evolution, and other topics, but genomic tools are needed for that
promise to be fully realized. This project will provide the scientific community
with a biobank and tools applicable to turtles and other reptiles. Workshops,
symposia, and publications will enable the rapid dissemination of these
resources. Training will be provided across levels of career development
(undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and faculty), including individuals from
underrepresented groups. Public outreach activities will be developed to engage
children and adults at the Science Center of Iowa to understand turtle biology
and general science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional genomic resources will be
developed in painted turtle fibroblasts and organoids, including gene
upregulation (lentiviral vectors or RNA injection), gene knockdown (RNAi), and
targeted mutagenesis tools (CRISPR-Cas9). The tools will further enable turtles
as model systems to illuminate gene regulation, the underpinnings of vertebrate
development, and the effects of structural variation on genome function by
enabling tests of genome-to-phenome mapping. Using fibroblasts and organoids
also solves the bottleneck from the seasonality of eggs for experimentation and
functional genomic approaches with transient transgenics mitigates some of the
challenge of studying long-lived organisms. Developing fibroblasts and organoids
as new systems for functional genomics will catalyze the study of climate change
effects in turtles and other reptiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.