* 2127825
* Collaborative Research: Concentration Polarization Induced Electrokinetic Flows around Dielectric Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Xiangchun Xuan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 243,775.00

Precise control flow in microfluidic systems has many applications in areas such
as clinical diagnosis, drug discovery, detection of chemical and biological
pathogen, immunoassays, rapid chemical analysis, biodefense, etc. Recent
experiments have discovered a new type of fluid flow around charged dielectric
surfaces under the action of electric fields. These flows are hypothesized to
result from an effect known as concentration polarization around the dielectric
surfaces. Such concentration polarization-induced flows can be readily
controlled by tuning the properties of the dielectric structure and the fluid.
This feature promises a versatile technique for microfluidic flow control,
including pumping and mixing, as well as manipulation of particles. The
principal aim of this project is to elucidate the mechanism of the concentration
polarization-induced flow around dielectric surfaces. This project will also
focus on broadening participation from women and underrepresented minority
groups and provide them with a bridge toward research-related careers. It will
provide education and hands-on training in microfluidics to undergraduate,
graduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a comprehensive understanding of the various control
parameters for the concentration polarization induced electrokinetic flow via a
combined experimental and theoretical approach. Specifically, the flow velocity
will be directly measured and compared with the theoretical prediction in terms
of the electric field frequency, salt concentration, surface zeta potential, and
dielectric permittivity. Furthermore, the broken symmetry of stationary
dielectric posts and hence the asymmetric concentration polarization induced
electrokinetic flow will be exploited for microfluidic pumping. Finally, the
concentration polarization induced electrokinetic flow around dielectric
particles will be demonstrated and exploited for particle manipulation. The
proposed experiments can quantitatively verify the proposed theoretical
predictions to deepen the fundamental understanding of this flow. All parameters
needed for the mathematical model can be obtained accurately from the
complementary experiments. Such a rigorous comparison between theory and
experiment features the unique contribution of this proposed research to the
field: it will not only provide crucial insights for revealing the underlying
physics, but also provide the guidance to exploit concentration polarization
induced electrokinetic flows for various microfluidic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.