* 2127063
* A Workshop to Strengthen Engagement of Community College Faculty and Disciplinary Societies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Mark Maier, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 39,865.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving participation of
community college faculty with professional disciplinary societies. Since
community colleges teach an estimated 44 percent of U.S. undergraduate students,
they play a critical role in the education of undergraduates and hold tremendous
potential to expand and diversify the field of emerging STEM professionals.
Recent reports have recommended that scientific societies do more to engage full
and part-time community college faculty. Through increased interaction, faculty
will have the opportunity to engage in discipline specific professional
development that represents the current state of affairs with respect to careers
in the field. A multi-day virtual workshop will promote strategies for
partnerships between community college instructors and their respective
professional disciplinary societies to foster more inclusive teaching practices,
enhance transfer and career opportunities for students, and promote a more
diverse workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in the virtual workshop
will include faculty, administrative, and professional society leaders. Together
they will explore how to support community college faculty in their teaching and
professional development through expanded involvement with professional
societies. The workshop conveners are the co-editors of a 2021 New Directions
for Community Colleges publication Partners in Progress: Community College
Faculty and Disciplinary Societies. The workshop will be hosted by the Science
Education Resource Center at Carleton College with expected attendance of 75-100
participants over the course of three days. The workshop website and the
associated report will be distributed to all participants, professional
disciplinary societies, and will be available to all in the professional and
academic scientific community. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.