* 2127540
* Saxophone: A glucose-sensitive type I Dpp/BMP receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Anthea Letsou, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 12/31/2024
* USD 812,067.00

Discoveries made in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster concerning how
signaling pathways are built and how those pathways are controlled by metabolic
signals provide a foundation for understanding developmental abnormalities that
arise due to both an environmental and genetic component. In particular, recent
breakthrough studies linked fruit fly fertility to its nutritive environment. In
conditions of low glucose, female fruit flies have 35% fewer progeny, with
reduced fertility resulting from a high rate of embryonic lethality. Molecular
studies revealed the Saxophone (Sax) receptor to be the metabolite-sensitive
point of a signaling pathway that is essential for proper embryonic development
(in this case the Bone Morphogenetic Protein or BMP signaling pathway). The
current study will employ genetic (mutant analysis), molecular (sequence
analysis), and biochemical (mass spectrometry) methods to probe: 1) the
mechanism of metabolite-mediated regulation of Sax, and 2) the pathwayâ€™s
evolutionary history. This multipronged and multidisciplinary study will also
provide an integrative platform for educating students from middle school to
graduate school in modern research methods. Inclusion of students from Salt Lake
Center for Science Education (SLCSE), a magnet school in Salt Lake City serving
a high proportion of economically disadvantaged (40%) and minority (48%)
students in grades 8-12, in the research program is expected to contribute to
improved science self-efficacy and facilitate retention of underserved student
populations in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Activation and inhibition of BMP (Bone
Morphogenetic Protein) signaling pathways at the right time and place is
essential for all animal life, with defects in signaling leading to devastating
abnormalities. Importantly, the breakthrough finding in Drosophila that
O-linked-N-acetylglucosaminylation (O-GlcNAcylation) regulates Dpp
(Decapentaplegic, a Drosophila BMP) signal transduction reveals new avenues for
studies of the relationship of the environment to emergent developmental and
physiological systems. In this project, the relationship of O-GlcNAcylation to
Dpp signaling during development is assessed in the genetically tractable fruit
fly model. Tests of the hypothesis that O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAc) regulates a nutrient-sensitive branch of the BMP/Dpp signaling family
are central to the proposed research, and three lines of investigation are
undertaken. First is a determination of how O-GlcNAc modifies the type 1 Dpp
receptor Saxophone (Sax). Second is a determination of how bioactivities of the
Thickveins (Tkv) and Sax type 1 receptors differ. Last is a determination of
whether the nutrient-sensitive Sax arm of the Drosophila Dpp receptor pathway is
conserved. The research proposed here will be used to introduce students from
middle school to graduate levels to model systems genetic research.
Establishment of long-term mentor-student relationships, especially with
students from SLCSE (Salt Lake Center for Science Education), a magnet school in
Salt Lake City serving a high proportion of economically disadvantaged (40%) and
minority (48%) students in grades 8-12, is expected to improve science
citizenship, trust, and scholarship, and facilitate student success in attaining
independent STEM cell careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.