* 2127466
* OCE-PRF- Deleterious mutational load in climate driven marine range expansions
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Remy Gatins, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Timothy Crone
* 10/31/2023
* USD 304,266.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species range expansions are
occurring across the globe at unprecedented rates as global warming continues to
accelerate, and even more so in marine species. In general, range expansions
occur by a series of colonization events in waves of a few dispersed individuals
at a time. This leads to the establishment of a new population that originates
from few individuals, resulting in a small non-random representation of the
genetic variation from the original population – a process known as founder
effect. As a result of founder effects, a deleterious mutation that arises at
the range edge disperses to a newly expanded habitat and can rapidly increase in
frequency within the new population (i.e., expansion load), leading to a loss in
fitness. This process is enhanced during range expansion due to the small
population sizes and low genetic variation present to select against the new
mutation. Fishing triggers similar evolutionary dynamics of population declines
and lower genetic diversity, similarly increasing expansion loads. Marine
species experience faster range expansions than terrestrial species due to their
high dispersal ability and are heavily impacted by fishing pressure, yet, the
interaction of both these processes have yet to be elucidated in a marine
species. Quantifying the load of deleterious mutations is critical for
conservation and management, because they can limit a population’s adaptability
and survival. With climate change expected to continue, more species will
experience range-shifts at unprecedented rates, making it imperative to document
current genetic diversity and understand the genetic basis of populations at the
forefront of their expanded range. This project will fund the early career
development of an NSF Ocean Sciences Postdoctoral Fellow and will support the
research, training, mentorship, and professional development of the fellow. To
enhance the broader impacts and utility of this work, the fellow will
disseminate results to the scientific community, the local fishing community and
fishery management officials (e.g., NOAA, Manomet, Atlantic States Marine
Fisheries Commission). Additionally, this project will increase participation of
traditionally underrepresented groups in science through: (1) undergraduate
student mentorship, (2) outreach seminars for students in local community
colleges, and (3) outreach with the local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rapid accumulation of genetic mutations – and in particular deleterious
mutations in edge populations – remains largely understudied during range
expansions. This study presents a unique opportunity to test the evolutionary
theory of the accumulation of deleterious mutations in a rapid climate-driven
range expansion and harvested marine fish, Black Sea Bass (Centropristis
striata). Using a combination of genome-wide data, fitness tests, and
quantitative modeling approaches, the following hypotheses will be tested: H1-
(Higher load at range edge) C. striata will show a greater expansion load in
coding regions at the range expansion front compared to the historical range
center and edge populations; H2- (Decreased fitness at range edge) range
expanding populations with a greater expansion load will show evidence of
decreased fitness-related traits; H3- (Load exacerbated by fishing) overfishing
will exacerbate the accumulation of deleterious mutational load in expanding
populations. If results support the hypotheses (i.e., higher loads and decreased
fitness are found at the expanding-front), as predicted by theory, they will
have widespread implications for marine conservation strategies in a rapidly
changing climate. However, if these hypotheses are rejected, the data will
challenge existing scientific assumptions, suggesting marine systems undergo
different processes. This integrative dataset will advance understanding of
climate-driven range expansions and the interactive effects of climate change
and fishing pressure on marine species, such as Black Sea
Bass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.