* 2127213
* SBIR Phase I:  A Non-thermal Plasma Reactor System for Destruction of Particulate Matter in High-Temperature Diesel Exhaust
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Vince Pilletteri, PARADIGM OF NY, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to eliminate more than 95% of particulate emissions
(i.e., carbon soot) from diesel exhaust while reducing fuel usage, carbon
dioxide production, and vehicle maintenance. Diesel particulate pollutants are
directly related to respiratory and heart disease. Curently this is addressed
with diesel particulate filters (DPF), devices that trap particulates and do not
destroy them. Furthermore DPFs are prone to clogging, resulting in wasted fuel
and costly engine maintenance. This project advances a non-thermal plasma (NTP)
solution to destroy diesel particulates by converting them into non-hazardous
compounds. NTP technology also has potential to be applied more broadly to power
plant smoke stacks and other sources of particulate emissions. The proposed
solution will develop a NTP device for retrofitting diesel fleets, such as
buses, waste haulers and utility trucks, improving engine performance and
reducing operating costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
researches novel materials and components for use in a non-thermal plasma (NTP)
reactor capable of withstanding the harsh conditions within the main exhaust
stream of a diesel engine (e.g., 650 C temperatures and high exhaust flow).
First generation NTP reactors capable of operating in low-temperature exhaust
(e.g., 150 C) have already been developed and sold for use in diesel exhaust gas
recirculation (EGR) systems; however, only about 30% to 50% of total diesel
exhaust flows through EGR. The objective of this research is to demonstrate
feasibility of NTP technology for use in the main exhaust stream to treat 100%
of particulate emissions. The research plan will accurately characterize the
working environment of the main diesel exhaust system and identify potential
designs and parts/materials, creating hybrid or completely new components.
Promising candidate components will be assembled into a prototype reactor and
evaluated on an accelerated schedule to measure performance representing 6
months of typical operation. The system will be optimized for thermal, chemical,
electrical, and mechanical performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.