* 2127220
* NNA Planning: Collaborative Research: A holistic approach to monitoring abrupt environmental shifts in the Kluane Lake region
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Emily Huff, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 223,796.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is
one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The Arctic research is needed to
inform the economy, security and resilience of the Nation, the larger region and
the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships from local to international
scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhances efforts
in formal and informal education, and integrates the co-production of knowledge
where appropriate. This award fulfills part of that aim by supporting planning
activities with clear potential to develop novel, leading edge research ideas
and approaches to address NNA goals. It integrates aspects of the natural
environment and social systems, and addresses important societal
challenges, builds significant educational opportunities, and engages
internationally and with local and Indigenous communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapidly changing Arctic conditions necessitate multi-
perspective approaches to creating new knowledge and engaging communities that
are most affected by these changes. Thus, planning and co-producing effective
Arctic research is needed, results of which will inform social and ecological
security on a national, and global scale. The Kluane Lake Region in the Yukon
Territory has recently experienced many abrupt environmental shifts. In 2016,
the retreating Kaskawulsh Glacier cut off flow from Lhù’ààn Mân (Kluane Lake),
effectively removing one of the largest water inputs to the lake. Additionally,
recent insect outbreaks have harmed nearby forests, and warming climate regimes
have shifted winter ice formation and snowpack development. While these
compounding environmental changes will have drastic impacts to the ecosystem for
decades to come, their impacts on the local communities will be more rapid.
While these ecological impacts have been observed by formal research
communities, it is also critical to work closely with local communities to
understand their perspectives on critical research questions and natural
resource concerns. Thus, the research team works with local communities like the
Kluane First Nations and Champagne and Aishihik First Nation, as co-producers of
research questions and design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convergence research
team is co-creating research questions, seeking questions that are relevant and
generalizable to the Kluane Lake region specifically, the Yukon generally, and
broadly at a pan-Arctic scale. Research questions are being identified by
incorporating the experiences and local knowledge of communities. Specifically,
planning activities center around a community liaison employed by the project
with credibility in the communities around the lake, with two kick-off scoping
trips (research team), and then a community-driven workshop to identify gaps in
current understanding and existing methodologies to develop: 1) a citizen-
science monitoring program to generate reliable and consistent data for climate
and lake conditions; 2) compilations of datasets, databases, and tools for
accessibility and integration into educational offerings; and 3) knowledge of
community acceptance and perspectives on new technologies and data tools.
Researchers are employing a mixed methods triangulation approach during the co-
production process, via assembly of existing quantitative data, key informant
interviews, and structured and unstructured qualitative data collection during
the workshop. Researchers will then expand the team to include gaps in
expertise, based on final co-produced research questions. Finally, the research
team is involving underrepresented students from multiple institutions in the
planning process, so they may see how a hybrid model of knowledge co-production
(traditional and westernized view of knowledge) takes
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.