* 2127881
* Collaborative Research : SWIFT : Effective Spectrum Utilization for Coexisting Active, Semi-passive, and Passive IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zicheng Chi, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 365,999.00

The use of Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices in many applications has been
increasing exponentially. By connecting billions of sensors, actuators, and
various smart objects to the Internet, IoT will produce an unprecedented amount
of information for making more informed decisions in numerous public and private
sectors. To support various applications, IoT devices are connected via
different types of communication networks (e.g., LTE, WiFi, ZigBee, etc.). To
support future IoT devices, backscatter technology provides a promising
direction with i) high spectrum efficiency by reusing existing RF signal; ii)
energy-efficient communication; and iii) low cost. In this project, we propose
to create a frequency agnostic backscatter system that can operate across
different protocols and frequency bands. The proposed research, if successful,
can be a catalyst for developing and deploying new applications, thus having a
potentially enormous impact on the U.S. economy by fostering job growth related
to IoT-based applications. The proposed research will also enrich the scientific
knowledge of wireless networking and mobile computing. The PIs have been
strongly committed to broadening participation in computing and have plans to
raise interest in technology among K-12 students and other underrepresented
minority groups. In addition, the PIs aim to enhance undergraduate research
experience through senior design projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to design a frequency agnostic backscatter system that can operate
across different wireless protocols (e.g., LTE, WiFi, ZigBee) and frequency
bands and has the potential to be deployed at different locations to support
various applications. To achieve this goal, we propose a holistic solution to
address the challenges of spectrum utilization and coexistence among active,
semi-passive, and passive IoT devices across different frequency bands.
Specifically, we seek to investigate novel hardware designs that can improve the
overall spectrum utilization in heterogeneous networks that work in different
frequency bands. Our proposed research can effectively address the challenges of
spectrum utilization in the IoT networks with coexisting active and passive
radios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.