* 2127514
* Collaborative Research: Building consensus around the quantification and interpretation of Symbiodiniaceae diversity
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Adrienne Simoes Correa, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 07/31/2023
* USD 35,394.00

Single-celled microorganisms are highly diverse and play various roles in the
function of natural ecosystems, but it is challenging to recognize how genetic,
morphological, and physiological diversity relate to each other in microbial
groups. In an exemplary case, micro-algae in the family Symbiodiniaceae comprise
many species that can only be distinguished using molecular data. Symbiodinaceae
function as symbionts of various marine invertebrates, but are perhaps best
known as the key to coral reef ecosystem health and persistence. The team is
hosting a virtual workshop in August 2021 to identify and build further
consensus among experts regarding the assessment of Symbiodiniaceae diversity.
By formalizing consensus approaches and disseminating them broadly, this
workshop is creating a more collaborative and welcoming research community and
ensuring that all current researchers, as well as those entering the field, feel
confident applying for grants, conducting research, and publishing papers that
incorporate work on Symbiodiniaceae diversity. This workshop is defining
additional forward-thinking research priorities that anticipate methodological
advances over the next 5-10 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resolving the molecular
diversity of microorganisms is a major technical challenge, particularly for
dinoflagellates in the family Symbiodiniaceae. These micro-algal endosymbionts
that associate with corals and other marine invertebrates feature massive
genomes, high repeat content, and other unique aspects that have hindered their
molecular characterization. As sequencing technologies have advanced, so too has
our understanding of Symbiodiniaceae diversity, which has grown from the
presumption of one widespread species in the 1960s to now encompass fifteen
divergent genera and likely hundreds of species. This process of discovery has
been fraught with controversy, as the most useful phylogenetic marker–the
hyperdiverse internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) region–is frustratingly
difficult to interpret in a consistent manner. The ribosomal array is multicopy,
it evolves at different rates in different lineages, and it is subject to
concerted evolution, all of which complicate phylogenetic reconstructions.
Moreover, sampled coral tissues contain populations of symbiont cells that can
potentially be from multiple Symbiodiniaceae taxa, complicating efforts to
characterize partner specificity. Early debates focused on the extent to which
unique ITS2 sequences indicated the presence of multiple symbiont species or
simply multiple intraspecific variants. This central conflict has led to
different schools of thought about how flexible coral-algal associations can be,
and how they might respond to ongoing climate change. Next-generation sequencing
has provided more data, but the same foundational interpretive issues remain.
This team is gathering pioneering Symbiodiniaceae experts from around the world
(ranging from seasoned veterans to newly-minted PhDs) who all collectively agree
that a consensus interpretive framework can and must be identified and advanced
in order to move the field forward. The participants are generating a ‘consensus
road map’ leading to two workshop products: 1. an NSF white paper; and 2. an
open-access, peer-reviewed manuscript. Through pre-workshop surveys, four
workshop sessions, post-workshop collaboration, and publication, the team is
summarizing current practices and recommending key methods for identifying and
analyzing Symbiodiniaceae genetic diversity across three ‘umbrellas’: 1.
communities, 2. populations, and 3. strains. The written products from this
workshop are being distributed to the wider reef and conservation community by
leveraging a separate mini-workshop previously developed for the 2022
International Coral Reef Symposium. Workshop participants are also highlighting
new technologies and research priorities for the next decade that should help
fill some of the remaining knowledge gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.