* 2127379
* A multisensory-motor integration circuit; from synapse to behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Andrew Dacks, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Natural behaviors are a coordinated symphony of motor acts which cause self-
induced sensory activation. Sensory neurons only signal presence and magnitude
of a sensory cue; they cannot disambiguate self-induced from externally-induced
inputs (e.g. hearing your voice versus someone else’s voice). Nevertheless,
animals readily differentiate between these sources of sensory signals; this is
fundamental to appropriate decision making and adaptive behavioral outcomes.
Nervous systems differentiate sources of sensory signals via corollary discharge
circuits, which are a broad class of neural circuits that convey a “corollary”
of motor commands to sensory neural systems, modifying sensory processing.
However, little is known about the cellular and molecular mechanisms that make
corollary discharge circuits work. The objective of this project is to
characterize the structure and function of a pair of related corollary discharge
circuits, comprised of two pairs of identified histaminergic neurons.
Establishing a mechanistic framework by which corollary discharges modify
sensory function to optimize sensory-motor performance will address long
standing gaps in knowledge of how the nervous system integrates sensory-motor
information. The research will contribute to the broader study of goal-directed
and sensory-guided decision making in animals, robotics, unmanned vehicles, and
other engineering applications where movement can interact with sensor function.
Additionally, this proposal contains broader societal impacts, STEM training for
undergraduate and graduate students in West Virginia, and the development of
curriculum for next generation neuroanatomical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to resolve the cellular and
synaptic mechanisms that drive the activity of corollary discharge circuits and
the consequences of this activity for sensory-motor performance. To achieve
this, experiments will be conducted to: 1) identify upstream and downstream
partners of 2 pairs of histaminergic neurons using serial section electron
microscopy-based volumetric reconstructions of fly brain and ventral nerve cord
coupled with molecular genetic techniques; 2) determine how up- and downstream
partners interact with the histamine neurons using optogenetics and Ca2+ imaging
during ongoing behavior in highly restricted driver lines, and 3) determine the
role of the histamine neurons in shaping sensory-motor performance in behavioral
assays. The working hypothesis is that the histamine neurons are primarily
activated by descending motor command neurons resulting in downstream
suppression of distinct but related sensory networks in the brain. The rationale
for this project is that by precisely dissecting interactions between the
histamine neurons and their synaptic partners in specific behavioral contexts, a
better understand of how corollary discharge circuits integrate and distribute
information to fine-tune multisensory-motor interactions during complex natural
behaviors. By establishing a mechanistic framework by which corollary discharges
modify sensory function to optimize sensory-motor performance, this project
provides knowledge of how nervous systems integrate sensory-motor information
and contributes to the study of goal-directed and sensory-guided decision
making, that can be applied in both biological and engineered applications. This
this project will expose students to STEM training and provide new courseware
for the emerging field of connectomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.