* 2127733
* Collaborative Research: Sustaining The Utqiaġvik Aerosol Record of Decades (STUARD)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Timothy Bates, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2027
* USD 116,810.00

The Arctic is warming faster than any other place on Earth, with sea ice
declining rapidly and sources of sea spray and aerosol emissions derived from
living organisms (biogenic) are consequently changing. Utqiagvik is at the
forefront of this change, abutting one of the largest areas of sea ice loss.
These atmospheric aerosols could have far-reaching impacts to both the climate,
environment and resident community. Because this change has happened largely in
the last decade, now is an important time to document changes and continue a
data record that will allow for a characterization of the New Arctic. The
longest and most complete record of airborne fine particles (or “aerosol”) and
their properties in the American Arctic is that of Utqiagvik, where NSF, the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Department of Energy
have contributed to making this unique location serve as a regional record of
changes in atmospheric aerosol properties. That record has served as the basis
for hundreds of publications on questions from atmospheric chemistry to climate
science to ecology and biodiversity conservation, which clearly demonstrate the
broad, cross-disciplinary scientific value of these
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will extend the baseline
measurements of this Arctic aerosol record, including a continuation of the
15-year record of submicron inorganic components, re-instituting the 2-year
record of organic components collected a decade ago, enhancing the chemical
analysis with sulfur isotopes to improve interpretation of emission sources,
continuing particle number size distribution measurements, and re-starting cloud
condensation nuclei measurements. Re-starting sampling for organic components
provides a comparison to that of 2008-2010, documenting the myriad of source
changes in the last decade. Observations for continuing size distribution
records and re-starting cloud condensation nuclei measurements provides the link
from the chemical record of sources to the physical impacts on climate and the
environment. This project will also allow analysis and archiving of the last 7
years of inorganic filters that were collected and the next 5 years, extending
the inorganic aerosol composition record to almost 30 years. In addition to
making the data widely available for a breadth of research, a journalist will
publish articles in local news media to broaden the awareness of Utqiagvik’s
historic role as an Arctic observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.