* 2127096
* SBIR Phase I:  A highly-scalable, rapid, in-season approach to tune a nitrogen model for accurate prediction of a corn crop’s remaining nitrogen need
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Kent Cavender-Bares, ROWBOT SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a novel artificial
intelligence technology that enables U.S. corn farmers to optimize nitrogen
fertilizer applications based on field characteristics, rainfall and growing
conditions. More efficient use of nitrogen fertilizer will reduce the carbon
footprint of U.S. agriculture because more than 10% of the energy consumed in
the U.S. agricultural sector goes toward the production of nitrogen fertilizer
for corn. Because nitrogen fertilizer is a critical driver of both input costs
and yield, this technology will improve the profitability of U.S. farmers by
reducing input costs and maximizing corn yields. This project may enable corn
production that creates less nitrogen fertilizer pollution, which threatens
human health, degrades aquatic ecosystems and emits greenhouse gases that
contribute to climate change. A key social element of this project is a teaching
module for middle-school science students that will blend content on soil
science, agronomy, and crop management with the challenges faced by U.S. corn
farmers to follow best management practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to demonstrate the
technical feasibility of using machine learning to evaluate the amount of
yellowness on the lowest corn leaves visible in images taken from low-cost
cameras mounted on ground robots. Characteristic yellowness on corn leaves is a
strong indicator of stress caused by insufficient nitrogen, a key nutrient. A
prototype neural network model will be iteratively improved, in part by
dramatically increasing the available training imagery over the course of this
Phase I project. Imagery will be collected on field trials set up across several
Mid-Western states. Preliminary data suggest that the extent of characteristic
yellowness is an indicator of accumulated nitrogen stress that is observable
only under the canopy and not via airborne sensors. A commercially available
nitrogen model will be used to estimate accumulated nitrogen stress across small
plots created by manipulating the amount of added nitrogen fertilizer when corn
is about 1-2 feet high. Tuning will occur by adjusting key model parameters
through simulation until the differences are minimized between observed and
modeled accumulated nitrogen stress across a field’s small plots. Parallel
software development will improve prototype codes running simulations of a
leading nitrogen model, enabling rapid model tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.