* 2127354
* Collaborative Research: NNA Research: Capturing Indigenous Knowledge to Co-Design more Effective Operations, Maintenance and Management of Water Infrastructure
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Mario Berges, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 341,627.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Resilient Infrastructure
and Education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge for rural water infrastructure
systems in the Arctic is how to operate, manage, and maintain them successfully.
Operations, maintenance, and management (OMM) that ensures continuous water
access is difficult in these remote areas for many reasons, such as limited
access to technical resources and to training across a broad range of skills.
Building local workforce capacity and training has been recommended to address
this OMM gap. However, underlying these recommendations is the assumption that
the knowledge used to build the water systems matches the local knowledge of
people operating and interacting with said systems. In rural Alaska, this is not
always the case. This project seeks to bridge this gap between expected
engineering know-how and the actual know-how of the local community. The
approach supports local operators through developing water system OMM training
material that is better grounded in local knowledge. At a systems scale, the
project also develops educational material describing rural Alaskan water
systems, aimed at educating the non-technical user community more broadly.
Through bridging the connection between engineering and social context, this
project empowers and broadens participation of the current and potential future
engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To make inroads into this
challenge, this interdisciplinary research team engages in a three-phased
approach that integrates principles from civil and environmental engineering,
sociology, anthropology, and human computer interaction. Phase I characterizes
the knowledge landscape between socio-cultural-technical knowledge domains. This
is accomplished using ethnographic interviews that seek to understand daily
practices that pertain to water, as well as how relevant local natural resources
are classified and understood. This phase also uses artificial intelligence
approaches, such as natural language processing, to assess the engineering
knowledge expected for OMM as derived from existing water operator training and
OMM support material. Phase II consists of mixed-modality focus groups to
understand end-user valuations and expectations of water services and the
development of cross-cultural information resources by mapping the mixed
knowledge structures together to produce accessible OMM resources for operators.
Phase III evaluates the knowledge transfer across domains of understanding with
the hopes of developing protocols and materials that can scale across water
systems and to other remote communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.