* 2127361
* Fundamental Studies of Process-Material Interactions in Advanced Adhesion-Driven Manufacturing with Automated Placement of Uncured Thermoset Tows as Model Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Michael Sutton, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2025
* USD 651,725.00

Automated tow placement (ATP) is an adhesion-driven manufacturing process for
polymer matrix composites in which a bundle of fibers impregnated with
resin—known as a tow—is placed onto a tool or onto a previously-placed tow. The
technique is widely used in the aerospace industry and is also gaining interest
in automotive, military, and energy sectors due to its potential for improved
productivity and reduced material waste. The ATP process requires application of
temperature and pressure, and the process conditions can result in defects
(wrinkles, folds) that are known to be detrimental to composite bond strength
and can lead to premature component failure. This award supports fundamental
research into defect formation that will enable better process simulations,
which will enhance composite part quality by providing guidelines for the ATP
manufacturing process. Knowledge developed regarding process-material
interactions can significantly decrease manufacturing defects, which should
reduce manufacturing cycle time, as well as expensive and time-intensive manual
inspection that increases manufacturing cost. Improved understanding of
fundamental defect deformation mechanisms will enable development of emerging
additive manufacturing processes for fiber composites and ATP processing for
complex geometries with curved paths in lightweight composite structures. A
specific effort will be made to recruit graduate and undergraduate students from
under-represented groups through the Society for Women Engineers at the
University of South Carolina. In addition, a module on ATP manufacturing and
process simulations developed in this research will be incorporated into the
Composites Manufacturing course for undergraduate and graduate students to
provide knowledge on the governing process-structure-property links for design
and manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved understanding of the
fundamentals of adhesion-driven manufacturing can improve part quality while
reducing the overall cost associated with re-work or remanufacturing of
defective components. This research aims to fill knowledge gaps by investigating
the fundamentals of how in-situ bond strength-toughness develops and how defects
form during contact and adhesion of uncured, polymer-rich materials. In
particular, the time-temperature superposition principle at characteristic
millisecond time scales will be applied using parameters gleaned from novel
cohesion experiments and high speed stereo digital image correlation. In
parallel, a multi-physics process model will be developed to study how process
parameters affect defect formation, with data-driven machine learning techniques
employed to establish defect-free process parameter windows and provide guidance
for enhanced manufacturing processes. The new fundamental knowledge will enable
the establishment of processing parameter windows for defect-free tow placement
and will serve as a guide to enhance composite part
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.