* 2127543
* SHF: Small: High Performance Graph Pattern Mining System and Architecture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Xuehai Qian, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This research project aims to develop high-performance systems and architectures
for graph pattern mining, which the key component for various applications,
including mining biochemical structures, finding biological conserved
subnetworks, finding functional modules, program control-flow analysis,
intrusion network analysis, mining communication graphs, social-network
analysis, anomaly detection, and mining XML structures. High-performance graph
pattern mining enables fundamental scientific research advance. The research is
motivated by the need for scaling to large graphs and patterns; the significant
gap between the fastest algorithm and general graph pattern mining systems; and
the inefficiency in current computer architectures when executing such
workloads. The project vertically advances the field by seeking synergies
between algorithm, system, architecture, and hardware implementations. The
project provides research opportunities to female, minority and undergraduate
students to enhance the broader participation of computer science education. In
particular, the project involves non-CS major students, introducing them to
graph-analytics techniques to solve problems in science and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research takes a top-down approach, starting from
algorithms and developing efficient graph pattern mining systems and
architectures. Based on pattern-decomposition algorithms, it develops efficient
and general system mechanisms and compiler optimizations with an accurate cost
model. To support distributed graph pattern mining with partitioned graphs, it
proposes the idea of breaking down pattern-enumeration algorithms to small tasks
with a key abstraction, extendable embedding, and builds an efficient execution
model to overlap the communication and computation. At the architecture level,
the research proposes novel instruction-set extensions and architectural
components to support the stream and intersection operations. The proposed
techniques will be implemented in two hardware prototypes: (1) a RISC-V
processor with an instruction-set extension for stream and intersection
operations; and (2) a distributed FPGA accelerator for graph pattern mining with
extendable embedding as the primitive. The research outcomes will be published
in top system and architecture conferences. The project will deliver several
open-source graph pattern mining systems, architecture simulators and hardware
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.