* 2127517
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BSF: Somatic cell adaptation towards immortalization in a marine tunicate
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Alison Gardell, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2025
* USD 499,924.00

The research investigates how cells from the marine colonial tunicate Botryllus
schlosseri evolve when critical molecular networks that control cell growth and
programmed cell death are disturbed by either stress or genetic manipulation or
a combination thereof. The main question addressed is: What molecular mechanisms
constrain cell immortalization? Immortal cell lines of marine invertebrates have
great potential as “bioreactors” for producing pharmaceutical compounds with
health benefits, nutraceuticals, anticancer drugs, and other biologically active
chemicals. The tunicate B. schlosseri is widely distributed throughout the world
and used as a common sentinel species for assessing marine pollution and other
anthropogenic impacts on coastal ecosystems. The research contributes molecular
tools that increases the utility of this tunicate for bioindication.
Opportunities for cross-disciplinary training, curricular, and professional
development are provided to students and researchers at all career stages with
emphasis on underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
hypothesis addressed in this project is that specific evolutionary constraints
prevent somatic cell immortalization in marine invertebrates and that cell
immortalization is facilitated by stress-induced evolution and/or genetic
manipulation that removes these constraints. The project investigates the
conditions and gene regulatory networks that promote cell proliferation and
counteract cellular senescence. Primary cultures of B. schlosseri hemocytes and
epithelial monolayers are exposed to (1) environmental factors (media
supplements and attachment substrates), (2) stress-induced evolution, (3)
synthetic manipulation of pro- and anti-proliferative genes, and (4) cell fusion
technology to increase heritable variation in proteome networks and cellular
phenotypes that natural selection can act on. The goal is to a) understand the
sequence of molecular events that promotes cell proliferation and inhibits
senescence in vitro and b) to generate the first cell line for any marine
invertebrate. This project utilizes systems biology approaches (transcriptomics,
proteomics) to characterize how relevant cellular phenotypes (proliferation,
senescence) are controlled by gene regulatory networks. Complex datasets are
analyzed using network modeling and topological data analysis approaches.
Moreover, the extent of mRNA: protein coregulation during transition of cells
from in vivo to in vitro contexts provides insight into the degree of non-
linearity between mRNA and protein levels of regulation in marine invertebrate
cells exposed to environmental stress and synthetic genetic
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.