* 2127762
* Novel mm-Wave Reflectarray Antennas for Next Generation Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Stavros Georgakopoulos, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 365,000.00

This project will develop novel dual-polarized, ultra-wideband and beamstearable
high-gain reflectarray antennas for next generation wireless communication
systems. The vision of this work will be achieved by developing fundamentally
new approaches that will potentially transform antenna designs for mm-wave 5G
and 6G communication systems. The focus of this research is on the study,
design, and development of non-uniform reflectarray antennas at mm-Wave
frequencies that have high performance in terms of bandwidth as well as beam
steering ability. This research has the potential to impact disruptive
technologies, such as, advanced robotics and human-machine interfaces, big-data
apps, communication, and sensing enabling applications like tele-presence
services, telemedicine, tele-surgery, online immersive education, tele-work,
remotely-controlled robotics, environmental sensing, and space exploration. The
educational efforts of this work are focused on broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM through curriculum development, REU programs and
outreach efforts to support critical societal needs. Broad dissemination to
enhance scientific and technological understanding will be accomplished by
presentations to conferences, K-12 students, and the industrial
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the synthesis,
electromagnetic modeling, design, fabrication, and characterization of novel
reflectarray antennas with significantly improved performance in terms of
bandwidth, polarization diversity and beamsteering. Specifically, (a) non-
uniform shape wideband reflectarrays offering 50% fractional bandwidth, (b)
ultra-wideband reflectarrays with three-dimensional unit-cells offering 100%
fractional bandwidth, and (c) wideband reflectarrays with beamsteering
capabilities based on magneto-electric dipole unit-cells that are integrated
with tightly-coupled dipoles or super-shaped patches will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.