* 2127797
* I-Corps: Probabilistic artificial intelligence (AI)-based software for proactive data quality assessment
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Tahir Ekin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a solution that identifies and corrects data data entry errors.
The accelerating adoption of e-commerce and digital systems has increased the
use of digital data entry systems. This may create challenges for providing
equitable service to people with low income and education levels. The proposed
data quality software finds and eliminates user errors at the point of data
entry, providing proactive, secure and convenient support for users while
filling in forms. The solution may also provide accurate data for companies.
Compared to existing data quality solutions, this product eliminates the need
for time-consuming and costly post data collection cleaning. The solution may
benefit data-centric domains such as health care, finance, e-commerce, and tax
and government benefit application systems where data errors can be costly. The
goal is to provide users with proactive help that may reduce incorrect
processing and potential issues with timely access. This proposed real-time,
error alert and correction technology may benefit data entry specialists and
consumers through corrective capability, while the companies that process the
digital documents and online forms/web submissions may benefit from the cost-
savings in terms of both post-submission corrective costs and potential damage
control costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an artificial intelligence-driven analytical process and smart
software that helps users submit mistake-free information at the time of data
entry. The algorithms analyze the data to reveal unusual entries through the use
of basic format checks, data matching, and probabilistic machine learning
algorithms. Context based and personalized probabilistic analytical methods
enable both variable and data accuracy assessment. The Bayesian nature of these
algorithms allows incorporation of expert opinion and user feedback. The
proposed software provides an interface that uses the analytical output and
works with the user to verify their data entry before submission. This interface
helps users fix mistakes at the time of data entry. Use of probabilistic
algorithms allow the use of relative occurrence weights instead of computing
over the whole data base. This makes the process faster with diminished privacy
and security concerns over raw data transfer. The proposed technology involves
multiple research areas including Bayesian statistics, data analytics, and
software development. This project aims to verify a secure, trustworthy, and
validated approach based on a proactive data quality paradigm and a suite of
algorithms including probabilistic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.