* 2127229
* Collaborative Research: Do subduction‐complex metamorphic rocks record the thermal evolution of a subduction zone or periods of anomalous tectonic activity? Baja California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Paul Kapp, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 08/31/2025
* USD 305,251.00

A fundamental aspect of Earth’s plate tectonic system—the movement of Earth’s
rigid outer plates—is subduction: the sinking of oceanic crust down into Earth’s
interior along large faults. The largest earthquakes, most volcanic hazards, the
locations of mountain belts, many critical metal deposits, the existence of the
continents themselves, and the balancing of Earth’s climate over geological time
are all ultimately controlled by the process of subduction. Understanding
subduction is thus key to understanding many aspects of Earth science. However,
studying subduction is difficult because it is happening deep below Earth’s
surface and occurs over millions of years. The purpose of this study is to
examine rocks that have been brought back to Earth’s surface from an ancient
subduction zone; these rocks and the minerals they contain provide a “window”
into the chemical and physical processes that occur in subduction zones.
Detailed observations of these rocks will be used to test competing hypotheses
about how subduction zones operate. In addition to this scientific goal, this
project contributes to important societal outcomes by supporting the research
program of an early career researcher and by providing educational
opportunities, professional development, and mentoring for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and post-graduate researchers in an important STEM
discipline through classroom study, fieldwork, laboratory work, and professional
conferences. Finally, this project fosters international collaboration and
strengthens ties between the academic systems of the USA and
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this project is to quantify
the pressure–temperature–time histories of amphibolite, blueschist, and eclogite
from Mesozoic subduction complexes in the Baja California peninsula, Mexico, by
using state-of-the-art thermobarometry and petrochronology. This location in
Mexico was chosen for the research due to the outstanding exposure of these
important rock types and the unique geological history that brought deeply
subducted rocks back to the Earth’s surface for direct investigation. These
metamorphic rocks occur as blocks in mélange and coherent units on the Vizcaíno
peninsula (structurally beneath the c. 220 Ma Vizcaíno ophiolite) and Cedros
Island (structurally beneath the c. 170 Ma Cedros ophiolite). The project will
evaluate: (1) the evolution of subduction zone thermal structure with time; and
(2) the history, processes, and potential tectonic linkages among metamorphism,
exhumation, and ophiolite generation. Project results will be used to test
proposed models for subduction initiation and subsequent evolution as well as
the relationships between exhumation of metamorphic rocks from subduction zones
and regional tectonic changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.