* 2127527
* US-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Design of Genetically Engineered Tensile Load-Bearing Soft Tissues Inspired by Embryonic Tendon Development
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Spencer Szczesny, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2026
* USD 489,218.00

This award will support research with the ultimate aim of creating tendons and
ligaments in a laboratory. Currently, the treatment of many tendon and ligament
injuries requires replacing the torn tissue with a tendon from another part of
the patient’s body or from a deceased person. Since both of these options cause
complications, the ideal solution would be to use an artificial tendon to
replace the torn tissue. Unfortunately, no material or biological tissue has
been able to reproduce the function of human tendons or has been successfully
used to treat patients. This project will provide the fundamental knowledge
necessary to produce strong tissues in a laboratory that are capable of
replacing tendons and ligaments. This will be accomplished by studying how
tendons form naturally in animal embryos. Additionally, the existing techniques
for creating artificial tendons will be enhanced by encouraging lab-grown
tissues to follow a developmental pathway that is more similar to normal tendon
development. These results will eventually improve human health and improve the
US economy by reducing healthcare costs resulting from poor treatment outcomes.
Additionally, the international collaboration supported by this US-Ireland
R&amp;D Partnership grant will enhance training for students from
underrepresented populations and enable broad public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of multiscale mechanical testing,
ultrastructural imaging, and computational modeling, this study will establish
the essential structural and mechanical benchmarks that must be met for tissue
engineered constructs to replicate tendon function. Genetic manipulation of
embryonic chicken tendons will identify the mechanotransduction mechanisms that
trigger the structural changes observed in late tendon development. Furthermore,
this project will develop a novel nanoparticle-hydrogel gene delivery system for
manipulating tendon construct maturation during in vitro culture and in vivo
implantation. Finally, these techniques will culminate in an investigation of
whether exogenous initiation of the mechanotransduction mechanisms that drive
embryonic tendon development will produce a tissue-engineered biomaterial that
can meet the established structural and mechanical benchmarks. Together, this
work will provide a breakthrough in the production of robust tensile load-
bearing soft tissues by applying knowledge of tendon developmental biology to
tissue engineering. Additionally, the novel approach to temporally manipulate
gene activity within specific tissues of developing chick embryos will broadly
advance the field of developmental biology. The ability to manipulate molecular
signaling pathways in tendon constructs will also provide a model system to
study the key elements driving tendon development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.