* 2127632
* Collaborative Research: Cloud Radiative Impact on the Surface Energy Budget of the Antarctic Peninsula
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Penny Rowe, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 211,208.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Western Antarctic Peninsula
(WAP; AP) has been warming faster than the global average since the mid-1960s.
Concurrent mobilization of ice shelves has been associated with glacial
discharge into the ocean, with important implications for global sea level rise.
This work will enhance our understanding of the contributions of clouds, water
vapor and surface radiation to warming over the WAP. Processes governing phase
partitioning and amounts of supercooled liquid water are crucial for
understanding surface melt, and will be explored. In addition, the role of
clouds and moisture during foehn and atmospheric river (AR) events, will be
characterized. Clouds and atmospheric water vapor have strong radiative signals
that vary seasonally and with cloud properties. This work will lead to a better
understanding of how clouds are impacting surface melt on the AP in the changing
climate. In addition, the proposed work will include several undergraduate
research projects. Finally, broader impacts include public outreach through
participation in GeoWeek at Ohio State University and Polar Science Weekend at
the Pacific Science Center in Seattle, WA. It is crucial to human welfare to
understand mechanisms responsible for the rapid pace of Antarctic ice loss. This
work will lead to a better understanding of how clouds are impacting surface
melt on the WAP in the changing climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will use surface- and satellite-based measurements to characterize
clouds and humidity. The project maximizes value by using a variety of previous,
ongoing, and planned measurements made by an international group of
collaborators, along with measurements and model (AMPS, Polar-WRF) results.
These will be used to quantify clouds, water vapor, and radiation and their
effects on the surface energy balance at three strategically-located stations:
Rothera (upwind of the WAP), Marambio (downwind of the WAP) and Escudero (north
of the WAP), in order to provide a detailed characterization of cloud radiative
and precipitation-formation properties and their role in surface warming and
melt events. These mechanisms lead to the following hypotheses: 1) Through their
effect on the surface energy balance, clouds play an important role in surface
warming on the AP; this role is seasonally varying and sensitive to cloud
thermodynamic phase, 2) Radiative heating during foehn events is an important
contributor to warming at the northern AP, and 3) The radiative effects of
clouds and water vapor have strong influences on heating before and during AR
events, with significant differences on the two sides of the
WAP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.