* 2127044
* SBIR Phase I:  Field Demonstration of Ship Hull Inspection with a Fleet of Unmanned Underwater Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Alexandre Immas, BERKELEY MARINE ROBOTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to protect marine ecosystems against invasive species and to help the
shipping industry reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Marine invasive
species are considered to be one of the greatest threats to marine and coastal
biodiversity worldwide, second only to habitat loss. Keeping the oceans healthy
is essential to preserve the employment, development and growth of the ocean
economy. This is particularly relevant in the United States, where the marine
economy contributes nearly $400 billion to the nation's gross domestic product
with 40 percent of the population living in coastal counties. One of the main
vectors for the transfer of marine invasive species is the biofouling on ship
hulls, described as the undesirable accumulation of microorganisms, plants,
algae and animals on the submerged hull. A second impact of biofouling is to
increase the drag forces on the hull, resulting in an increase of the ship's
fuel consumption and GHG emissions in the atmosphere. This project advances a
system for in-water inspection of ship hulls with a fleet of Unmanned Underwater
Vehicles (UUVs). The automated underwater inspection system will provide
maritime stakeholders with biofouling data to optimize hull cleaning schedules,
validate compliance with regulations, thereby improving ship performance and
ecosystem health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a system
leveraging a UUV fleet that forms an arch operated from a vessel (e.g. power
boat, crew vessel) located at one of the arch's extremities. It can inspect
hulls as ships enter or leave ports without having to be immobilized. The UUVs
exchange data wirelessly between each other and with the surface, enabling
autonomous coordinate inspections without tethers but under human supervision.
An advanced positioning system and control scheme will be implemented to enable
accurate localization without GPS and precise operation in the vicinity of the
hull. This project will conduct in-water experiments to validate the performance
of the positioning system and control scheme. The outcome of the project will be
a proof-of-concept where a fleet of two UUVs inspect the hull of a vessel,
demonstrating that the inspection system is fast, practical and
repeatable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.