* 2127285
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Socio-ecological considerations for sustainAble Fuel treatments to Reduce wildfire Risk (SAFRR)
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Hannah Brenkert-Smith, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 11/30/2025
* USD 478,980.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is
one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The Arctic research is needed to
inform the economy, security and resilience of the Nation, the larger region and
the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships from local to international
scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhances efforts
in formal and informal education, and integrates the co-production of knowledge
where appropriate. This award fulfills part of that aim by addressing
interactions among social systems, the natural environment, and the built
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Education,
Forecasting, Global Impact, and Resilient
Infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boreal forest, a belt surrounding the
Arctic south of the tundra, represents about 30% of the global forest area and
provides critical food, shelter, and other needs to local and Indigenous peoples
and wildlife, as well as key economic opportunities at the local, regional, and
global scale. Wildfires occur naturally in boreal forests, but they have become
increasingly dangerous as the climate warms. The area of boreal forest burned
each year in Alaska and western Canada has doubled since the 1990s, and the
region has experienced some of the most deadly and costly wildfire events in the
last decade. Vegetation management methods such as thinning and prescribed
burns, also known as fuel treatment, are among the main tools employed by land
management agencies, landowners, and communities to reduce risk to residents and
infrastructure. Effective fuel treatments require significant planning,
implementation costs, and maintenance. Fuel treatments can also be
controversial; they may face resistance and affect attitudes and behaviors of
nearby residents. In this project, researchers are working with agency personnel
managing forest lands and wildfire to create an integrated framework to evaluate
fuel treatments; assess their short-term and long-term ecological effects and
influence on wildfire behavior; examine how likely they are to be acceptable to
residents; and evaluate the ability of alternative fuel treatment designs to
achieve social, ecological, and public safety goals. The project is providing
insights into how vegetation responds to different treatments, installation and
maintenance costs, and acceptability to residents of different types of
treatments in boreal forests, and is improving how land managers, landowners,
and communities can use fuel treatments to reduce wildfire
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is working with public land and
wildfire practitioners; Indigenous organizations; and communities on the Kenai
Peninsula, in Interior Alaska, and Anchorage, and Whitehorse, Yukon Territory,
to co-produce an integrated assessment of fuel treatments. The team is following
a co-produced approach to an integrated social-ecological evaluation framework.
The project includes workshops and interviews with land managers and wildfire
practitioners to identify preferred strategies, barriers to implementation, and
key policies regarding fuel treatments and promote the exchange of knowledge and
collaboration. Team members are providing new estimates on rates of fuel
recovery across different types of fuel treatments and ecoregions to better
understand the short and long-term ecological effects of fuel treatments and
maintenance requirements. They are also testing whether vegetation successional
trajectories can be directed towards creating longer-lasting treatments with
lower maintenance costs, and evaluating the ability of alternative designs to
achieve identified social, ecological, economic, and public safety goals.
Surveys and interviews are being used to evaluate public acceptance of fuel
treatments in Alaska and increase the understanding of how preferences and
social acceptability of fuel treatments affect homeowner risk mitigation
behavior in subarctic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.