* 2127407
* I-Corps:  Digital Biomarkers Combined with Wearable Devices to Monitor Alzheimer’s Disease and other Neurological Disorders
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Devin Collins, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cloud-based, predictive analytics platform to identify,
develop, and validate digital biomarkers that identify early signs of
neurodegeneration and other significant health-related concerns related to
aging. Existing methods of collecting longitudinal data from aging populations
for clinical and nonclinical research are slow, expensive, labor-intensive and
often introduce flawed data. This project may improve research with qualitative
and quantitative behavioral and biophysical information using passive and
unobtrusive patient-generated data aggregated in real-life environments using
smartwatches. At scale, this platform may be used to build models that predict
disease onset in at-risk populations and help millions of individuals around the
world identify means to delay the onset or slow the progression of Alzheimer’s
disease and related dementias. In addition, this platform may enable
pharmaceutical companies with licensed access to data to conduct focused
clinical trials in aging populations. The proposed technology may improve
health-related applications offered by wearable/smartwatch manufacturers, and
may provide health-concerned individuals with personalized low-cost behavior
modification intervention recommendations in order to delay, prevent, or slow
the progression of neurogenerative diseases and other health issues.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
analytical models deployable within the cloud to identify, measure, and predict
those behavioral and clinical features impacting people at high-risk for
Alzheimer’s Disease and related dementias. The proposed technology is an end-to-
end patient monitoring solution that benefits patients, caregivers and medical
researchers by combining data from widely available consumer smartwatches with a
cloud-based analytics and artificial intelligence platform to deliver improved
health and behavior information. This proposed software solution advances high-
frequency data aggregation to a centralized cloud-based platform where it is
possible to generate insights and identify, develop, and clinically validate
digital biomarkers for Alzheimer’s disease, dementias, and other potential
illnesses and comorbidities in aging populations. The development of this
prototype artificial intelligence-driven platform may provide a solution to
passively and unobtrusively capture patient-generated data beyond conventional
clinical trials, in real-life settings, and advance capabilities to analyze
digital health information from broad demographic
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.