* 2127807
* Structure and thermal elastic properties of calcium silicate perovskite
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Przemyslaw Dera, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,996.00

Calcium silicate perovskite (CaPv) occurs as the third most abundant phase in
the Earth’s lower mantle, next to (Mg,Fe)SiO3 bridgmanite and (Mg,Fe)O. It is
considered a candidate mineral to explain some lower-mantle seismic observations
and anomalies, as well as the main host for large cations in the lower mantle.
Seismic properties of CaPv at mantle conditions, however, remain poorly
constrained, as there are often contradictory theoretical and experimental
predictions and determinations in the literature. Experiments and calculations
have revealed multiple crystal structures of CaPv, but its phase transition
boundary and elastic properties in the pressure-temperature-composition (P-T-X)
space of relevance to the mantle are still under debate. This project will
contribute to the following fundamental questions: (1) the fate of subducted
oceanic crust and CaPv’s roles in lower mantle mineralogy and seismology, and
(2) the origin of mantle’s seismic anomalies and heterogeneity. The project will
directly contribute to the training of one graduate student at in-house
laboratory and large synchrotron facilities and will also actively involve two
early-career scientists. The research team will continue to mentor undergraduate
students or high school students, particularly traditionally underrepresented
minorities, i.e., Native Hawaiians and other Pacific Islanders, to study
geosciences and planetary sciences by active involvement in ongoing research.
The results from the proposed project will be disseminated via publications,
national and international meetings, public lectures and news
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to accurately measure the
crystal structure and identify the phase transition boundary of (Al,Ti)-bearing
CaSiO3 pervoskite in the P-T-X space of Earth’s mantle, employing laser-heated
and externally-heated diamond anvil cell (EHDAC) and synchrotron X-ray
diffraction techniques. The team will approach this goal by developing in-situ
methods of growing non-quenchable silicate single crystals, and combining
single-crystal/multigrain X-ray diffraction measurements with a newly developed
EHDAC setups to reach temperatures above 1200 K. The proposed research aims to
(1) determine the crystal structure and phase transformations of pure and
(Ti,Al)-bearing CaPv, and (2) measure the thermal equation of state of CaPv at
pressure-temperature conditions relevant to Earth's transition zone and lower
mantle. The proposed measurements on the crystallographic phase transitions and
thermal elastic properties of CaSiO3 will break open a bottleneck on the quest
into the mantle mineralogy, and thus offer new understanding of CaPv’s
contribution in elucidating the lower-mantle seismic observations and
anomalies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.