* 2127576
* I-Corps:  An Emergency Electro-Mechanical Communication System for Underground Tunnels and Mines
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Ali Abdi, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an emergency communication technology for underground tunnels.
Underground tunnels have numerous uses worldwide, ranging from the mining
industry to transportation via subways and railroad tunnels. Disastrous events
underground are common, especially in the mining industry. Current communication
technologies include wired phones and local WiFi modems in underground tunnels
and mines. However, existing solutions that are operative under normal
conditions often fail to operate during emergencies due to collapsed roofs,
broken cables, power outages, or network failures. Communication using radio
wave-based technologies such as cell phones is not a viable solution when
hundreds to thousands of meters underground when trying to pass through
collapsed walls and rocks. The proposed technology may provide a lifeline
between the rescue workers and the trapped individuals deep underground in
catastrophes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a data communication technology using mechanical waves and
existing infrastructures in underground tunnels when current methods fail to
work. To maximize the likelihood of survival of people trapped deep underground,
under unusual and life-threatening conditions, development of an electro-
mechanical communication system is proposed as a new suite of communication
devices. This proposed technology utilizes the existing pipelines in tunnels and
mines as the medium for communication. These pipelines have a much lower
likelihood of failure during catastrophes. Such infrastructures are less likely
to break in catastrophic events. The proposed technology is based on research
that shows that in addition to mechanical acceleration channels in solids, there
also is a mechanical strain channel that may be used for communication. The
strain communication channel is formulated based on the fractional particle
displacement parameter. This is the amount of local displacement of a solid
particle when exposed to mechanical vibrations. This channel has shown to offer
superior communication performance compared to other channels. Given the need
for a reliable communication link between rescue workers and people trapped
underground, the market may be ready for the new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.