* 2127776
* RAPID: Automated discovery of COVID-19 related hypotheses using publicly available scientific literature
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2020,04/30/2022
* Ilya Safro, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 104,474.00

The vast amounts of biomedical information that accumulate in modern databases
(such as MEDLINE of the National Library of Medicine) impose a great difficulty
for efficient wide surveying by researchers who try to evaluate new information
considering existing biomedical literature even when advanced information search
engines are used. Automated hypotheses generation systems are designed to help
scientists to overcome these difficulties and accelerate their research. The
pandemic situation with COVID-19 is precisely one of the cases when such systems
can play an extremely important role in coping with the coronavirus. Using two
different AI approaches, we have developed two systems to discover plausible
hypotheses in the biomedical domain. In this project, we will will deploy the
COVID-19 customized hypothesis generation and knowledge discovery system,
massively run it on any relevant to this research queries, and publish the
results (including trained AI models, and discovered information) in the open
domain for broad scientific community with the goal to accelerate the COVID-19
research. This work focuses heavily on addressing fundamental knowledge
discovery questions by modeling and formulating scientific hypotheses using the
publicly available information in the biomedical domain. However, in general,
these methods are not restricted to any specific information domain, i.e., they
can be broadly used to discover knowledge in texts. Although our experimental
work will be related to COVID-19, the methods can be applied with some
reservations to any literature-based analysis. For example, in the Materials
Science Initiative, one of the goals is to establish a systematic understanding
of the material properties and discover new materials which can be done by
analyzing using the massive corpus of papers. In the legal world, identifying
related patents can be done using a similar hypothesis modeling
methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the heart of the proposed approach lies a
big multi-modal and multi-relational semantic knowledge network of all
biomedical objects extracted from a variety of heterogeneous databases of the
National Library of Medicine. These objects include but are not limited to
scientific papers, abstracts, keywords, phrases, elements of thesaurus, genes,
proteins, mutations, pathways, diseases, and diagnoses. We will leverage two
systems, namely MOLIERE and AGATHA, that are based on structural and deep
learning, respectively. We will customize them using the rapidly updated dataset
of new papers that has not been yet processed by the National Library of
Medicine but already exists in the open domain such as in various preprint
archives and reports. The MOLIERE system is based on the network analysis
techniques applied on the graph constructed using the low-dimensional embedding
of the papers with the result interpretation methods that are based on the
probabilistic topic modeling. The AGATHA system processes texts at much finer
granularity, and creates a semantic knowledge network using more accurate
embedding techniques followed by the deep learning training for knowledge
discovery. Two systems complement each other. While the AGATHA is of higher
quality, the MOLIERE is more interpretable. A combination of both will be
leveraged in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.