* 2127729
* RUI: Role of the Endoplasmic Reticulum in mediating cell fate
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Blake Riggs, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2025
* USD 611,347.00

A major step during development in multicellular life is the generation of cell
diversity. Specifically, the task of cells adopting a specific shape and
function is essential towards development of the adult body plan and formation
of tissues in multicellular organisms. This is a highly conserved process among
multicellular creatures and involves an unequal or asymmetric partitioning of
factors during cell division to allow cells to adopt different fates (e.g. to
become neurons or become skin). There has been significant progress in
understanding the distribution of these factors; however, the regulation of
movement and the selection of these determinants and how they are passed to
daughter cells is still poorly understood. The Principal Investigator (PI) has
formed a model in which cell fate-determining factors are organized and
distributed during cell division by the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER), the largest
compartment in the cell involved in protein folding and distribution. The
objectives of this project are to define a pathway for the transport and correct
establishment of cell-fate determinants during cell division, and to
characterize the role of the ER in the generation of cell diversity. In
addition, the PI will provide opportunities to engage a diverse student
population and promote peer mentorship, thereby broadening participating in
science. The outcomes of the project will help close a gap of knowledge
regarding how cell fate is determined, and to provide a broader understanding
for the generation of cell diversity during
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of cell diversity is a highly
conserved mechanism and involves the asymmetric partitioning of factors during
cell division. Over the past 30 years, several cell fate determinants have been
identified, including cell fate determinants that are partitioned apically or
basally during mitosis leading to the daughter cells adopting different cell
fates. Despite the considerable knowledge regarding the factors involved in cell
fate selection, there is little known regarding the transport, localization, and
organization of these cell fate determinants along the division plane during
mitosis. Preliminary data from the PI’s laboratory identified the highly
conserved Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) integral membrane protein, Jagunal (Jagn)
as being partitioned asymmetrically in pro-neural cells during Drosophila
melanogaster embryogenesis. The PI’s central hypothesis is that the Jagn-
mediated asymmetric division of the ER acts as a scaffold for organization and
transport of transcriptional machinery involving the basal cell fate
determinants towards the diversification of cell types in the central nervous
system. The PI will test this hypothesis in vivo by examining neuroblast
division in the Drosophila melanogaster larval brain by means of super-
resolution confocal microscopy, and determine which cell fate outcomes are
dependent on Jagn. The PI’s work will deepen our understanding of cell fate
selection and outline the role of the ER in the generation of cell
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the Cellular Dynamics
and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in
the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.