* 2127228
* Collaborative Research: How do histories of violence shape affect and experience?
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Cheryl Rodriguez, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 262,687.00

Violence affects individual and community health in both subtle and obvious
ways, acutely and over the long term. Even in areas that are no longer impacted
by direct violence, historical legacies of violence can cause lingering trauma
among those who experienced it. These traumas can be transmitted to individuals
who were not otherwise affected by violence. This research project addresses the
question of how regional and temporal histories of violence affect emotional
responses and ongoing experiences of individuals affected -directly or
indirectly - by violence. Using theory from cultural anthropology and geography,
the project will contribute to more innovative science by considering how
violence over time and space continues to elicit emotional responses in affected
communities. The project widens the pipeline of highly qualified minority
students into leading graduate programs. It will build scientific infrastructure
at a minority-serving institution and increase public literacy of science by
making findings publicly accessible. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
seek to answer the following questions: 1) How does variation in the history of
violence affect perceptions of danger and safety embedded in associated
landscapes? How are legacies and ongoing dynamics of violence reflected in the
human body and in geographic space? How can public histories be re-constructed
to account for these legacies and ongoing dynamics? The Co-PIs and their teams
of student researchers will conduct ethnographic research over a three-year
period in fourteen communities with variable histories of violence. The team
will identify, collect, and aggregate existing spatial data and maps related to
violence; affected communities, and their dynamics over time. For comparative
perspective, the researchers will conduct a range of interviews with people
across study sites. The results will provide insights relevant to decreasing the
burden of violence on human societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.