* 2127098
* STTR Phase I:  Development of an Additively-Manufactured, Non-Toxic, Advanced Storable Hybrid Rocket Propulsion System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Adam Irvine, ONYX AEROSPACE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project seeks to make orbital maneuvers affordable for
large and small CubeSat operators. The proposed technology seeks to supply the
market with an affordable, “green”, reliable, and easy to integrate modular
propulsion system. Minimal integration requirements will allow CubeSat operators
to focus on mission objectives and payload first, instead of the propulsion
system integration. Today, integrating a propulsion system requires significant
accommodations for thermal, electrical, and volume requirements and hazardous
propellants limit available launch service. Both of these factors contribute to
increasing cost and lenthening schedules. The goal of this project is to make
advanced maneuvers, interplanetary trajectories, rapid end of life disposal, and
accurate course corrections accessible capabilities for CubeSats. Accessible
propulsion may also reduce orbital congestion as fewer maneuverable satellites
can equal the capability of many statically-positioned satellites. CubeSats have
already enabled rapid deployment of capabilities including low latency
communication relays, defense purposes, and scientific research ranging from
fundamental physics experiments to Earth observation. The proposed technology
seeks to enhance CubeSat capabilities, opening new industries and discoveries
for the next great generation of scientists, engineers, and
entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer
(STTR) Phase I project seeks to develop the technology and produce a prototype
spaceflight-ready design for a commercially-available, chemical-hybrid
propulsion system. Conventional hybrid systems have shown significant downsides
due to complex manufacturing, single use and/or toxic ignition systems, and low
fuel regression rates. This technology seeks to solve these issues by utilizing
a 3-D printed thermoplastic as the base fuel, which has electrical properties
that allow for repeatable, rapid, and low power ignition. Some potential
propellant combinations have a high theoretical performance, but are
incompatible with the ignition method, have a low fuel regression rate, or are
difficult to manufacture. After testing propellant combinations for
compatibility with the ignition system, the system performance will be
simulated. The performance data will be used to evaluate and design a prototype
propulsion module. The fuel will be exposed to a simulated space environment and
a lab weight scale test will be performed to verify the simulation results. The
proposed research plan will identify the best option to produce a competitive
and reliable integrated CubeSat propulsion system, with a test campaign
constructed to provide confidence that a prototype system will perform as
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.