* 2127031
* The Role of Cellular Mechanical Oscillations in Triggering Cell Migration
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Zhongkui Hong, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 11/30/2022
* USD 396,121.00

This award will study cellular mechanical oscillations, which exist broadly in
many cell types. In migrating cells (cells that are able to move from one
location of the body to another), mechanical oscillations of cells are thought
to contribute to disease development, such as cardiovascular disease and cancer
by triggering cell migration. However, a critical gap exists in understanding
how these cellular mechanical oscillations are regulated, and thus trigger cell
migration. Continued existence of this knowledge gap hinders the development of
therapies to prevent and treat human disease. This study seeks to elucidate the
molecular mechanism of cellular mechanical oscillations and their functions in
cell migration. Scientific outcomes of this work are expected to advance efforts
to treat and prevent cell migration-relevant diseases. This work also advances
undergraduate and graduate education and training in bioengineering in South
Dakota. Mentoring and authentic research experiences will be provided to
undergraduate students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM. In
particular, in collaboration with a local tribal college and a primarily
undergraduate institution, a discovery-based program will be advanced to attract
Native American, female, and first-generation students to pursue careers in
biomedical engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work answers a central
question: What is the underlying mechanism and function of cellular mechanical
oscillations, and how do physicochemical stimuli regulate them? The hypothesis
is cellular mechanical oscillations are driven by cytoskeletal remodeling and
oscillation in cell adhesion force, which, in turn, synergistically regulates
cell polarization and migration. This hypothesis will be addressed by three
research objectives. First, the work will decipher the underlying mechanism by
which cytoskeletal remodeling and vinculin vibration drive periodic oscillations
in cell mechanics. Second, the work will elucidate the relationship between
oscillations in cell mechanics, polarization, and migration. Third, the work
will discover how physicochemical signals regulate cellular mechanical
oscillations and cell migration. An innovative approach is employed that
integrates: (a) real-time fluorescence-lifetime imaging microscopy to monitor
cytoskeleton dynamics; (b) real-time cellular E-modulus-mapping and height-
mapping using atomic force microscopy to monitor cellular mechanical
oscillations and cell membrane undulation; and (c) data-driven mathematical
models for signal and image processing. For the first time, this study will link
cellular mechanical oscillations to cell membrane undulation, cell polarization,
and then to cell migration. Findings are expected to provide fundamental new
understanding of cellular mechanical oscillations and inform development of new
strategies to treat human disease, such as cardiovascular disease and cancer
metastasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.