* 2127822
* What limits visual working memory?
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Benjamin Tamber-Rosenau, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 158,339.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remembering and thinking about
things seen moments beforehand—termed visual working memory (VWM)—is
surprisingly difficult. People continuously use their limited VWM for basic
tasks like navigating a car or rapidly finding the eyeglasses they just put
down. Because VWM is associated with intelligence, VWM affects academic and
professional performance. VWM degrades with aging, disorders (like ADHD or
schizophrenia), and brain injuries. Like a tune-up or repair of a mechanical
system needs some understanding of how the system is built, an intervention to
improve VWM would benefit from knowledge of the working memory system’s
architecture. To gain a more full understanding of VWM’s structure and its
relationships to other aspects of thinking, new research infrastructure is
needed. This infrastructure will then enable future examination of how little-
studied VWM capacity limits (beyond the amount of information that can be
stored) are related to thinking and perception, which will in turn indicate if
what is known about the well-studied VWM storage capacity generalizes to these
other important limits on VWM. To enable this future examination, the present
research will iteratively devise and pilot component research tasks to
ultimately form an approximately 8-hour extensible suite of cognitive tests that
will serve as infrastructure for the aforementioned future VWM research in
healthy young adults. Moreover, this infrastructure will eventually enable
further research on how VWM changes over the lifespan and in populations of
disorder and/or neurological injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the vast
majority of VWM research has focused on storage capacity, but neglected how
information moves from visual perception into VWM (termed consolidation) and how
memories for items that are near one another are kept separate (termed
resolution). Consolidation determines if seen items make it into memory before
being disrupted by distraction. Resolution determines whether remembering an
item means that memory for additional, nearby items is less accurate.
Understanding these limits is critical for generalizing from the lab to the real
world, where objects and events are close to one another and distraction is
frequent. This research will enable future measurement of individual differences
in storage, consolidation, and resolution; other kinds of working memory;
attention; and executive control using computerized tasks. These data could then
be used to determine how these distinct capacity limits relate to one another.
This is important to science because it is vigorously debated whether working
memory should be thought of as limited by a single resource that is shared for
different kinds of memory representations and processes, versus being a series
of distinct systems, each with their own separate capacity limits. The novel
inclusion of consolidation and resolution measures in the new research
infrastructure (test suite) will allow a much more complete and accurate picture
compared to past research. This, in turn, is important to society because it
could greatly change how therapies or interventions are targeted. For instance,
intervention strategies would be different if verbal training could benefit
visual memory, compared to if verbal and visual memory were independently
limited. Present evaluations of working memory typically either focus on VWM
storage capacity, or on verbal versus visuospatial memory span; when these are
considered together, VWM consolidation and resolution are not included. The test
suite that will be the product of the present research will overcome this
limitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.