* 2127329
* STEM Participation through Community Air Quality Sensor Networks and Data Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Shermane Austin, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 179,950.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Socioeconomic inequities due to
climate variation and environmental disparities are amplified in marginalized
communities, especially through poor air quality. The air we breathe – a
universal variable that connects us all – is a prime determinant of human health
and mortality. Long-term exposure to poor air quality, especially particulate
matter (PM), is linked to many comorbidities that have been associated with poor
health prognoses (e.g., cancer, cardiovascular disease, lung disease), which
contribute to approximately 7 million deaths per year. This project will
implement face-to-face/virtual community interventions to engage participants in
utilizing high- and low-cost air quality sensor technologies together with data
analytics to better understand how poor air quality contributes to adverse
health impacts, especially COVID-19. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will
work with urban academic institutions and residences in New York City and New
Jersey to train them on how to build and operate high- and low-cost air quality
sensors for the collection of indoor air quality measurements of PM10, PM2.5,
and PM1. The project team will work with community participants to train them
how to construct data visualization products to quantify the contribution of air
quality levels to adverse health impacts at the individual and county level.
This initiative will also engage community participants, such that they are able
to quantify the correlation among collected data using well-established
statistical approaches. The project team will train participants to utilize
open-source tools to examine the physics of where air parcels come from and
forecast where they are going. Lastly, the initiative will implement soft- and
hard-skills training and STEM professional development (PD) workshops – all
aimed at optimizing recruitment, retention, and successful matriculation in STEM
disciplines and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.