* 2127295
* Collaborative Research: The Impact of Covid-19 on Victimization Risk and Service Needs for Domestic Violence Victims and Survivors
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,02/29/2024
* Mangai Natarajan, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 232,005.00

There is increasing evidence that the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated domestic
violence. There are many commendable and promising programs to respond to
domestic violence, but it is not known how these programs cope in the pandemic
environment to serve domestic violence victims and survivors, and especially
individuals from diverse backgrounds and living in disadvantaged communities.
This collaborative study builds a nationwide inventory of domestic violence
victim programs including critical information about these programs' services.
It will also generate critical knowledge on strongest predictors of domestic
violence and strategies for efficient service provision and servicing
underserved populations. This study will address the urgent need for
programmatic research to advance the knowledge of domestic violence risks posed
by COVID-19 and the availability and accessibility of nationwide resources for
victims and survivors. The project integrates a multidisciplinary theoretical
framework and a Rapid Assessment Methodology to understand the multifaceted
nature of domestic violence. The theoretical framework includes criminological,
epidemiological, public health, service advocacy perspectives. This study will
also assess the service needs of domestic violence victims to identify
nationwide proactive and protective interventions against domestic
violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will use a mixed-methods study design
and its objectives are to: (1) determine the known risk factors of domestic
violence which have heightened during COVID-19 and new COVID-19 related risk
factors for domestic violence; (2) identify protective factors against domestic
violence during COVID-19; (3) identify the immediate and long-term needs of
survivors based on their demographics; (4) compile an up to date inventory of
all domestic violence programs nationwide to assess service needs; (5)
demonstrate the special service needs of victims and survivors for mitigating
risks and prevention, and (6) translate the research findings and transfer the
knowledge to the practitioner and scholarly communities nationwide. The study
will gather data on existing services for domestic violence victims and
survivors; COVID-19 related domestic violence risk factors and service needs;
and the barriers in providing and accessing services. The data will be collected
via interviews, focus groups discussions, and a survey with victim service
providers across the US. This study will produce evidence that will benefit
practitioners, policymakers, and researchers working in the fields of victim
services, public health, law enforcement, and community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.