* 2127900
* Dynamics and Thermodynamics of Nanoscale Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2025
* Christopher Jarzynski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2025
* USD 302,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on foundations of the control and application of quantum
mechanical systems. The first theme of this project involves the ability to
control microscopic systems that obey the counter-intuitive laws of quantum
physics. Technological progress has brought us to the point where
experimentalists can isolate, observe, and manipulate individual quantum
systems. The PI and his group will develop new strategies for controlling how
quantum systems evolve with time. One approach will use impulses, in which the
system is briefly subjected to very strong external forcing, causing its state
to change quickly. This project will develop the theory needed to design
impulses to achieve a desired change in the system’s state. Another approach
will involve Thouless pumping, a quantum-mechanical analogue of Archimedes’
screw that can be used to transport electrons. The original theoretical proposal
by Thouless in 1983, which has been verified experimentally during the past
decade, requires that the pumping be carried out very slowly. The PI and his
group will apply new techniques from the field of Shortcuts to Adiabaticity, to
accelerate the transport of electrons by Thouless pumping.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The second theme of this project addresses systems that are driven by
an external force that oscillates periodically with time, causing the system to
absorb energy. When these oscillations are very fast, it has been found that
energy absorption is greatly suppressed. This project will explore whether this
behavior can be understood in terms of a simple picture in which the system’s
energy performs a “biased random walk”. The PI and his group will investigate
this question both for systems that obey familiar laws of classical physics and
for those that obey the laws of quantum mechanics. If the biased random walk
hypothesis proves to be accurate, it will provide a quantitative theory for
predicting the rate energy is absorbed by rapidly and periodically driven
systems, which will be useful in proposed applications of such out-of-
equilibrium systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The educational component of this
project will involve the training of students in a strongly collaborative,
supportive and cross-disciplinary environment. Research results will be
disseminated through publications in scientific journals as well as
presentations at conferences and other venues. The PI will regularly give
colloquium-level presentations aimed at introducing a broad scientific audience
to recent progress in non-equilibrium statistical physics, and will write a
graduate-level textbook on this field based on a course he has developed and
taught multiple times at the University of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and education to investigate strategies for controlling the
dynamics of quantum systems, with a particular focus on accelerated evolution.
Impulses are familiar from undergraduate-level classical physics but have
received less attention in quantum physics. This project will specifically
address “super”-impulses, in which the strength of the impulses scales inversely
with the square of its duration. Preliminary results reveal that such super-
impulses cause a wavefunction to change in a non-trivial manner that can be
described entirely in terms of classical trajectories, without invoking the
semiclassical limit. The project will also address the phenomenon of Thouless
pumping, in which electrons are transported via a topological effect. While in
its original version Thouless pumping is adiabatic (quasi-static), the PI and
his research team will explore non-adiabatic extensions of Thouless pumping,
making use of recently developed tools from the field of Shortcuts to
Adiabaticity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will also investigate the
phenomenon of prethermalization, which refers to the exponential suppression of
energy absorption by systems driven rapidly and periodically with time. In
preliminary results, the PI and his group have proposed a Fokker-Planck equation
describing energy absorption in this scenario. The research activity will
include validating this equation in a number of model systems, exploring whether
it quantitatively describes prethermalization, and extending these results to
quantum systems through a model that combines Fermi’s Golden Rule with a
semiclassical treatment of quantum energy transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of this project will involve the training of students in a
strongly collaborative, supportive and cross-disciplinary environment. Research
results will be disseminated through publications in scientific journals as well
as presentations at conferences and other venues. The PI will regularly give
colloquium-level presentations aimed at introducing a broad scientific audience
to recent progress in non-equilibrium statistical physics, and will write a
graduate-level textbook on this field based on a course he has developed and
taught multiple times at the University of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.