* 2127427
* Improving the Storage Conditions and Beginning Digitization of the Paleozoic Stratigraphic Fossil Collections at the Paleontological Research Institution
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Gordon Baird, Paleontological Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 377,334.00

This project will upgrade the physical storage and begin the long-term process
of digitizing the Paleozoic stratigraphic fossil collections at the
Paleontological Research Institution, which are currently in danger of physical
deterioriation and data loss due to inadequate storage and lack of digitization.
The Carl Brett and Gordon Baird Devonian collection will be upgraded to the
highest curatorial standards and its associated data digitized and made more
widely known and available online to the research community and general public.
This collection documents the unique invertebrate fossil record of the Devonian,
~418 to 358 million years ago, of the northeastern United States, particularly
New York, which is widely regarded as one of the most stratigraphically complete
in the world. The project will greatly increase the accessibility and
discoverability of these collections for studying a variety of important
paleobiological topics, including: 1) community-level stasis and change, 2)
niche evolution in response to major sea-level/ climatic change and invasion of
new species, 3) morphological stasis, and 4) environmental change and evolution/
extinction of marine biotas. The project has two broader impact components: 1)
construction of an online field guide to common New York fossils, and 2)
development of a series of educational videos. These complementary resources
will highlight both the geologic context and diversity of invertebrate fossils
in the Brett and Baird Devonian collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To ensure that
the considerable research and educational value of the Brett and Baird Devonian
collection is realized, this project will 1) upgrade the physical storage of the
~4,000 invertebrate fossil assemblage samples in the collection by moving them
to a newly renovated climate-controlled facility, and 2) encourage use of the
collection by digitizing and sharing records publicly online via data
aggregators, such as the System for Earth Sample Registration and iDigBio. The
project will also provide value-added geo-referenced data to the estimated 2,500
localities in the collection. Beyond improving the storage conditions and
accessibility of the collection, this project will build on the Paleontological
Research Institution’s strong history in developing free, online educational
resources about paleontology and the fossil record. Specific outreach activities
include creating a collection of five short (3-5 minute) videos with closed
captioning for the public that will highlight the Brett and Baird Devonian
collection. This series will be called “From the Field to the Cloud” and will
detail the journey of an individual fossil as it travels through the steps from
first discovery, to curation, to its final online representation in a publicly
accessible online database. A new Devonian Atlas of Ancient Life will also be
developed featuring at least 200 commonly encountered species from the Devonian
fossil record of New York to help everyone from avocational collectors to museum
professionals identify and learn more about fossils from the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.