* 2127756
* Development of an Airborne Pathogen Capture and Detection System
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Jae Hong Park, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2023
* USD 280,674.00

The global public health crisis caused by the recent COVID-19 pandemic
highlights the urgent need for disease diagnostics and control tracing
strategies for airborne pathogens. A large number of pathogens, such as viruses
or bacteria, are present in and transmitted through microscopic particles that
originate from an infected person’s speech, cough, sneeze, or breathe. Such
particles can easily be transmitted when people congregate in close quarters
such as cultural and sporting venues, churches or common living spaces. However,
the presence of such airborne pathogenic particles are not effectively monitored
today by any readily available detection methods. In response to this situation,
the investigators aim to design an airborne pathogen particle collection and
detection system with the ability to track the presence of airborne pathogens in
indoor spaces. A biosensing related education-research-training model is also
proposed; it will educate a diverse cohort of science and engineering students
who traditionally lack exposure to research on the integration of materials
chemistry, biology, device design, and manufacturing technologies and ways to
bring these together into one overall technical skillset. This program will
empower students to address both critical scientific and professional workforce
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts to mitigate exposure to airborne pathogens in
enclosed spaces first require knowledge of their presence and quantity in such
areas. Current indoor air monitoring methods involve collecting air samples and
analyzing them by colony/plaque counting assay, which requires an incubation
period, or by quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). As a solution, this
project proposes an integrated airborne pathogen collection and detection
system, with the ability to collect aerosolized pathogens and detect them with
electrochemical biosensors. The project aims to develop the science base
necessary for the deployment of an automatic airborne pathogen monitoring system
that will allow detection of the presence of airborne pathogenic particles in
interior spaces. The system comprises a wet impactor, microfluidics and
chemoresistive electrochemical sensing units, coupled with wireless
transmission. While the model target will be specific to coronavirus by
targeting Spike Protein S displayed on artificial virus-like particles, a
protein common to four types of common cold, as well as the current SARS-CoV-2
outbreak, this project will build the science base necessary for the design of a
platform technology for the capture and detection of any airborne pathogens in
enclosed spaces. Anti-S antibodies and anti-S aptamer sequences will be tested
and evaluated for detection performance in a chemoresisitve biosensing unit fed
by spiked concentrator buffers. System performance in terms of detection limits,
specificity, sensitivity and biosensor shelf-life will verify success. The
system will continuously sample the air, separate airborne particles, collect
particles ranged from 100 nm to 2.5 µm into a buffer solution with the
collection efficiency of 99%, and display the results. As part of the
educational component, the team will initiate and lead an effort to design a
multidisciplinary curriculum model for science and engineering graduate and
undergraduate students that incorporates concepts from Chemistry, Biology
Materials Science, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering, as well as Chemistry,
Health Science, and Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.