* 2127308
* Reversible Metal Electrodeposition for Modulating Light
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael McGehee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 484,000.00

Title: Reversible Metal Electrodeposition for Modulating
Light&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is developing windows
whose tinting can be adjusted by applying a voltage between two transparent
electrodes to either electroplate metal or remove the metal. These windows could
reduce heating, cooling and lighting costs in buildings by 20% and allow people
to enjoy the views through their windows even when the window is partially
tinted to control glare. This technology is expected to enable people to have
better moods and be more productive by optimizing the amount of natural daylight
they have. The project team is distributing kits to high school teachers and
helping them show students how to make the windows. Through the construction of
these dynamic windows, high school students are learning valuable concepts in
electrochemistry, optics and architectural engineering with a project that is
easy to visualize and has a clear purpose. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adoption of
high-performing dynamic windows based on reversible metal electrodeposition will
increase the energy efficiency and comfort of buildings. Dynamic windows in
buildings result in an average of 20% energy savings and 2% increase in
workplace productivity due to improved management of lighting and temperature.
The large extinction coefficients and intrinsic robustness of metals make them
ideal materials for dynamic thin films. Compared to traditional materials such
as electrochromics, reversible metal electrodeposition is an underexplored
strategy for constructing switchable thin films. Over the last five years, the
McGehee and Barile groups have designed new strategies that enable enhanced
control over reversible metal electrodeposition on transparent electrodes. The
underlying objective of this research is to determine the physical and chemical
parameters that yield rapid and reversible metal electrodeposition on
transparent conducting electrodes with tailored optical properties and
outstanding durability for optoelectronically switchable thin films. This work
is applicable to energy-saving dynamic windows for buildings and automobiles,
switchable eyewear, and cameras. The project team’s unique research strategies
are enabling the development of dynamic thin films with an unprecedented control
over device optical contrast, switching speed, scalability, and cycle life. The
work is aiding the progress of metal-based switchable films through the
development of alkaline and Zn electrolytes with enhanced voltage stabilities,
polymer-modified electrodes that allow for uniform tinting on a large scale,
pulsed electrodeposition techniques to control device optics, and systematic
durability studies that are enhancing the cycle lives of the
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.