* 2127867
* Collaborative Research: Diversifying Human-Centered Data Science through the Research and Design of Ethical Games
* SBE,SMA
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Cecilia Aragon, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 89,663.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Tackling the overwhelming issues in data science and
machine learning require new ways of training and combining expertise from
social science, human-centered design, information studies, statistics, computer
science, and related fields. We invite interested undergraduates across
disciplines to collaborate on the research and design of a serious game on data
ethics issues. In this context, our project studies collaborative learning in
groups of peers with conflicting methodological cultures and diverse
backgrounds. Participating students will come from two university campuses in
different regions of the United States to form a single team of diverse
individuals collaborating in a virtual setting. By studying students’
experiences throughout the project, we will increase our understanding of
learning through collaboration over time and in relation to their sociocultural
histories. An additional artifact of this two-year, interdisciplinary project
will be a prototype of an educational game, targeted towards the
underrepresented communities and the greater public, that will bring more people
into critical conversations about the roles of AI and data science in our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of our research is the production
of novel theories in learning sciences regarding collaborative learning in the
face of diverse backgrounds and cultural norms. How do students individually and
collectively position themselves within data ethics and do these views change
over time with increased exposure to technical concepts and norms? How do
students reconcile conflicting norms in the design of a single design project?
Does the collaborative design of an ethical simulation game facilitate diverse
student learning experiences? Our work will be conducted as an ethnographic case
study with analysis heavily informed by sociocultural-historical theory.
Multiple streams of data will be collected over the course of the project,
including observations in the “field,” i.e. of the team meetings (consisting of
both audiovisual recordings and researchers’ field notes), informal
conversations with participants, products created by the team (such as papers,
images, prototypes, etc), brief surveys, and participant interviews. This work
aims to contribute new theories on collaborative learning to the body of
research in learning sciences as well as serve as a case study for future
educational projects situated between disciplines with conflicting cultural
norms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.