* 2127778
* Collaborative Research: Revenue Management for Port Operations and other Multistage Service Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Sigrun Andradottir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2025
* USD 340,583.00

This award will contribute to the Nation's prosperity and welfare by providing
rigorous revenue management solutions to improve the competitiveness of
multistage service systems. Such systems are challenging to analyze due to the
interactions between different stages of operations and the lack of system
status transparency to customers. The focus of this project is on revenue
management for ports, a problem that has attracted limited attention despite the
importance of ports to the economy. This project will develop modern revenue
management strategies for port terminal operations that involve both berthing
and loading/unloading stages and more generally, will examine pricing policies
for multistage service systems. The results of this project will advance the
modernization of operations in the port industry and promote the digitalization
of the industry. This award will support the involvement of graduate students in
advancing the research agenda.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
static and dynamic pricing policies that maximize the long-run average profit of
multistage service systems with customers that are price and congestion
sensitive. The project considers both observable and unobservable service
systems depending on what information is available to customers. The project
will provide tools for the service provider to decide what information to
provide to potential customers and to assess the benefits of dynamic pricing
relative to simpler static pricing. The project will involve the development of
exact and approximate algorithms for determining optimal policies that
practitioners can use to solve a broad class of real-world problems. The project
will use a case study on port terminal operations that will be used to validate
the methods and which terminal operators can use to build their own models and
algorithms to obtain optimal pricing strategies. The analytical results and
numerical algorithms involve Markov decision processes, sample-path arguments,
stochastic comparisons, matrix-analytic methods, changes of variables, and
linear programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.