* 2127314
* SBIR Phase II: Developing a courseware platform that helps students develop self-regulated learning skills
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Ashley Rowland, CODON LEARNING, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,724.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop courseware that will catalyze the
use of inclusive, evidence-based teaching and learning practices. Such practices
have been empirically shown to improve learning outcomes and retention rates for
postsecondary Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) students,
particularly those from historically underserved groups: first-generation
college attendees, students from racial and ethnic minorities, and students from
low-income families. These practices have not been widely adopted because
instructors lack the time and resources needed to shift from a lecture-based
course to one grounded in evidence-based practices and students struggle to use
the evidence-based study strategies that are more effective for college courses.
This project helps instructors design and teach inclusive, high-structure
courses and helps students develop stronger metacognition and self-regulated
learning skills, both of which will lead to more equitable outcomes for students
from historically underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to create novel
courseware that helps students develop self-regulated learning skills and guides
instructors to design and teach aligned, high-structure courses. Both of these
practices are supported by empirical research. However, these practices are
underutilized, not because of a lack of understanding or evidence of their
efficacy, but because instructors lack time to design a high-structure course
and work one-on-one with students to develop their learning skills. Instructors
need a courseware tool to help students effectively reap the known benefits of
these practices. Using this courseware platform, instructors and students will
benefit from rich sets of actionable learning data that help them adjust their
teaching and learning. Research will be conducted — with results disaggregated
by race, ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic status, and first-generation status —
to determine whether the courseware improves students’ self-regulated learning
skills and instructors’ use of evidence-based teaching
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.