* 2127476
* MCA: Multi-scale considerations of climatic signatures on debris flows and alluvial fans
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kimberly Hill, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 368,342.00

Worldwide, communities are experiencing historic changes in storm frequencies
and magnitudes that destroy homes and lives. One of the most devastating effects
of frequent and/or intense storms is the way in which associated rainfall can
destabilized earthen materials and liquefy the very foundation of natural and
built infrastructure. Under such conditions, these materials can flow downslope,
subsequently entrain additional materials, and increase in dramatically size.
Their growth rate and evolution can be alarming as they add mud, rocks, and even
meter-sized boulders to become massive rivers of debris flows. These debris
flows may abruptly change direction as they flow, and even create their own
channel walls, or levees, thus maintaining a high speed as they “super-elevate”
relative to their surroundings. The unpredictability of the timing, directions,
and magnitudes of these flows can add to their devastation as evident, for
example, in the deaths and destruction of the 2018 debris flows in Montecito
County, California. For better hazard mitigation scientists need to understand
how details such as local materials, moisture, and local climate conditions
dictate these behaviors. This project involves research using data from previous
flows and their deposits, physical experiments, and computational simulations to
help us better anticipate and predict behaviors of likely future flows under
varying climatic conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines field
work, laboratory experiments, granular physics theory, and computational
modeling to understand combined effects climate conditions external to specific
debris flow events and flow physics embedded in those conditions. This will
involve a new framework relating sediment-fluid specifics and boundary
conditions as it relates to debris flow behaviors under varying conditions.
Experimental work will include: (1) controlled slump-slurry experiments with
simplistic basal conditions; (2) erosional channelized experiments, and (3)
alluvial fan experiments. Computational work will build on sediment-fluid
rheology embedded in a multi-phase discrete-element-method (DEM) model. Field
work will include debris flow deposits at sites selected for their distinct
climatic and physics-based signals to help identify signals from each: (1) on
periglacial deposits in the Richardson Mountains (changing sediment supply with
climate changes) with collaborative partner Professor Marisa Palucis of
Dartmouth College; (2) on wetter warmer deposits along the Laonong River Valley,
Taiwan (high sediment supplies, moist conditions, distinct catchment
lithologies); (3) in drier hotter deposits in Owens Valley that contain
signatures of distinct climate and lithology differences. Planned work with
indigenous communities will contribute to the science with their active
involvement and community records. This award is jointly funded by the
Geomorphology and Land-use Dynamics Program and the Particulate and Multiphase
Processes Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.