* 2127095
* NNA Research: Development of a Nonlinear Reduced Order Modeling Framework for Marine Structures Operating in The Arctic and Sub-Arctic Regions
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Oceana Francis, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 793,505.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among natural and environments in the
following NNA focus areas: Data and Observation, Education, and Global Impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to rapid warming in the Arctic, sea ice is thinning
and retreating, making more Arctic waters increasingly accessible to shipping
and transportation, research and exploration, and other economic development
activities. Increased maritime activities in the region pose potential risks to
the Arctic environment, especially in areas used by fishing vessels, offshore
oil, and gas industry and cruise liners. Marine structures operating in the ice-
covered part of the region also lead to changes in the Arctic icescape. Using a
combination of data from field experiments, models, satellites and observations,
this project explores complex interactions between ice and marine structures in
the Arctic to develop a conceptual framework for risk assessment and modelling
to provide safe shipping and operations in the region. The knowledge acquired
through the project benefits a wide range of stakeholders, such as residents,
businesses, local, regional, and government agencies, and researchers who are
invested in the well-being of the region to ensure a resilient and sustainable
Arctic environment. The project also provides research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students and a postdoctoral researcher and outreach
to minority students for learning mechanical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Arctic, a major barrier to
understanding the relationship between sea ice and marine structures is the
complex, evolving nature of Arctic system interactions. Therefore, this project
utilizes a reduced-order modeling framework to simplify these complex ice-
structure interactions through understanding the dynamics of each parameter and
finding the dominant environmental and structural conditions governing these
interactions. This project develops a state-of-the-art ice-structure interaction
modeling framework and risk assessment concept. Meteorological and oceanographic
data from satellite images, data stations, and meteorological institutions, as
well as structural response data from marine structures are studied to create
data matrices and to facilitate the development of an efficient framework. Using
sparsity-promoting multivariate analysis techniques and equation free modeling,
the nonlinear nature of such interactions are clarified. The developed model is
used to form a novel risk assessment concept, which assists ship operators and
people working on other man-made structures to provide informed decisions during
operations in the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.