* 2127112
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Keystone molecules and estuarine foodwebs: chemical defense and a novel biosynthetic pathway in a common mudflat mollusc
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Amanda Zellmer, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 128,646.00

Estuaries are ecologically sensitive nursery habitat for many economically
important coastal species. A potentially important but understudied food
resource for migratory waterbirds, juvenile fish, and diverse invertebrate
predators are small sea slugs (genus Alderia), which can occur in dense
aggregations of over 1,000 slugs per square meter on temperate mudflats
throughout the Northern Hemisphere. We hypothesize that Alderia use a recently
discovered branch of metabolism to make bad-tasting molecules termed
polyketides, a family of compounds that include medically important drugs. We
will characterize new polyketides from these abundant slugs, test how they repel
predators, and then explore how they may affect many other aspects of the
ecosystem. Potential effects of these slug compounds include changing the
bacteria in the mud through antibiotic effects; repelling some animal species
that live in the mud while attracting others; and causing the evolution of slug
mimicry in palatable ‘roly-polies’ that co-occur on the mudflat. These studies
will provide new insight into how energy moves through the food-chain in
estuaries, and how one species can have unexpected effects on many surrounding
species in its ecosystem. We will also study how climate change has altered the
distribution of slug species (and hence their compounds) along the U.S. west
coast, which may have cascading but previously unrecognized effects on the
inhabitants of threatened estuaries. Finally, the project will support the
collaboration between two primary undergraduate institutions, one of which is
Hispanic serving and a large research institution, via the collaboration between
the three school many undergraduate and master’s students will be supported each
year by the project. The project will focus on the recruitment of students
historically underrepresented in science to the proposed research and outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will test whether polyketide (PK) compounds
produced by sea slugs function as keystone molecules, altering energy flow and
community structure in Northern Hemisphere estuaries. Small sea slugs (Alderia)
are exceptionally abundant (&gt;1000/m2) on mudflats, representing a potential
resource for diverse fish, bird and invertebrate consumers. We will characterize
a biosynthetic pathway and novel PK metabolites produced by slugs, and determine
if PKs protect Alderia from wetland predators using a combination of laboratory
and field assays with extracts and pure compounds. We will then estimate the net
loss of primary production to higher trophic levels due to this chemical
defense. The rapid evolution of Batesian mimicry in introduced isopods along the
U.S. west coast will be assessed in this system to understand how chemical
defense and visual predation affect phenotypic evolution of co-occuring
organisms over short timescales. Manipulative experiments will test the effects
of PKs on the microbiome and infaunal community of mudflats to determine the
impact of shed compounds on diverse ecological processes in this sensitive
nursery habitat. These studies will address, from gene to ecosystem, the impacts
of potential keystone compounds synthesized as an antipredator defense in a
common temperate mollusc. Modeling studies will explore the basis for range
limits and the effects of ongoing climate change on shifting range boundaries
between two Alderia species. These results will collectively provide new insight
into how global change may alter the distribution of keystone molecules and thus
have unanticipated effects on communities in already-threatened habitats such as
estuaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.