* 2127062
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long term Flooding Consequences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Cross, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 28,040.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reseachers will undertake
interdisciplinary research to study the resiliency of a traditional society in
the Ohio River Valley. Floods are the most common natural hazard faced by human
populations, having long played an important role in shaping our natural and
social environments. As the risk of large-scale flood events increases in many
parts of the world, it is crucial to build as much information about how both
flood regimes change over time, as well as how communities may respond to these
events. Archaeology provides a unique deep timeframe of analysis to study these
issues. Currently, policymakers attempting to plan for flood prevention and
responses are often limited to historical data that are only a few hundred years
old at best. In contrast, this project will provide long term information
regarding changes in flooding at the confluence of the Ohio and Great Miami
Rivers. As a result, urban planners, engineers, city administrators, and first
responders will be able to plan for flood events more accurately in nearby
modern river communities. Furthermore, local students and volunteers will be
involved in this project, allowing for a unique experience performing
interdisciplinary research where they live. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators will examine how the inhabitants of the Guard site located at the
confluence of the Ohio and Great Miami Rivers, were resilient to inundation at
various scales. Floods are often viewed as risks in modern American society;
however, floods are also key in depositing nutrient rich sediments along the
floodplain as well as replenishing back swamps and oxbow lakes, creating a
resource rich environmental mosaic. Traditional societies took full advantage of
these floodplain environments across North America for millenia, creating a
unique relationship with the natural elements of their environment. What did
resiliency to occasional floods both large and small look like for
agriculturalists living along one of the largest rivers in North America? This
research uses a combination of soil science and archaeological methods to
examine these processes. Combining archaeological excavation data with
information from geological soil cores, flood deposits and possible rebuilding
episodes will be cross-examined. This interdisciplinary dataset will help better
determine the role of natural hazards on the social lives of these communities.
In short, this research will clarify long term socio-ecological relationships of
agricultural communities in the Eastern United States facilitating the
refinement of current theoretical models regarding the role of fluvial
environments in community life history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.