* 2127133
* SBIR Phase II:  Large-Scale Synthesis of Hollow Metal Nanospheres: Conversion of Batch Synthesis to Continuous Flow
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Sarah Lindley, CORELESS TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 991,478.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is based upon establishing a consistent, reliable source of high-quality
hollow metal nanoparticles, thus enabling their commercial adoption in
applications where they markedly outperform their conventional counterparts. One
such application is point-of-use testing: by switching to hollow metal
nanoparticles, lateral flow assays will reach higher levels of sensitivity and
lower limits of detection, improving field testing for environmental
contamination; detection of toxins and pathogens in agriculture; and early
disease identification in clinical and veterinary care. Integration into rapid
antibody and antigen tests for highly contagious diseases such as COVID-19
should prove particularly impactful, as the resulting higher sensitivity would
reduce the occurrence of false negative results, thereby improving the
performance (and public perception) of rapid testing. Critically, it would also
improve baseline testing availability for rural and under-served populations who
do not have access to PCR-equipped clinical laboratories. They can be applied to
many other industries as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase II project will advance the state of the art of
continuous flow synthesis of plasmonic nanomaterials. Nanoparticle synthesis is
a highly sensitive process, and obtaining high quality samples of advanced
architectures has previously required labor-intensive, small-batch processes
incompatible with large-scale production. Simply scaling traditional batch
techniques has led to product with poor quality and prohibitive costs. This
project advances a prototype reactor that has demonstrated high-throughput
production of hollow plasmonic nanoparticles with control over size and color,
while maintaining structural uniformity (&lt;15% CV). Importantly, it reduced
the cost of labor per liter of product by 950% from that of small batch
synthesis. The proposed project will increase fidelity, further scale production
volume, post-process and stabilize the final product, and benchmark its optical
performance. The resulting production-scale reactor will have the capacity
necessary to supply LFA manufacturers with ready-to-use, advanced color labels.
It will enable new research and new nano-enabled devices by creating a
consistent commercial supply of high performance plasmonic nanostructures with
well-controlled physical properties. The manufacture of hollow metal
nanoparticles for point-of-use testing applications will also pave the way for
their expansion into other industries that would also benefit from their
advantageous optical and photothermal plasmonic properties, such as
photocatalysis, water purification, and
phototherapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.