* 2127102
* SBIR Phase II:  Vasoreactive Perfused in Vitro Vascular Network
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Gail Hatfield, ARACARI BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 988,018.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is
to improve clinical outcomes related to cardiovascular side effects of various
treatments. It is currently not possible to test this activity on cells in a
petri dish, and mice are not an accurate model for predicting these outcomes in
human clinical trials. Rodent lifespans, metabolism and responses to drugs are
often very different from those of humans. This project advances a pre-clinical
drug screening platform, leading to the development of better and safer
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
II project improves accurate pre-clinical screening of new pharmaceutical
compounds that may trigger unwanted effects on vascular tone and blood pressure.
Both hypertension and hypotension can have immediate and long-term life-
threatening effects on patients, and are almost always disqualifying for further
development of a new drug. As a result, there is a need for improved, human
cell-based models to screen vasoactive drugs for human patients. This project
advances a platform to accurately mimic physiologically-relevant
vasoactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.