* 2127696
* Collaborative Research: Computationally Efficient Algorithms for Large-scale Bilevel Optimization Problems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Erfan Yazdandoost Hamedani, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 224,375.00

The recent advancements in machine learning and power systems with hierarchical
decision-making structure necessitate developing efficient schemes to solve
bilevel optimization problems. A bilevel optimization problem is a hierarchical
decision-making process and an important class of mathematical models in which
finding the optimal decision (the upper-level problem) depends on anticipating
another decision-making problem (the lower-level problem). Despite the progress
in studying bilevel optimization, most existing methods could be slow or
inefficient when applied in large-scale, uncertain, or distributed settings.
This project aims to address these challenges by examining novel reformulations
of bilevel optimization and developing computationally efficient algorithms for
solving hierarchical decision-making problems. The outcomes of this project will
be transformational for energy storage systems, investment and operation
planning in power systems, recommendation platforms, and speech and image
recognition software. On the education front, this project will provide a
stimulating and innovative research environment to include under-representative
and minority students in the project research; it will also incorporate the
development of curricular material for courses in the PIsâ€™ institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project lays out a detailed agenda for exploring
bilevel optimization reformulations and developing efficient and scalable
schemes to address major limitations of state-of-the-art bilevel optimization
frameworks when confronted with the challenges of recently emerged paradigms in
machine learning and power systems. The research encompasses three different
thrusts: (I) Examining reformulations of nonconvex bilevel optimization and
offering new insights on how to reformulate a bilevel optimization problem with
the goal of finding a local optimum. (II) Developing computationally efficient
methods with fast convergence guarantees for bilevel optimization problems under
uncertainty by leveraging tools from stochastic optimization and online
learning. (III) Investigating bilevel optimization problems in a decentralized
regime with the goal of developing and analyzing distributed algorithms with
local computations and communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.