* 2127473
* RUI:  CMMT: Computational Study of Ternary Metal Halides for Optoelectronics: Structural, Electrical and Defect Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Blair Tuttle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 184,213.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research on ternary metal halide semiconductors. Ternary metal
halides are an emerging class of materials including two heavy metals (e.g.
silver and bismuth) and halide atoms (e.g. iodine). This project focuses on a
set of complex crystalline materials in this family which are flexible and
cheap; in addition, they are good at converting light into electricity and are
being incorporated in solar cells, sensors and wearable electronics. Despite
promising initial experimental results, ternary metal halides are new and many
of their properties are not well established or understood. Specifically, it is
unclear how structure and defects affect their performance in electrical
devices. In this project, the PI and his team will use computational materials
modeling and data science methods to develop an atomic level understanding of
the structural, electrical, and defect properties of ternary metal halides and
to discover new materials in this family. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This awards also
supports various educational and outreach activities. The research will involve
training of undergraduate students in computational materials modeling and data
science methods. The students will visit collaborating research institutions to
gain additional training and experience. The results from this project will be
placed in the context of related work on solar cells and renewable energy, and
presented in a workshop accessible to a wide audience, including high school
teachers, students of all ages, and the general public. Finally, new college-
level curriculum on machine learning and materials science will be
created.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical and computational research on ternary metal halide
ionic semiconductors using a combination of density functional calculations and
data-science methods to (i) identify the atomic-level defect environments in the
Ag-Bi-I system that are responsible for bottlenecks in their optoelectronic
device performance, and (ii) discover new ternary metal halide semiconductors by
creating a database of microscopic-level calculations for hundreds of new
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent experimental studies have produced a wealth
of information regarding ternary metal halides and the optoelectronic devices
incorporating them. Specifically, new solar cells employ various Ag-Bi-I
compounds, which are part of the Rudorffite class of complex semiconductors. The
PI will generate new microscopic models of Ag-Bi-I that will match the
experimentally determined range of stoichiometries. New random forest modeling
simulations will be employed to explore the various arrangements of cations,
which can run into the billions. Using the generated microscopic models, the PI
will calculate basic properties useful for modeling electrical device
performance such as band gaps and effective masses. In addition, the PI will
explore candidate bulk point defects and dopants, characterize their properties,
and compare to available experiments. The results will be tabulated into a
searchable database. High throughput and machine learning methods will be
developed to accelerate the generation of accurate results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This awards also supports various educational and outreach
activities. The research will involve training of undergraduate students in
computational materials modeling and data science methods. The students will
visit collaborating research institutions to gain additional training and
experience. The results from this project will be placed in the context of
related work on solar cells and renewable energy, and presented in a workshop
accessible to a wide audience, including high school teachers, students of all
ages, and the general public. Finally, new college-level curriculum on machine
learning and materials science will be created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.