* 2127290
* Collaborative Research: PurSUiT: Species diversity and evolution of parasitic microfungi
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mary Aime, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2024
* USD 732,464.00

Fungi are essential to ecosystem functioning, occur virtually everywhere, and
form complex relationships with diverse organisms including prokaryotes, algae,
plants, invertebrates, vertebrates, and other fungi. Nonetheless, fungi are the
most undersampled and poorly documented major lineage of eukaryotes, even though
total species estimates range conservatively from 1.5–6.1 million species. This
uncertainty reflects numerous gaps in knowledge about fungal distributions,
especially regarding range and extent of unculturable fungi, microscopic fungi
(microfungi), parasitic fungi, and tropical fungi. This project will document
diversity of fungi in two groups that represent major gaps in our knowledge—the
first are unculturable microfungi that associate with insects, called Labouls,
and the other are unculturable microfungi that associate with plants, called
Rust Fungi. Members of Labouls and Rust Fungi are expected to have profound
effects on ecosystem health and functioning through both beneficial and harmful
interactions with their animal and plant hosts. The research team will explore
several global habitats in tropical and temperate regions that have not
previously been surveyed for these fungi. It is expected that hundreds of new
species will be discovered and described during this project. In addition to
enhancing the documented biodiversity on the planet, this project will resolve
the “tree of life” for both groups and use this information to resolve long-
standing questions regarding the evolution of the Fungi. Broader impacts include
graduate and undergraduate training, international workshops to enhance
collaboration between US and local researchers, and outreach to the public
through “Bat Night” and “Roach Hunt” field trips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
fungal lineages are being studied for several reasons: 1) both represent groups
poorly documented from tropical world regions; 2) both represent groups that are
not detected by commonly applied culture-based and high throughput sequencing
efforts; 3) neither group has been resolved, phylogenetically, by application of
multi-locus analyses of known species; 4) both represent obligately parasitic
lineages that are rarely studied but expected to have profound effects on
ecosystems; and 5) both are or are related to heteroecious fungi (requiring two
different hosts), a phenomenon that is extremely rare in Fungi. A complementary
team of US and other global experts on these fungi, ranging from junior to
senior scientists, have designed an experimental approach that includes
standardized sampling strategies from tropical and extra-tropical regions with
multi-locus phylogenetic, phylogenomic, comparative genomic, and statistical
analyses to: 1) Determine whether accurate estimates from obligate
microparasitic fungi, not included in any other estimates, will affect overall
Fungi species estimates; 2) whether parasitic microfungi follow the reverse
latitudinal gradient posited for other fungal groups; and 3) resolve long-
standing unresolved phylogenetic nodes by the incorporation of “missing”
lineages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.