* 2127325
* Longitudinal Pathways of Paternal Depression: Risk, Resilience, and Health in Diverse Fathers
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Darby Saxbe, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 11/30/2026
* USD 606,619.00

Families benefit from father involvement. Yet, the transition to fatherhood can
be a time of heightened risk for depression in men, with important consequences
for families. For example, paternal depression has been linked with behavior and
health problems in children, greater maternal depression, poorer relationship
quality, and poorer overall familial well-being.The specific mechanisms that
explain the relationship between paternal depression and family outcomes remain
under-studied, especially in populations of diverse fathers whose experiences of
fatherhood may differ in important ways. This study builds on theoretical
insights from developmental and family psychology to understand the mechanisms
underpinning relationships between paternal depression and family outcomes.
Insights will inform practice and policy efforts geared toward fathers and
families, and will also train students and provide early-career mentoring for
individuals from underrepresented groups. Findings will be disseminated broadly
to academic and non-academic audiences, including via targeted public outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will follow an existing sample of fathers
recruited before the birth of their first child across the first seven years of
new parenthood, pursuing three primary objectives: 1) describe the longitudinal
trajectories of paternal depressive symptoms; 2) test relationships among
paternal depressive symptoms, family functioning, and child development; and 3)
examine associations between paternal depressive symptoms and
psychneuroimmunological outcomes. The study pursues these objectives via
holistic methodological approach, including collection of biological data for
assessment of immunological function, brain imaging, and behavioral
observations. As one of the first prospective, longitudinal studies of paternal
perinatal depression and its associations with child and mother well-being as
well as immune and brain health, this project will yield new insights into
father mental health, father-child relationships, and child
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.