* 2127459
* EAGER: Democratizing the use of Advanced Computational Resources
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Research Triangle Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 207,699.00

Advanced cyberinfrastructure is becoming increasingly central to research across
virtually all fields and disciplines. Yet, researchers in many fields and
disciplines do not know what is available or how to engage with the
cyberinfrastructure. Further, longstanding digital divides across universities
and colleges limit access to cyberinfrastructure and the needed expertise to
fully utilize advanced cyberinfrastructure capabilities. The environment also
requires continuous learning and capacity building on the part of
cyberinfrastructure professionals and institutions. This threatens to further
exacerbate the "digital divide" our nation is experiencing. Unless we can find
ways to more effectively provide access, training, education, and assistance to
the much larger group of "non-expert users" from small colleges and underserved
institutions, the digital divide will persist and will continue to expand. This
EAGER project will address these gaps through a series of multiple focus group
interviews in four general areas and will generate a needs assessment that can
inform national investments in the research cyberinfrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the first set of focus groups is to better
understand the present state and future potential of advanced computing from
students and researchers who are already motivated to use compute facilities but
are not doing so currently. The goal of the second set of focus groups is to
identify new applications that use compute resources including non-traditional
approaches and research domains that currently do not use advanced
cyberinfrastructure capabilities. The goal of the third set of focus groups is
to identify mechanisms for engaging remote or underserved potential users of
advanced computing resources and to better understand the barriers to their
access and use of these resources. The goal of the fourth set of focus groups is
to explore the opportunities and challenges under-served institutions and
smaller campuses face in using advanced cyberinfrastructure resources. This will
include a focus on identifying barriers to institutional support, including
challenges facing campus leaders and administrators given additional pressures
caused by the current pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.