* 2127364
* NNA Collaboratory: Collaborative Research: Arctic Cities: Measuring Urban Sustainability in Transition (MUST)
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Nikolay Shiklomanov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,798,856.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSFâ€™s 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environment,
and built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data
and Observation, Education, Global Impact, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic cities face multiple challenges from social and
economic transformations, deteriorating infrastructure, a changing environment,
and pressures on their governance systems. To respond effectively, mayors, city
councils, agency leaders, local citizens and residents, and other stakeholders
need a clear set of indicators to help them understand changes in Arctic
conditions and provide guidance in devising infrastructure and governance
strategies to achieve future prosperity and spur sustainability. This NNA
Collaboratory project assesses numerous issues of urban sustainability and
compiles a set of metrics on Arctic conditions that provides data about changes
in several issues, including the natural environment, energy, and socio-cultural
issues. With these indicators, policymakers and stakeholders can develop
effective governance systems and design and build infrastructure to meet the
challenges of a shifting natural environment and economy in Arctic urban areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NNA Collaboratory expands upon a database of
indicators on various topics in numerous cities on natural conditions in the
Arctic. The Collaboratory cultivates theories and test hypotheses in the
natural, social, and urban planning sciences by developing new indicators for
Arctic conditions that include historical data, enabling examination of dynamic
trends and relationships among the various components of urban sustainability.
The Collaboratory advances a long-term research agenda and platform around
Arctic urban sustainability by organizing collaborations among the Arctic
research community and facilitating convergence research on the natural, social,
and built environment transitions taking place in and around Arctic cities now
and in the future. Indicators introduce a shared vocabulary with explicit
measures and assumptions that allow scholars and others across disciplines to
interact while providing a foundation for theory building and testing. Working
with Indigenous and other communities, the Collaboratory also engages in case
studies of divergent Arctic urban areas to examine city-level data for
interlinkages among assorted elements of sustainability. Consequently, this NNA
Collaboratory improves the ability of policymakers and stakeholders to promote
sustainability by providing tools to measure progress, identify areas of most
urgent need, select verifiable best practices, examine opportunity costs, and
determine where external actors can have the greatest
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the NNA Program and
the Office of International Science and Engineering
(OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.