* 2127208
* Collaborative Research: The Effects of Information, Mentoring and Time on Economic Faculty at MSIs
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Poterba, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 110,500.00

Faculty at Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) make considerable contributions
to educating and training science leaders. Yet, the National Science Foundation
(NSF) has received few proposals from MSI faculty over time. This project will
implement an intervention that will support MSI faculty in two ways. First, MSI
faculty will be granted time to write and submit proposals to the NSF. Second,
faculty will be mentored through the proposal preparation process. The project
will evaluate the impacts of the intervention by collecting and analyzing data
from mentees, i.e., MSI faculty participants. The intervention is expected to
increase NSF proposal submissions by MSI faculty, improve their proposal
preparation skills, and in the long run, contribute to greater inclusion of
faculty at MSIs in STEM. Undergraduate students at will support the research
process by assisting with data collection and analysis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior initiatives suggest that a proposal mentoring
intervention such is likely to change behavior through several channels, e.g.,
information awareness and feedback, role models and networks, cognitive load
theory, and metacognitive awareness. Underlying these different theories of
change, is a factor that seems to have been taken for granted: facultyâ€™s time
availability. This research will directly tackle time constraints by offering
MSI faculty mentees a course release to write proposals and address other
constraints through intensive mentoring, workshops, and debriefing. Findings
will be derived from a mixed-methods approach that combines quantitative and
qualitative data analyses (i.e., surveys and focus groups). Impacts will be
assessed by comparing different outcomes, in particular proposal submissions to
NSF, before and after participating in the intervention across a treatment group
of mentees and a control group of those who applied but were not admitted.
Findings will be disseminated at academic conferences, meetings with federal
agencies such as NSF, and by means of a final report to be posted on the
National Bureau of Economic Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.