* 2127861
* Synthesizing historical records to constrain and understand Great Sea Ice Anomalies
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Astrid Ogilvie, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 10/31/2023
* USD 272,225.00

Arctic sea ice is not just a passive indicator of climate change, but also an
active agent of change. Interactions between sea ice, oceans, and the atmosphere
affect the global climate system in ways that are not yet fully understood. This
project focuses on understanding how sudden changes in the export of sea ice
(Great Sea Ice Anomalies or GSIAs) from the Arctic Ocean through Fram Strait
(between Svalbard and Greenland) and along the East Greenland Current can have
far-reaching and long-lasting effects in the subpolar North Atlantic. For
example, in the 1960s and 1970s, a large and abrupt influx of sea ice and
freshwater from the Arctic Ocean led to a strong anomaly in the salinity of the
northern Atlantic Ocean (what has become known as the Great Salinity Anomaly).
There are indications that such GSIA events have occurred in the past, but the
frequency, intensity, and causes of such events are not yet understood. The
research team is assembling data from historical and cultural records dating
back to 1600 to identify potential anomalies and combining these results with
advanced modelling results to understand potential triggers of GSIAs and how
their occurrence affects the North Atlantic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
will investigate abrupt GSIAs in the Atlantic Arctic using multiple lines of
evidence based on data from long observational time series, historical, and
proxy records of sea ice spanning several centuries in the waters near
southwestern Greenland, northern Iceland, and the western Nordic Seas. These
data will provide an empirical foundation required to assess the occurrence and
origins of GSIAs and explore three hypotheses: (1) GSIAs of decadal to
multidecadal duration are recurrent events, with the (sub)decadal sea ice
anomaly leading to the 1960–70s salinity anomaly being a moderate realization;
(2) GSIAs can be initiated spontaneously from natural internal climate-system
variability alone; and (3) sea ice anomalies east of Greenland and multidecadal
variability in Atlantic Ocean sea-surface temperatures are coupled
bidirectionally. The research will provide the first-ever consistent catalog of
GSIAs and improve our fundamental understanding of how abrupt changes in sea ice
in the Atlantic Arctic occur. The research will provide important historical
perspectives and contribute to a better understanding of changes in the Arctic
system. This research has broad scientific importance because abrupt changes in
sea ice export may influence ocean circulation and temperatures, marine
ecosystems, and climate across the northern North
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.