* 2127349
* Discovery and Design with the FAST Principle: Following Local Models of Stability to Emergent Phenomena in Intermetallic Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Daniel Fredrickson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 537,184.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: The role played by metallic materials in the advancement
of prosperity and national security is evolving. Research in these materials has
increasingly shifted from mechanical properties, conductivity, and corrosion
resistance to more exotic effects related to the quantum nature of electrons,
such as the resistance-free conduction of electric currents, advanced magnetic
phenomena, and the conversion of thermal energy into electric energy. Underlying
these properties is a startling diversity in the geometrical arrangements that
the atoms of materials can form at the microscopic level. Understanding and
learning how to control these arrangements is a limiting factor in the design of
new metallic materials. This project is promoting the progress of science by
building a predictive model for how different types of interactions between
neighboring atoms in a metal propagate to form the observed complex atomic
arrangements, opening avenues to the discovery of new materials. Theoretical
calculations are being used to analyze these interactions and explore their
implications, while databases of structural information are scanned to identify
metallic materials in which intriguing behavior at the atomic level are
expected. The predictions of theory are guiding experimental investigations of
new metallic compounds, which provide feedback on the models being developed.
This project also impacts the training and education in the STEM fields, with an
emphasis on solid state chemistry. New content is being created for the Science
through Comics website, which uses relatable analogies and humor to inspire
interest in science. In addition, the free on-line textbook Interactive Solid
State Chemistry is being developed for dissemination to a broad range of
students and educators in collaboration with LibreTexts. Here, comics
introducing the materials are integrated with interactive tools for active
student engagement, such as structure models that can be manipulated in three
dimensions. The research team is also increasing the participation of members of
underrepresented groups in the sciences through outreach activities and
mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY: Intermetallic phases are a
rich source of potential functional materials, as they combine an unparalleled
structural diversity with valuable physical properties. To fully realize this
promise, however, design principles are still needed for guiding the crystal
structures of these phases, such that their structure-properties relationships
can by systematically investigated, and materials with structures tailored to
specific applications can be prepared. In this project, the need for such design
principles is being addressed through the development of the predictive
capabilities of the Frustrated and Allowed Structural Transitions (FAST)
approach. Of the many transformations or modifications a structure could
potentially undergo, those that involve cooperation between the various factors
influencing stability can be expected to out-compete energetically those in
which the factors conflict with each other. In one component of this work, the
scope of the FAST approach is being expanded through the computer-aided
screening of crystal structure databases for geometrical features associated
with easy transitions, yielding candidate structures for theoretical analysis
and experimental investigation. Simultaneously, the completeness of the FAST
picture is tested and improved through its application to the structural
preferences involving 18-n+m isomerism in transition metal-main group
intermetallics, in which a variety of bonding configurations are used by
different compounds to adhere to the 18-n electron counting rule for any given
electron count. Finally, the predictive implications of the FAST schemes are
explored by translating these pictures into force field models for large-scale
molecular dynamics simulations. Predictions of emergent structural properties,
such as incommensurate modulations or phase transitions, are pursued
experimentally. In all of these endeavors, the experimental results are being
used to refine the theoretical and conceptual
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.