* 2127012
* STTR Phase I:  High-Yield Platform Process for Fabrication of Unique Nanofiber Materials
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Anthony Brayer, TRUSPIN NANOMATERIAL INNOVATION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to enable nanofiber integration in a wide
variety of applications that were previously cost prohibitive. The technology
will enable both the cost-efficient production of nanofibers at commercially
acceptable rates, as well as the development of unique nanofiber materials with
properties compatible with specific industry uses. The high-capacity batteries
developed as part of this effort may give rise to advancements in the energy
industry enabling electricity distribution via microgrids and solar arrays, in
turn supporting energy resilience, independence, and sustainability. Further,
the commercialization of this technology platform for facile nanofiber
production at scale may create prospects for nanofiber use across a multitude of
industries, such as: textiles for fine-mesh surgical face masks and thermal
regulating clothing, remediation of water and air, tissue engineering and wound
care, and defense applications such as low-weight aircraft, bulletproof
uniforms, and personal protective equipment for use against chemical/biological
agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project develops a low cost, high-throughput process to fabricate
nanofibers with unique properties, enabling their integration into a variety of
end applications. Traditional DC electrospinning methods have low nanofiber
production rates, preventing their widespread adoption. This project develops an
alternating field electrospinning (AFES) process capable of producing a wide
variety of unique nanofibers at a rate thousands of times faster than existing
systems. Phase I research objectives include: the characterization of different
thermal settings for AFES electrospinning and studies of the impacts on material
properties, the expansion of classes of materials compatible with the AFES
system, and the fabrication of materials with application-specific properties.
This work will involve extensive testing and characterization of nanofibers
produced under a variety of thermal process settings. The researchers will also
incorporate the nanofibers into lithium ion batteries to quantify capabilities
and identify optimal silicon nanofiber characteristics for the
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.