* 2127509
* Engineering Fellows Postdoctoral Fellowship Program
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2027
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Fellowship Award
* Christine Grant
* 05/31/2027
* USD 18,394,366.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic
has propelled a technological revolution that is radically transforming the way
in which we live and work, including a significant disruption in the higher
education ecosystem. While the ultimate impact of the pandemic is still unknown,
the U.S. academic sector continues to face hiring freezes, lost jobs, and
general job market uncertainty. These negative consequences are
disproportionately impacting women and other underrepresented groups as well as
low-resourced institutions. This perfect storm occurs at a time when the primacy
of U.S. innovation and research is facing unprecedented competitive pressure and
providing pathways to retain highly talented researchers in their fields is
crucial. As a country, we cannot afford to lose an entire cohort of highly
educated research engineers, but we are in danger of doing just that as doctoral
engineering students graduate into an extremely challenging job market that
could force them to abandon their advanced research career ambitions. To address
this need, the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) will launch the
Engineering Fellows (E-Fellows) program, enabling recent engineering doctoral
graduates to obtain two-year postdoctoral positions at U.S. academic
institutions despite the current economic downturn caused by the COVID-19
pandemic. The E-Fellows program will provide rich postdoctoral experiences that
will prepare participants for successful research careers in academia or
industry while also serving as an employment bridge during a time of hiring
freezes and job market uncertainty, helping to retain fellows who might
otherwise leave the engineering research career pathway. The E-Fellows program
will support a total of sixty fellows from diverse backgrounds, for two years in
two cohorts, starting in fall 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The E-Fellows program
will scaffold and prepare these two cohorts of engineering researchers and serve
as a pilot to validate program design tenets that will enable the engineering
community to prepare the engineering workforce that industry and society will
need in coming years. Based on the successful Computing Innovation Fellows
(CIFellows) program, the E-Fellows program will bridge the gap to provide hands-
on experience in academic research, attract and retain new doctoral students
into academic pathways, boost connections to our nation's best scholars, prepare
new doctoral students to navigate the challenging job market, and retain them in
technical research fields. Application and selection to the E-Fellows program
will follow a comprehensive evaluation of merit and diversity indicators (along
individual and institutional dimensions), with emphasis on intellectual merit
and broader impacts in applicant materials. This unique new fellowship program
will be supported by research-based, high-impact educational methods such as the
application of a cohort model, implementation of first-year and culminating
experiences, enactment of networking and mentoring experiences, and fulfillment
of andragogical just-in-time professional development, within an intentionally
designed outcome-based experiential learning theoretical framework. A five-year
longitudinal evaluation will be completed for each cohort to evaluate the
effectiveness of the fellowship in (1) preparing E-Fellows to be job market
savvy and (2) retaining E-Fellows as researchers in their fields. The outputs of
the fellowshipâ€™s longitudinal evaluation will inform future engineering
fellowship design necessary to maintain U.S. technological
leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.