* 2127375
* Collaborative Research: The relative roles of ecology, evolution, and experience in solving novel problems
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Sarah Brosnan, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 12/31/2024
* USD 187,180.00

Innovation and learning are fundamental human traits, but they are thought to be
costly to evolve due to the cognitive capacities necessary to support them. This
research project tests hypotheses relevant to understanding the context in which
social learning emerges to uncover the selective pressures driving innovation,
behavioral flexibility, and a propensity to learn from others. Specifically,
this project investigates how ecological and social factors influence social
transmission of information in primates with differing baseline use of social
learning. The project provides much-needed field-based research opportunities
for underrepresented and lower-income students. The project also improves
research partnerships that build capacity at minority-serving institutions, and
disseminates findings broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study investigates social learning among
non-human primates that share many features with humans, including large brains
relative to body size, extensive cooperation, innovative social conventions, and
refined foraging skills. These characteristics make them excellent candidates
for studying the factors that influence the emergence of innovation and social
learning. This research investigates how evolutionary pressures, ecological
need, and social experience influence problem-solving and social learning
strategies in two closely-related species that differ in tool use and social
traditions that may impact their propensity to innovate and learn from others.
The project will compare a) problem solving, b) behavioral flexibility, and c)
social learning strategies across these populations. This research will
highlight the impacts of cognitive differences, ecological necessity, and
previous experiences on individuals’ ability to solve novel problems and
transmit that knowledge to others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.