* 2127468
* STTR Phase I:  Automated Continuous Varroa Mite Monitor for Honeybee Hive Health
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Steve Cantley, IF, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,262.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project addresses the health of
honeybee hives and the associated $15 billion in annual agricultural services.
Honeybee hives are susceptible to the parasitic Varroa destructor mite; unless
the hive is treated, the presence of the Varroa mite eventually proves fatal to
any bee colony it infests. Monitoring mite levels in beehives requires partial
disassembly of the hive and the best counting method sacrifices some bees. Most
of the nation’s 120,000+ beekeepers do not adequately test for mites. The
expected output of this project is a low-cost, battery-operated “Internet-of-
Things” device that can be placed inside hives, passively counting the Varroa
mite population, and reporting the results to the beekeeper. The count can be
used to indicate when mite treatment is needed and whether the treatment was
effective. It prevents costly and unneeded prophylactic treatments that can lead
to resistance in mite populations. This project fosters bee colonies that are
healthy and productive, while reducing beekeeper workload and reducing
unnecessary chemical treatments for beehives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is in the novel investigation of the use of
near-infrared light wavelengths to determine where acceptable contrast exists
between the exoskeletons of honeybees and Varroa mites, and the recognition of
parasitic Varroa mites using modern artificial intelligence techniques that can
be scaled to down for use in an edge computing environment that has significant
limitations in terms of power availability and processing speed. The Phase I
effort will integrate an infrared camera with variable wavelength narrowband
infrared LED illumination, and photograph unparasitized and mite-infested
honeybees. Human researchers will identify mites and use scored images to train
an artificial intelligence engine to detect and count the
mites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.