* 2127752
* RI: Small: Efficient and Just Allocation of Scarce Societal Resources, and Applications to Homelessness
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Sanmay Das, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 333,549.00

This project studies algorithms for efficient and just allocation of scarce
societal resources. The investigators will study fundamental questions related
to algorithmic decision making in the context of disparate needs and resource
availability. Key questions include how to define and quantify desirable
outcomes in terms of both efficiency and fairness; how to predict outcomes of
different types of interventions for different households; and how to optimize
the allocation of scarce resources that achieve the best societal outcomes under
constraints defined by notions of fairness, preferences of participants, and
incentives created by service delivery systems as a whole. The algorithmic
approach taken by the team will lead to more efficient and socially beneficial
use of the limited resources available to communities for mitigating the central
social problem of homelessness, while respecting the notions of need and
fairness on which current allocation mechanisms are based. This project is among
the first to explore how principles of local justice can be applied in the
pursuit of ethical algorithmic intervention in society, contributing to the
ongoing dialogue on fair machine learning and AI and Mechanism Design for Social
Good. The project also contributes to the training of graduate students,
research experiences for undergraduates, and broadening participation in
computing through involvement of underrepresented populations in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will develop new models to understand
the effects of different algorithmic techniques for allocation of scarce
societal resources, with a focus on defining objective functions that take into
account both efficiency and considerations of fairness. They will develop
analytical models of how agents evolve in their needs for services, and their
vulnerability states, and solve these models in order to characterize optimal
policies, given different assumptions about how intervention affects different
types of agents. Using these models, the team will study the "price of justice"
or the efficiency loss incurred in order to achieve different objectives. The
theoretical modeling will be informed by real data on the use of homelessness
services in a major metropolitan area. The team will also study new problems in
optimal dynamic allocation of limited societal resources, considering carefully
how predictions about the entire probability distributions of outcomes for
agents (rather than just point estimates) can be used in the process of
optimizing resource allocation over sets of agents that could need to use social
services at different times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.