* 2127607
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Watershed Dynamics and Flood Hydrology on Mangrove Sedimentation in Tropical Coastal Catchments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Shannon Jones, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 24,935.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal watersheds are
increasingly at risk from major floods due to increased sea-level rise and human
modification of the landscape. However, more localized flood research and
modelling is needed, particularly in regions that lack information on local
storm impacts and streamflow. Recent literature has focused on coastal flooding
from sea-level rise, with much less attention to upstream contributions of
channel flow or localized differences in flooding within the watershed. Often
areas that lack sufficient flood information are where extreme floods are likely
to be more severe and devastating to local communities. Traditionally, flood
management has heavily relied on instrumental and modelling methods and has
excluded valuable information on the duration and extent of flooding from locals
affected by these events. This investigation advances integrated methods for
characterizing the extent of flooding in watersheds. Research on this topic
helps to inform management decisions pertaining to local flood risks and
ecosystem management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project
investigates extreme floods in a representative data-limited coastal watershed
by using household surveys and preserved evidence of flooding in the landscape
to create a graphical representation of the most recent extreme flood event.
These data are also used in a locally calibrated rainfall-runoff model to
estimate the timing and intensity of extreme floods. The findings of this
investigation help to establish baseline estimates on the relationship between
rainfall and runoff. An additional objective of this research is to understand
how more recent land-use changes affect coastal flooding, which is assessed by
analyzing satellite imagery to highlight major changes in the channel,
coastline, and watershed drainage area. To determine how often extreme floods
occur on longer timescales, the investigators are extracting sediment cores from
coastal mangroves and analyzing for evidence of flood deposits. Combined, these
methods provide a robust assessment of past extreme floods and highlight the
importance of using multiple data sources and local information to improve flood
planning and management. Furthermore, these methods help to reduce uncertainty
in flood modelling and provide an improved understanding of flooding in any
data-limited region around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.