* 2127272
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Fate of the Caribou: from local knowledge to range-wide dynamics in the changing Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Mark Hebblewhite, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 10/31/2024
* USD 669,931.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among the natural environment and built
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data and
Observation, Forecasting, and Global Impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most
abundant large animal in the Arctic is caribou (Rangifer tarandus). Caribou have
significant influences on social and natural systems. These animals perform the
longest terrestrial migrations on Earth in herds of up to half a million
individuals. Caribou are central to the spiritual and material culture of
Indigenous peoples across the North. In many communities, food security depends
directly on caribou presence. Caribou are also an important part of Arctic
ecosystems through their impact on forest and tundra. It is therefore extremely
concerning that global caribou numbers have declined over recent decades, with
some herds collapsing by over 95% since 1990. These declines are likely related
to the many environmental changes occurring in the Arctic, but the true causes
are unknown. This research follows the leadership of Indigenous communities and
other stakeholders to directly address the future of caribou across northern
Alaska and Canada. The project trains students and postdoctoral fellows at
several U.S. universities, contributing to a strong STEM workforce. Results are
disseminated broadly, and data are accessible to the public, including valuable
new spatial data products and visualizations. Understanding caribou decline is
one of the most pressing concerns in the Arctic, and this project provides data
to inform decision-making on the management of a vital resource.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests hypotheses that relate specific
climatic and ecological relationships to the movements of populations of
migratory caribou. The hypotheses are directly informed by local observations
and the immediate concerns of affected communities. Several relevant changes in
Arctic environments include: tundra vegetation, snow quality and quantity, fire
regimes, insect harassment, and impacts of built environments. The analyses use
an unprecedented compilation of caribou monitoring and satellite collar tracking
data amassed by partners in territorial and federal agencies across northern
Alaska and Canada, combined with Indigenous Knowledge and remote sensing of
vegetation, fire, snow, and land-cover. Strong, well-established relationships
with Arctic community partners, including Indigenous-led co-management
governance boards and government agencies, enable a broad knowledge base. By
leveraging an enormous collaborative network, it is possible to compare and
contrast caribou populations, highlighting both fundamental processes and local
particularities of relevant interactions. The ultimate outcome will be the
ability to generally anticipate the fate of caribou as the Arctic continues to
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.