* 2127780
* Hyperdimensional Neural Computation for Real-Time Cognitive Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Mohsen Imani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

With each passing year, the volume of analyzable data continues to explode, with
new information gathered from a variety of video, sensors, and informatics
platforms. Therefore, we face increasing needs for machine learning techniques
to adaptively analyze this large-scale data and transform that into actionable
knowledge. Today's machine learning algorithms, however, have the following key
technical challenges: (1) they are extremely slow and inefficient on lightweight
embedded devices, e.g., smartphones or smartwatches, (2) they are very
vulnerable to noise and failures that often exist in highly scaled technology
and network, and (3) they lack brain-like cognitive support and adaptation to
provide a high quality of learning and a reason for each prediction and
decision. To achieve real-time performance with high energy efficiency and
robustness, we redesign algorithms using strategies that more closely model the
human brain. We leverage Hyper-Dimensional Computing (HDC), a brain-inspired
method, motivated by the observation that the human brain operates on high-
dimensional space. In HDC, objects are encoded into high-dimensional vectors to
represent neural patterns with thousands of elements. This encoding transforms
data into knowledge that enables lightweight cognitive learning. In this
project, we develop an infrastructure that supports a wide range of learning and
cognitive tasks with high robustness and efficiency. Our open-source
infrastructure provides real-time and dynamic learning, with a wide range of
applications in intelligent healthcare, environmental monitoring, and smart
distributed systems. The project will also support underrepresented minority
students through synergistic outreach plans and educational activities,
including programs for K-12 students, undergraduate research opportunities, and
new course development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel research approaches
introduced in this project aim to lay the foundations for deeper integration of
brain-inspired mathematics, learning algorithm, and hardware. This includes the
development of: (1) encoding methods that map various spatial-temporal data into
high-dimensional space, including simple numerical values to complex
video/images, (2) algorithmic solutions that enable brain-like learning and
cognitive tasks over encoded data, and (3) hardware-software libraries that
significantly accelerate the HDC algorithms. Our programmable processor natively
supports HDC operations while utilizing extensive parallelism offered by
multiple hardware platforms. We will evaluate the effectiveness of our framework
on multiple large-scale systems, including smart home and environmental
monitoring. Our prototypes will be fully released under an established open-
source library for wide public dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.