* 2127781
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Mechanisms for Auctions and Markets - The Interplay of Incentives and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jan Vondrak, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Auctions are at the epicenter of algorithmic game theory. From a practical
perspective, the importance of auctions stems from their numerous applications,
in digital-commerce platforms such as eBay, in huge government-run endeavors
like the spectrum auctions, and as the basis for the online advertisement
industry. The emergence of such huge auctions has led to the necessity of
designing auctions that can handle vast amounts of data. From a mathematical
point of view, which is the focus of this project, auctions present an elegant
mathematical model that allows one to study the intersecting roles of various
elements that are crucial for market design, such as optimization, incentives,
and computational and information-theoretic limitations. Indeed, the rise of
algorithmic mechanism design can be attributed to the demand for mechanisms
which are computationally tractable and yet are powerful enough to properly
handle the incentives of the players. The rich toolbox of theoretical computer
science for designing and analyzing large-scale systems is a perfect candidate
for applying in the context of auctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses the clash of incentives and optimization objectives in combinatorial
auctions. In some settings the underlying optimization problem is easy from a
computational point of view, but it is impossible to incentivize the players
properly. An example domain here is the classic bilateral trade problem
introduced by Myerson and Satterthwaite. The small size of the problem makes it
computationally unchallenging. However, taking into account the incentives of
agents limits the set of applicable algorithms. In contrast, combinatorial
auctions involve a large number of players and multiple resources to be
allocated. In these settings, the optimization task of welfare maximization
itself is challenging. This project addresses the difficulty of welfare
maximization in several fundamental settings, as well as the difficulty of
reconciling existing algorithmic techniques with the requirement of incentive-
compatibility. Whether computationally efficient approximation algorithms are
more powerful than their incentive-compatible counterparts has been the subject
of extensive research. Only very recently, the first gap between the power of
the two families was demonstrated. The goal of this project is to prove a
significant separation between the power of incentive-compatible mechanisms and
algorithms without this requirement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.