* 2127592
* Harnessing nonlinear electrokinetic effects for microparticle identification and separation in microfluidic devices
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Blanca Lapizco-Encinas, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 348,435.00

Portable laboratories, also known as lab-on-a-chip systems, are capable of
performing multiple analyses in a device that will easily fit in your hand.
Microfluidics, which is the manipulation of very small volumes of liquid, is
what makes lab-on-a-chip devices possible. Miniaturization enables portability
and accessibility and shortens analysis time. For portable microfluidic devices
to work, separation and analytical methods must be implemented in the devices.
Although efficient and robust separation techniques for analyzing nano-sized
particles, such as protein molecules, have been successfully used in
microfluidic devices, similar techniques for the separation and analysis of
larger micron-sized particles, such as microorganisms, are not available. This
project will investigate the use of electric fields, or electrokinetics, for
separating and analyzing micron-sized particles inside a microfluidic device. By
analyzing this migration of particles, it is possible to identify the
microparticle type and to separate mixtures of microparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent reports have revealed that the nonlinear
electrokinetic (EK) phenomenon of electrophoresis of the second kind is a
dominant effect on the electromigration of beads and microorganisms in
insulator-based EK (iEK) systems. These findings unveiled a major change in the
field of microscale electrokinetics that revolutionized this entire research
area; for many years it was believed that the phenomenon of dielectrophoresis
was the dominant effect in these systems. This project focuses on using this new
knowledge to understand particle electromigration under linear and nonlinear EK
effects and develop a new separation technique that combines nonlinear EK
phenomena with the principles of chromatographic theory. By using mathematical
modeling and experimentation, the theory and basic equations of the new
technique of nonlinear electrokinetic chromatography will be developed. These
equations will relate the distinct EK mobilities of the microparticles to
separation performance parameters such as particle retention time and separation
resolution. The project will advance the state of the art in microscale
electrokinetics by developing a new technique that exploits nonlinear EK
effects. The present project will provide a research opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students, and will also assist in providing research
opportunities for female students through the Women in Engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.