* 2127080
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Holographic 3D Optical Metrology Tool for Precision Low-Volume Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2023
* George Herring, DIFFRACT TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,901.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is for the
development of a precision three-dimensional (3D) optical metrology tool for in-
process quality control. The proposed tool uses a high-resolution, computer-
defined 3D light field to perform rapid multipoint non-contact measurements on
parts during the fabrication process. The tool uses an adaptive process to
enable 3D metrology with sub-10-micron resolution, at a fraction of the price of
competing technologies. Low-volume, high-precision manufacturing plays a
critical role in the global economy and is currently a limiting factor in the
creation of new assembly lines, larger volume manufacturing, research timelines,
and tool creation. The tool itself will benefit small businesses in hardware
development by improving part quality through feedback during the manufacturing
process. Already, surface inspection systems account for a global $3.7 billion
market which is projected to grow to $5.3 billion over the next five years. This
strategically impactful innovation is aimed at assisting small businesses,
students, trainees, and professional specialty machinists in achieving complex,
precision tolerances on low-volume parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this project advances core technology for precise optical projections,
based on a novel component that generates a computer-defined high-resolution
projected light field to enable both versatility and high-performance metrology.
A programmable light field creates the opportunity for direct user feedback by
projecting real-time measurement information onto the part under inspection. The
objective of this study is to measure and optimize the design of this
programmable device by experimentally evaluating the device stability, field of
view, spatial resolution, and efficiency for several design permutations.
Additional goals include evaluating the device for its manufacturability,
repeatability, and commercial viability. Simulations suggest capabilities
including a 60-degree angular field of view and sub-10-micron projection spot
size at a nominal working distance of 40 centimeters. Further development of
this core technology, when combined with commercially available components, will
enable the creation of a compact, high-precision, economically viable tool that
provides exceptional reliability for metrology
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.