* 2127438
* NNA Planning: Developing community frameworks for improving food security in Greenland through fermented foods
* GEO,RISE
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Maria Marco, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2024
* USD 307,287.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. The
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security, and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region, and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by addressing interactions among social systems, natural environments,
and the built environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents and
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inuit communities have sustained themselves in
the Arctic for millennia through systematic knowledge about the ecosystem of
which they are a part. There is a growing lack of access to affordable,
culturally significant, and nutritious food in these Arctic communities. This
food insecurity stems from multiple factors, including an increasing reliance on
global industrial food systems, and the loss of Inuit knowledge regarding
traditional food production. The latter has resulted in part due to negative
stereotypes that label traditional foods as unsafe or unappetizing. Fermented
foods are among those traditional foods that have been the most criticized,
despite the fact that they provide a valuable source of nutrition and health
benefits. The goal of this project is to support the resurgence of Inuit
fermented foods by generating positive, factual outreach that recognizes and
values the knowledge of Indigenous fermenters. This research will develop an
Inuit-led, self-sustaining, and collaborative network in Greenland to promote
Inuit fermented foods and food safety. Successful completion of these efforts
will lead to improved scientific understanding of food security in Arctic
communities from an Indigenous perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term
goal of this research is to improve food security in Inuit communities. This
goal will be accomplished by reversing negative narratives about Inuit fermented
foods by creating positive, factual, desire-based feedback loops rooted in Inuit
knowledge. The specific objective of this project is to record the Indigenous
knowledge of Southern Greenland fermenters. These efforts will identify
community food security concerns, engage stakeholders to bring together
perspectives from Inuit fermenters and other Greenlandic food authorities, and
integrate different forms of knowledge to identify critical research needs in
Greenland and the Arctic more broadly. Successful completion of this project
will benefit society by i) developing a foundation to address food insecurity in
Inuit communities by understanding traditional Inuit fermentation practices; and
ii) evaluating community fermentation practices that have become over reliant on
non-Inuit infrastructure for food supply in recent generations. This research
will center Inuit social networks and practices that sustain knowledge and
interest in fermented foods as a means to secure safe inclusion of these
culturally significant foods in local food systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.