* 2127343
* NNA Research: Collaborative Research: Frozen Commons: Change, Resilience and Sustainability in the Arctic
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Nikolay Shiklomanov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 08/31/2026
* USD 852,749.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is
one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects address convergence scientific
challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This Arctic research is needed to
inform the economy, security and resilience of the Nation, the larger region and
the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships from local to international
scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic researchers, enhances efforts
in formal and informal education, and integrates the co-production of knowledge
where appropriate. This award fulfills part of that aim by addressing
interactions among social systems, the natural environment, and the built
environment in the following NNA focus areas: Arctic Residents, Data and
Observation, Education, Forecasting, and Resilient Infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies convergent methodologies to study the
Arctic Frozen Commons (FC), defined as the ice, snow, and permafrost landscapes
collectively used and governed by communities and numerous non-local
stakeholders. While significant knowledge exists around biophysical
characteristics of the cryosphere, this remains largely separate from its
cultural and social understandings among local and Indigenous communities,
culminating in poor integration around the use and governance of Frozen Commons
in a rapidly changing Arctic. An enhanced understanding of interacting processes
in the social, cultural, technological, environmental, and governance domains
for frozen commons is critical to framing sustainable Arctic futures. This
project advances transdisciplinary research by converging Arts, Science, Local
and Indigenous Knowledge systems (ArtSLInK) for developing a deeper
understanding of FC resilience and sustainability. ArtSLInK encompasses
synchronous, equitable, co-productive engagement across the social and natural
sciences, the arts and place-based local and Indigenous knowledge systems, each
with their distinct modes of exploration and
expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates social, technological,
and environmental domains of frozen commons, and explicitly engages with
governance implications across diverse worldviews and management narratives. The
project addresses three research questions: 1) What FC are recognized by
culturally diverse Indigenous and local communities and regional stakeholders,
2) How are they governed within specific cultural domains?, and 3) What are the
major sociocultural, environmental, technological, and infrastructural driving
forces and their interrelations that affect the resilience and sustainability of
FC? The project pursues the following objectives: (1) to identify and inventory
community relevant FC; (2) to situate knowledge of FC using a social-ecological-
technological systems (SETS) framework; (3) to understand interactions between
sociocultural, environmental, and technology infrastructure domains affecting
the availability, quality, and use of FC; and (4) to use integrated modeling
approaches to determine sources of resilience and sustainability for FC under
changing conditions. The project applies a transdisciplinary and comparative
research framework for two rural-urban community pairs in Russia and the U.S.
(Alaska) that are representative of different community sizes, governance
regimes, socioeconomic arrangements, and geographies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.