* 2127524
* Collaborative Research: Metabolic habitat barriers imposed on tropical diel vertical migrators
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Christopher Roman, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 364,591.00

This project is seeking to define physiologically-accessible habitat for animals
faced with changing ocean conditions. Many oceanic animals migrate daily from
warm, oxygenated surface waters at night to deep, cold and hypoxic waters during
the daytime, and these migrations play critical roles in oceanic ecology and
biogeochemical cycles. Over their depth ranges, migrators face very different
ecological and environmental demands that may lead to unique traits that in
turn, influence how they respond to a warming ocean where oxygen minimum zones
are also expanding. This study is combining ecological and physiological
approaches during two expeditions to the Gulf of California. The investigators
are measuring metabolic traits in a diverse suite of ocean animals that exhibit
vertical migration to determine possible roles of oxygen and temperature in
triggering changes in vertical and latitudinal distribution. They are also
measuring species distributions in relation to environmental oxygen and
temperature to determine ecologically-relevant thresholds of environmental
tolerance. The project involves training and experiential learning for graduate
and undergraduate students. In addition, engagement with educational experts and
artists will generate media and lesson plans to support STEM education and Next
Generation Science Standards. These activities leverage the Bermuda Institute of
Ocean Sciences’ Databytes and Mid-Atlantic Robotics IN Education (MARINE)
programs, designed to improve ocean literacy and technological fluency and
targeting students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science.
Project products also include a new level for a video game that introduces the
concepts of how oxygen minimum zones influence animal
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is driving poleward shifts in
the distributions of marine animals. These shifting edges of the range of
species habitats are often interpreted as a manifestation of oxygen limitation
that is presumed to occur at high water temperatures due to a mismatch between
physiological oxygen supply and thermodynamically-driven oxygen demand. However,
recent work by the investigators suggests that oxygen supply has evolved to meet
demand regardless of temperature. These opposing views predict very different
thermal thresholds for range expansion. In this study, the investigators are
employing a relationship between metabolic traits to infer a unique temperature
sensitivity in tropical diel vertical migrators and to map their metabolically-
available habitat in the Eastern Pacific. Specifically, the investigators
propose that oxygen supply does not limit metabolism in tropical migrators, even
in the oxygen minimum zone. Instead, they contend that the active metabolic rate
for tropical migrators is highly sensitive to temperature, and that this creates
a barrier to range expansion where the aerobic scope for growth and reproduction
is insufficient in cold waters. This temperature sensitivity will also allow
migrators to expand poleward to newly available habitat following modest
warming, rather than simply being extirpated from their native tropical habitat
by excess warming. This hypothesis, if supported, would transform our
mechanistic understanding of species’ responses to climate change, amend our
predictions of range expansion, and modify our assessment of migrator
contributions to oceanic biogeochemical cycles in a warmer future
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.