* 2127669
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Assessing the contribution of plastics to marine particulate organic carbon
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jason Guo, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 243,076.00

Like life and the natural organic material life leaves behind, plastics are
carbon-based. In use, plastics remain a wonder material, facilitating
technological advancement. However, once discarded, their durability allows
plastics to accumulate. One place that plastics are accumulating is at the
surface of the open ocean. This project will collect samples from the open ocean
and measure both natural organic carbon and plastic-carbon concentrations. The
team hypothesize that in some places at the surface ocean there will be as much
or even more plastic-carbon than natural organic carbon. If the team are
correct, this will change how they and other ocean scientists interpret the
carbon signatures observed in ocean samples and indicate our surface oceans have
been fundamentally changed by plastic pollution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics
are carbon-based polymers and an emergent component of the carbon-cycle. Data
for plastics and organic carbon at sea are collected by different scientific
communities, using different methods. Comparing data from these two communities
suggests plastic-carbon may now rival concentrations of biogenic OC at the
surface of the ocean. In this EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project, the team will conduct an interdisciplinary study combining
analysis of plastic-carbon and organic carbon for the same samples. Doing so in
the Atlantic Ocean at BATS/Hydrostation “S” will test the hypothesis that
plastic-carbon is now a significant fraction of total organic carbon at the sea
surface. The project will deliver new methods for plastic-carbon analysis,
including for nanoplastics down to 0.2 microns in size, and reveal whether ocean
scientists now need to consider the role of plastic-carbon as an analyte in
their samples and as an active component of the biogeochemistry and ecology of
the surface ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.