* 2127575
* AF: Small: Fundamental Questions in Communication and Computation Regarding Edit Type String Measures
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Xin Li, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 441,781.00

Strings are fundamental objects in many important computer
science&lt;br/&gt;applications, such as text/speech processing, bioinformatics,
data&lt;br/&gt;storage and access, and communication systems. However,
processing&lt;br/&gt;strings presents various challenges in computation and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;For example, many of today's applications involving
strings are&lt;br/&gt;implemented on large data sets, and the known algorithms
are often too&lt;br/&gt;costly in both time and space. Similarly, when strings
are transmitted&lt;br/&gt;between systems, errors like insertions and deletions
occur frequently,&lt;br/&gt;which can lead to problems from a simple
misunderstanding to a severe&lt;br/&gt;system failure. These challenges are
usually addressed by high cost&lt;br/&gt;solutions, where one either requires a
large amount of resources for the&lt;br/&gt;algorithms, or expensive hardware
that keeps systems strictly&lt;br/&gt;synchronized. The overarching goal of this
project is to understand the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental question of how to more
efficiently compute different&lt;br/&gt;string measures, and transmit strings
reliably in the presence of&lt;br/&gt;insertions and deletions. This will lead
to a deeper theoretical&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the nature of various string
measures and errors, as&lt;br/&gt;well as potentially much more efficient
solutions in practice. Examples&lt;br/&gt;of benefits include algorithms that
use much less resources for handling&lt;br/&gt;large data sets, and more
reliable communication systems in adversarial&lt;br/&gt;environments. The
project also has plans for mentoring PhD students,&lt;br/&gt;integration of the
research topics into courses taught to students from&lt;br/&gt;a variety of
different backgrounds, and support of under-represented&lt;br/&gt;groups of
students in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contains two sets
of specific goals. The first set of goals&lt;br/&gt;seeks to understand how to
design efficient error-correcting codes for&lt;br/&gt;insertions and deletions.
These include codes and document-exchange&lt;br/&gt;protocols over the binary
alphabet with asymptotically optimal&lt;br/&gt;parameters; codes that form a
linear subspace or have a low density&lt;br/&gt;parity check matrix, which allow
fast encoding and decoding; list&lt;br/&gt;decodable codes that can correct a
larger fraction of errors with&lt;br/&gt;outputting a small list of possibly
correct messages; and locally&lt;br/&gt;decodable codes that can correctly
recover any target message bit with&lt;br/&gt;only a few queries of the
codeword. The second set of goals investigates&lt;br/&gt;the space complexity of
various string measures, such as edit distance,&lt;br/&gt;longest common
subsequence, and longest increasing subsequence.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
goal is to both design algorithms that require much&lt;br/&gt;smaller space to
compute or approximate these string measures, and to&lt;br/&gt;prove better
space lower bounds in various models. These two sets of&lt;br/&gt;goals are also
naturally connected, since the codes in the first part&lt;br/&gt;can often be
used to give space lower bounds in the second part. The&lt;br/&gt;study of these
topics will be based on techniques from several different&lt;br/&gt;areas such
as probability theory, information theory, combinatorics,&lt;br/&gt;algorithm
design, communication complexity, and pseudorandomness, and&lt;br/&gt;will
further foster the interactions among these areas
towards&lt;br/&gt;breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.