* 2127334
* Collaborative Research: Socio-economic patterns, public perceptions, and climate vulnerabilities of water resources and quality
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* William D'Andrea, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 11/30/2024
* USD 196,357.00

Access to clean water is a fundamental requirement for a healthy society.
Numerous water safety crises in the past decade have shown that access to safe
drinking water is not a guarantee, however. Moreover, there is community- and
individual-level heterogeneity in relative vulnerability to water problems.
Individual characteristics are likely to affect perceptions of water, in turn
affecting decisions surrounding water use and associated health outcomes. This
project brings together an interdisciplinary team of scientists to examine
social, behavioral, health, and climatic issues related to water resources. In
addition to developing capacity at a minority-serving institution, the project
advances undergraduate teaching and training through curricular development and
hands-on research opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests social
science theories positing that ecological and social factors work together to
affect water and climate vulnerability. Research objectives include examining
the influence of social, economic, and political factors in water quality
remediation efforts in a context with contemporary and historical variation in
deployment of such efforts; and providing an analytical framework transferable
to other environmental remediation projects. To do so, this project documents
perceptions of water among diverse stakeholders, and how these perceptions
interact with individual and community characteristics. The project also
analyzes and provides data to document the full range of climate variability to
layer results within broader historical climatic fluctuations. Importantly, this
climate history will provide context for the lived experiences of people in the
region over space and time and allow improved modeling to anticipate future
changes in precipitation and water access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.