* 2127499
* Double-layered wide-bandgap photonic materials for efficient nonlinear applications without periodic poling
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Qing Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 395,000.00

Title: Double-layered wide-bandgap photonic materials for efficient nonlinear
applications without periodic poling&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing efficient,
scalable nonlinear nanophotonics platforms would enable a host of classical and
quantum applications including wavelength conversion, image restoration,
quantum-enhanced sensing and hacker-proof quantum communication. Currently,
efficient second-order nonlinear processes are predominantly realized by
applying the so-called quasi-phase-matching (QPM) technique in ferroelectric
materials such as lithium niobate, where the polarity of the material is
periodically poled (inverted) to achieve constructive interaction between
different waves. However, fabrication of QPM is challenging in thin-film
nanophotonics platforms such as lithium niobate-on-insulator, as the poling
period is significantly reduced compared to their bulky counterparts due to
stronger waveguide dispersion. In addition, given that QPM is customarily
designed for one specific nonlinear process, it is practically difficult to
implement multiple different nonlinear processes on the same chip, thus severely
limiting the scaling potential of integrated photonics. Finally, the QPM
technique cannot be easily generalized to non-ferroelectric materials such as
silicon carbide and aluminum nitride, as there is no known method to alter their
domain polarity other than during the growth period. This project aims to
develop a novel double-layered nanophotonics platform for efficient nonlinear
applications without periodic poling, which provides an elegant solution to some
of the most pressing issues faced by the broad integrated photonics community,
including tunability, efficiency and scalability. The double-layered device
concept can be generalized to most of second-order nonlinear materials such as
lithium niobate, silicon carbide, aluminum nitride, gallium nitride, gallium
phosphide, etc., potentially transforming the way of nonlinear optical processes
being implemented on these materials and improving the overall efficiency
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, this project also trains undergraduate and
graduate students in the area of optics and quantum photonics, and the research
findings will be integrated into relevant courses and outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core idea of this research is to stack two layers of
second-order nonlinear materials with opposite polarity and employ the second-
order transverse-magnetic mode as one of the interacting modes waves. This
configuration allows achieving phase matching and good modal overlap
simultaneously, which greatly simplifies the fabrication process and enables
scalable implementation of various nonlinear processes on the same chip. The
team of researchers will focus on two wide-bandgap photonic materials, i.e.,
lithium niobate and silicon carbide, which have generated a lot of recent
interests due to their unique material properties. Such double-layered
nanophotonics materials will be investigated for several important applications,
including efficient second-harmonic generation, sum-frequency generation, and
optical parametric oscillation in lithium niobate, and quantum frequency
conversion for converting single photons in the visible band to the telecom band
in silicon carbide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.