* 2127957
* SBIR Phase I:  Feasibility of Automated Computer Vision Analysis of Diabetic Foot Complication Images from an At-Home Non-Intrusive Imaging Mat
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,03/31/2023
* Eric Dahlseng, EMPO HEALTH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 03/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the prevalence of severe diabetic
foot ulcers. These ulcers affect one-fourth of patients with diabetes over their
lifetimes, significantly impacting mobility and life expectancy. When treatment
for an ulcer is too late, the only option is often amputation; in fact, diabetic
foot ulcers account for the majority of non-traumatic lower extremity
amputations. Reducing the incidence of severe ulcers will improve the health and
welfare of the American public as well as mitigate the economic burden of
diabetes on the American healthcare system. By some estimates, treatment for
diabetic foot ulcers accounts for one-third of all direct diabetic healthcare
spending. Therefore, preventing these ulcers would save the US healthcare system
tens of billions of dollars per year. The proposed solution will monitor foot
ulcers consistently to prevent further damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a computer
vision system for detecting and monitoring diabetic foot ulcers with an imaging
device. The current standard of care is for patients to inspect their own feet
visually every day, but these inspections happen inconsistently and unreliably.
If successful, this system will automatically identify patients’ feet
consistently across several days and lighting conditions. It will classify late-
stage wounds, allowing physicians to monitor progression or healing of ulcers.
Further, it will estimate the risk of future ulcers, enabling early-stage
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.