* 2127159
* SBIR Phase I:  High-throughput drug discovery system
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Mark Bernard, CAPIENDA BIOTECH, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to help chemists find drug candidates that can stick persistently to
the correct target and work better in patients. By coming off the target
prematurely, a drug stops working and may be cleared rapidly from the body.
Current state-of-the-art technologies find weak binders and are plagued by other
limitations. The system proposed herein tests large numbers of compounds at high
throughput during drug discovery and lead optimization, replacing current
systems with low throughput. The identified effective drugs must be selective to
the intended target. Furthermore, the proposed system will inform Artificial
Intelligence and Molecular Dynamics simulations for optimized algorithms
predicting drug performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
solve an unmet analytical need in drug discovery and lead optimization by
providing kinetic results at high throughput to refine drug designs. The
proposed novel instrument and assay chemistry system measures how long chemical
compounds stay on target. The solution will be benchmarked using FDA-approved
drugs that use an allosteric mechanism of action to engage protein kinases AKT1
and AKT2. Inhibitors will be profiled for biochemical binding kinetics,
thermodynamic analysis, and kinase selectivity in kinetic assays using novel
reagents and commercial instrumentation. Dissociation rates for the allosteric
drugs will be compared with literature reports. Analysis at several temperatures
will measure the activation energy for the kinase to release the allosteric
drug. The results will be a benchmark profile of kinetics and thermodynamics for
kinase-inhibitor interactions of successful approved drugs. An advanced
instrument will be built and tested in endpoint mode for sample handling, signal
linearity, background and dynamic range using control
reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.