* 2127532
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Constraining peridotite alteration timescales with environmental tracers (3H, 39Ar, 14C and 81Kr)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Amelia Vankeuren, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 146,619.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peridotite is the main constituent
of the Earth's upper mantle. Peridotite alteration through water-rock
interaction plays an important role in the global carbon budget and produces
hydrogen gas (H2) that can support lifeforms fueled by chemical energy. This
project will use the Samail ophiolite in Oman, the largest chunk of peridotite
rock at the Earth’s surface, as a field laboratory to investigate the process of
low temperature (25-60oC) peridotite alteration. Natural environmental tracers
in groundwater within the ophiolite will be used to provide a maximum timescale
for low temperature alteration and the source and supply rate of H2. These
results will eventually help to calculate the rate of low temperature peridotite
alteration and fluid flow through the ophiolite system and thus inform the use
of ophiolites for geological carbon dioxide storage to combat climate change.
They will also provide insight into the amount of chemical energy available to
support life in this extreme hyperalkaline environment and in other locations of
low temperature peridotite alteration on Earth and potentially elsewhere, like
Mars. This project will be transformative in the education and training of
geoscientists at two primarily undergraduate institutions: California State
University, Sacramento, a minority-serving institution, and Barnard College in
New York City, a women's college. The project will support student research
experiences through both faculty-mentored student projects and course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs). CURE classroom modules will be
publicly shared for use by other hydrogeology/geochemistry instructors
throughout the nation. The project will also support the development of
groundwater demonstration tanks to illustrate the use of environmental tracers
and the impact that precipitation of secondary minerals can have on groundwater
flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to use a suite of
environmental tracers in the hyperalkaline (pH 11-12) groundwater of the Samail
ophiolite to determine the maximum timescale of low temperature peridotite
alteration and the source and supply rate of H2 gas. Groundwater samples will be
collected using boreholes and sampling equipment recently installed in the
mantle peridotite of the Samail ophiolite as part of the International
Continental Scientific Drilling Program's Oman Drilling Project. Groundwater
ages are currently unknown and estimates span several orders of magnitude. For
this project, age distributions will be determined with environmental tracers
3H, 14C, stable noble gases, 39Ar and/or 81Kr. These ages will place upper
bounds on the timescale of low temperature peridotite alteration and help
determine if the water-rock interaction causing this alteration is taking place
in the hydraulically conductive near-surface or if there are deeper, and/or
older contributions. Other tracers (dissolved He and H2, 3He/4He ratios, and δ2H
in H2) will be used to distinguish between several previously proposed sources
of H2 in hyperalkaline groundwater: local production by low temperature water-
rock interaction, transport from deeper sources, or release through weathering
of fluid inclusions formed by peridotite alteration at higher temperature.
Finally, the combination of groundwater ages and measured H2 concentrations will
be used to quantify a minimum H2 accumulation rate in the aquifer. This H2
accumulation rate can then be used in bioenergetic calculations of the capacity
to support chemosynthetic microbial life in this unique
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.