* 2127380
* RUI: Processing ambiguity: From initial perception to race classification of multiracial faces in diverse observers
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Debbie Ma, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 351,755.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;America’s multiracial population
represents one of its fastest growing segments. In the 50 years following the
legalization of interracial marriage in the US, multiracial individuals have
grown to represent 6.9% of the American population, a figure poised to triple by
2060. By their very nature, multiracial people challenge conventional either-or
thinking about race, offering important avenues for improving race relations.
This research investigates basic cognitive and social psychological influences
on multiracial face perception with these broader impacts in mind. Understanding
how perceivers think about and racially categorize multiracial people also has
consequences for both the physical and mental well-being of multiracial
individuals themselves. As a result, it has become increasingly important to
understand how multiracial people think about their racial identity and how they
are perceived by others. Research has consistently found that people are
generally unable to categorize multiracial people as multiracial. Understanding
why and under what circumstances people fail to recognize others as multiracial
forms the basis for the current research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
tests the hypothesis that the inability to identify multiracial people as
multiracial is not universal but depends on the extent to which one’s past
experiences foster a mental representation of multiracial others. It is
predicted that people from areas with a relatively large multiracial population
will be more attuned to multiracial faces than those with little prior exposure
and will therefore be more likely to identify such faces as multiracial. This
research also explores the elements of cognitive processing as they rapidly
unfold during the perception of monoracial and multiracial faces. Using reaction
time modeling and recordings of electrical brain activity with
electroencephalography (EEG), the research aims to identify distinct stages of
processing that occur between initially seeing a face and its eventual
categorization. Unpacking these processing stages will allow an examination of
how they differ when viewing a multiracial versus monoracial face, and how they
may be differentially tuned by level of prior contact with multiracial people.
Critically, the research fosters active student involvement by providing hands-
on, technical training in scientific research methods and statistical
procedures, professional development, and intensive mentorship of
underrepresented students of color. These funds also allow for increased access
to neuroscientific tools and training by traditionally underserved students,
thereby diversifying the scientific pipeline for years to
come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.