* 2127156
* NNA Planning: Co-Designing Civic Education for the Circumpolar North
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jason Young, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Navigating the New Arctic (NNA) is one of NSF's 10 Big Ideas. NNA projects
address convergence scientific challenges in the rapidly changing Arctic. This
Arctic research is needed to inform the economy, security and resilience of the
Nation, the larger region and the globe. NNA empowers new research partnerships
from local to international scales, diversifies the next generation of Arctic
researchers, enhances efforts in formal and informal education, and integrates
the co-production of knowledge where appropriate. This award fulfills part of
that aim by supporting planning activities with clear potential to develop
novel, leading edge research ideas and approaches to address NNA goals. It
integrates aspects of the natural environment, built environment, and social
systems, builds significant educational opportunities, and engages
internationally and with local and Indigenous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project launches collaborative research
to produce a model for teaching civic education for the circumpolar North. The
Arctic is emerging as a distinct world region facing unique issues, including
unprecedented environmental and social change. Education is an important tool in
supporting Arctic-centered responses to new challenges and opportunities.
Despite initial efforts by educational institutions like the University of the
Arctic, more work is needed to create educational approaches that support
cooperation between the diverse peoples, organizations, and countries of the
circumpolar North. Civic education can provide such an approach. As a
longstanding cornerstone of American democracy, civic education provides
students with knowledge and skills to effectively participate in the political
decision-making processes necessary to respond to today’s most pressing
challenges. In collaboration with numerous Arctic partners, this project co-
designs civic education for the unique context of the North. In doing so, the
project transforms how Arctic Studies is taught within and beyond the Arctic.
Given increasing international interest in the region, Arctic Studies programs
are likely to expand dramatically in coming years. This project provides new
programs with a model upon which to base design and delivery of civic education,
thereby shaping the relationship that countless future students have to the
circumpolar North and that the North has to the world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project asks the following questions: (1) What key elements should define Arctic
civic education, to prepare Arctic and non-Arctic students to collectively
address the complex challenges that define the region? (2) How can these
educational programs be designed and implemented in Arctic-centered ways? (3)
What opportunities and challenges exist for leveraging travel and distance
learning to bring Arctic and non-Arctic students together? The project answers
these questions by carrying out a series of workshops that engage a broad range
of Arctic researchers and practitioners. Workshops engage participants in
discussions of how to conceptualize civic education for the Arctic; how to
rethink core concepts of civic education through Indigenous lenses; and how to
better leverage online learning and study abroad opportunities. Major outcomes
include comprehensive surveys of civic education and Indigenous-centered
teaching in the Arctic; creation and consolidation of research partnerships;
identification of core elements and approaches for teaching Arctic civic
education; identification of key opportunities and challenges associated with
online learning and study abroad; and refinement of a long-term research agenda
on Arctic civic education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.