* 2127742
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Applications of Galois Theory to the Search for Non-Linear Functions
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Jean-Francois Biasse, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Block ciphers and hash functions are a foundational building block of secret key
Cryptography. Almost Perfect Nonlinear (APN) functions, i.e. functions defined
over a finite field that behave as non-linearly as possible, are used to design
block ciphers and hash functions secure against differential attacks. This
project supports research on the construction of APN functions that impact the
design of the next generation of ciphers which will need to operate in
constraint environments (lightweight cryptography), and feature large keys to
offer high levels of bit security against quantum adversaries. The broader
impacts of this project include the organization of workshops bringing together
Academia and Industry, the development of new cryptography curriculum at USF,
the organization of Summer camps, and the design of animated videos featuring
important concepts in cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
construction of new APN functions, this project supports the development of
Galois theoretical methods to decide whether APN functions (more specifically
APN permutations) exist for given parameters such as the size of the finite
field and the degree of the APN function. In particular, the problem of finding
an APN function is converted into the problem of solving a polynomial system of
equations arising from group theory. This generates multiple polynomial systems,
each one allowing either the construction of a given APN function for a chosen
degree, or the proof of non-existence of APN permutations for the target degree.
The methods developed as part of this project are constructive and they can be
efficiently implemented via some standard computational algebra software such as
Magma or Sage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.