* 2127485
* RESEARCH-PGR: Single-Cell Analysis of the Dynamics and Evolution of Gene Expression in Legumes
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jeffrey Doyle, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Nitrogen fertilizers are required to maximize crop growth and yields to feed a
growing population. However, their extensive use leads to soil and water
pollution. Therefore, there is a need to find alternative and sustainable
sources of nitrogen to aid crop growth. Legumes (e.g., soybean, Medicago, common
bean) develop unique symbiotic relationships with a group of bacteria called
rhizobia that convert atmospheric nitrogen to a chemical form available to
support the host plant’s growth and reproduction. This biological process,
called nodulation, is economically important and benefits agricultural
sustainability and food security. Legume nodulation starts with the infection of
the plant root hair cell by rhizobia. Although this cell type is found in all
flowering plants, in only a subset of plants, among them legumes, is the root
hair cell capable of initiating this symbiotic relationship. While several
legume genes involved in this process have been characterized, a better
understanding of the genetic programs controlling root hair infection is needed
before considering the transfer of nodulation capacity to non-legume crop
plants. The investigators in this project will characterize these genetic
programs using plant single-cell technologies. In addition to its impact on our
understanding of legume nodulation and biological nitrogen fixation, this
project will promote the integration between research and education by
supporting the development of unique educational programs dedicated to STEM
high-school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
built on the hypothesis that plant cell differentiation, gain of biological
functions, and response to external stimuli are controlled by evolutionarily
conserved transcriptional modules. Focusing on the biology of legume root hair
cells and their response to rhizobia inoculation, this project will address
three key questions: What dynamic changes occur in the legume root hair
transcriptome at different stages of their infection by rhizobia? What is the
level of conservation of these programs among legumes after their divergence
over 50 million years and after recent (5-10 million years) polyploidy in
soybean? What is the contribution of chromatin accessibility in controlling the
dynamic changes of the transcriptomic programs in response to root hair
infection by rhizobia? To answer these questions, the investigators will analyze
in detail the molecular mechanisms associated with the early stages of the
nodulation process by using the Chromium Single Cell Multiome ATAC + Gene
Expression technology on isolated legume root hair cells. Accessing changes in
both gene activity and the profiles of chromatin accessibility will provide a
deeper understanding of the dynamic response of a plant cell to microbial
infection, and the level of conservation of these responses among legume species
and upon whole-genome duplication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded
by the Plant Genome Research Program and the Plant Biotic Interactions
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.