* 2127107
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Advection-Enhanced Geothermal Heat Pump Fieldloop Demonstration
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Suzanne Magdalene, DARCY SOLUTIONS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 995,074.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovative
Research (SBIR) Phase II project focuses on the high costs and greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions associated with conventional heating, ventilation, and cooling
(HVAC) methods. HVAC constitutes approximately 48% of building energy
consumption representing a significant cost to society. Much of this energy is
generated by fossil fuels, resulting in substantial environmental impacts:
carbon emissions associated with residential and commercial use are 35.6% of
total US emissions. Geothermal or ground source heat pumps (GSHPs) represent the
most energy-efficient and environmentally-friendly HVAC solution currently
available, however, their high upfront capital costs have significantly slowed
their deployment. The innovation in the present project takes a fundamentally
different approach to GSHP heat transfer, resulting in reductions of 50% in
installation costs and 20% in operating costs compared to conventional GSHP
systems, enabling an expansion of the geothermal market. The present project
seeks to thoroughly field test and analyze the performance of the GSHP
innovation, optimizing the fabrication and installation parameters, and readying
it for commercial deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
proposes to address the high installation cost and large, disruptive footprint
of conventional GSHP systems. The project objective is to demonstrate a compact,
cost-effective, easily-deployable, renewable solution for HVAC. The advection-
driven GSHP (AGHP) takes advantage of the 4-5 times greater heat capacity of
water than rock. Under the present project, AGHP will advance beyond numerical
and laboratory analyses to manufacturing and field testing performance under
real-world conditions. The research objectives include: 1) finalization of field
site, 2) preliminary design and numerical modeling of the AGHP system for a
chosen field site; 3) engineering retrofit design; 4) fabrication of the custom
designed submersible pump and heat exchanger; 5) installation and testing of the
AGHP system; 6) operation, monitoring, and analysis of the performance of AGHP
system, including the development of a comprehensive cost, energy use, and
emissions model for the AGHP system; and 7) use of the compiled data to estimate
the potential for the economic viability of AGHP in various regions of the
United States. The anticipated result of this project is a commercially-ready
GSHP product with design and installation guidelines for determining the
potential for deploying the innovative AGHP system at any given
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.