* 2128409
* Variable Resolution Modeling of the Large-Scale Atmospheric Circulation Response to North Atlantic Sea-Surface Temperature (SST) Anomalies
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2024
* USD 341,245.00

The extent to which the atmospheric circulation responds to changes in the
underlying sea surface temperature (SST) is a central topic in climate dynamics.
In the tropics the response of atmospheric circulation to SST variability is
easily seen in the evolution of El Nino events. But in the middle and high
latitudes there is no comparably strong and unambiguous attribution of
circulation change to variations in underlying SST. Nevertheless recent research
suggests that SST variability associated with the meandering of the Gulf Stream
affects the decade-to-decade variability of the wintertime atmospheric
circulation over much of the Northern Hemisphere. The observational evidence is
suggestive but not conclusive, as the inherent noisiness of circulation
variability and the short length of the observational record do not permit
definitive attribution. Climate model simulations offer a way around the
shortness of the observed record, along with the ability to design controlled
experiments, and models using moderate resolution (say one gridpoint per degree
of latitude and longitude) can generate very long simulations. But such
simulations have not generally shown a circulation response to Gulf Stream SST
variations, and recent experiments suggest that much higher resolutions are
necessary to capture the physics and dynamics leading to the circulation
response. Unfortunately global simulations using such high resolutions are too
computationally intensive to permit in-depth
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award considers the
effects of Gulf Stream SST variations using a variable resolution (VR) model in
which the grid spacing over most of the world is one degree but resolution over
the Arctic and northern North Atlantic is increased to 1/8th degree, or about
12km between gridpoints. The model is a version of the Community Atmosphere
Model (CAM), the atmospheric component model of the Community Earth System Model
(CESM). Preliminary results show a robust hemispheric circulation response, with
a spatial pattern similar to the North Atlantic Oscillation, forced by an
imposed SST change representative of a Gulf Stream fluctuation. Further work
compares the VR-CAM simulations with CAM simulations at lower resolution to
identify the physics and dynamics captured by the high resolution. One
hypothesis is that higher resolution is necessary to capture the influence of
SST change on the rising motions associated with frontal weather systems as they
cross the Gulf Stream. A further goal of the project is to use machine learning
to develop parameterizations of the small-scale effects captured in the VR
simulations so that they can be represented approximately at coarser and less
computationally intensive model resolutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
societal relevance due to the desirability of better understanding of decade-to-
decade changes in the wintertime circulation over the Northern Hemisphere.
Recent work suggests that the decadal circulation variabililty is more
predictable than would be expected based on climate model simulations,
suggesting that models may be missing key ingredients needed for successful
long-range predictions. The work performed here may thus contribute to the
development of models capable of long-range predictions with substantial
societal value. In addition, the project contributes to the development of VR-
CAM, which will be made available to the worldwide community of CESM users and
developers. The Principal Investigators conduct outreach to the public through
the University of Washington Program on Climate Change, as well as the Science
Communication Fellowship Program at the Pacific Science Center in
Seattle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.