* 2128406
* RAPID: The Public Response to the Texas Power Outage/Utilities Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Anand Sokhey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jan Leighley
* 04/30/2022
* USD 41,669.00

In February of 2021, Texas was hit by a series of rare winter storms that
resulted in widespread power outages, the disruption of other utilities and
services and over 100 deaths. Texas experienced a similar (though smaller-scale)
event 10 years earlier, and yet no substantial changes/preparations were made in
the wake of that storm. This project focuses on the public’s response to the
recent crisis to learn about who citizens hold accountable and whether the
crisis influenced their energy policy preferences. The PIs survey Texans at
multiple points after the crisis, asking about, among other topics, the costs of
policy changes, the public’s opinions on different energy sectors, and debates
over how much the government should be involved in regulating markets. By
looking at who Texans blame for the failure, what reforms they support, and how
experiences and the passing of time affect preferences and perceptions, the
study builds understandings of how citizens hold governments to account in the
wake of crisis and failure. The project also provides immediate insights to
policymakers, highlighting areas of policy agreement and temporal “windows” when
governmental reforms are going to have more/less public support. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the public’s responses to the Texas power
outage to better understand why crises often fail to lead to governmental
action. The PIs consider the following questions: Who does the public blame for
service disruption and its consequences? How malleable is public opinion in the
wake of such a disaster? How quickly (if at all) do any observed effects on
public opinion dissipate? And, what factors – whether individual, interpersonal,
or contextual – condition people’s responses? The PIs conduct a series of survey
experiments with a statewide, representative panel of Texans. These experiments
focus on cost/benefit arguments about investment in infrastructure, the blaming
of certain energy sectors (e.g., renewables), and debates over regulatory
policies. By conducting survey experiments, the PIs draw on a design tradition
that is marked by both high internal and external validity. By repeating the
experiments with the same individuals two months after the crisis and again 8
months after the crisis, the project evaluates whether any effects fade (or
increase) over time as recovery takes place, policies are changed, and messaging
evolves. The study presents a unique opportunity to study the development and
evolution of accountability in a mass public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.