* 2128865
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: Supporting future crisis line work through the inclusive design of worker-facing tools that empower self-management of wellbeing and performance
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Kaiping Chen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2022
* USD 35,767.00

This planning grant’s long-term aim is to create assessment and informatics
tools that empower Crisis Line Workers (CLWs) to self-monitor, develop skills,
and better manage both their personal wellbeing and counseling performance.
Counseling hotlines are a critical part of the informal healthcare system,
providing immediate mental health support through telephone or text messaging.
Such services have proven effective at decreasing hopelessness, psychological
pain, and suicidality. Research finds 18–24 year olds and students
disproportionately experience these psychological issues, contributing to a
recognized escalation in mental health problems on college campuses nationwide.
At the same time, the nature of the work puts CLWs themselves at high risk of
burnout, secondary traumatic stress, and compassion fatigue. In turn, such
distress negatively impacts CLWs' job performance, creating a cycle of distress
and vulnerability for both CLWs and the clients who depend on them. Our scope is
campus and campus-adjacent crisis line organizations (CLOs) and CLWs who manage
the underserved mental health needs of college populations. Insights from this
project could improve worker welfare, job performance, and client welfare for
broader contexts involving high-stress, high-stakes work that employs
information communication technology to serve clients in need of support. This
agenda tightly aligns with FW-HTF objectives given recent shifts in future
crisis line work, workers, and technology. Specifically, while CLOs
traditionally managed physical call centers with training programs for workers,
many new services allow CLWs to train online, field communications from home,
and more flexibly self-define schedules. Further, our initial interactions with
CLO partners indicate campus counseling centers are moving away from on-call
staffing to outsourcing crisis line support to vendors that provide around-the-
clock services and interaction reports that counselors follow up on as needed.
In addition, while originally limited to telephone calls, crisis services are
increasingly being delivered through modern information communication
technologies, including text messaging and web applications. Finally, “smarter”
features are increasingly being utilized within such platforms to automate
responses or help triage communication. Together, these changes are impacting
the practices of crisis line work as well as the skills expected of workers due
to emerging technologies augmenting or replacing various aspects of CLWs’
efforts. At a high level, our work will inform focus areas as well as the types
of monitoring technologies and interventions most likely to be accepted by CLOs
and CLWs toward improving their wellbeing and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together several disciplines, including human-centered design,
computer science and human-computer interaction, communication sciences and
social behavior, and mental health assessment and intervention. The investigator
team is structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. First, by cultivating
relationships with CLOs and undertaking needfinding engagements, we will deepen
understanding of CLWs’ work circumstances, experiences, risks, and needs.
Second, this discovery phase will produce design implications for self-
monitoring and self-care tools for CLWs. Third, iterative co-design with CLWs
will identify and initiate formative development of effective solutions (e.g.,
informatics, interventions) responsive to these requirements and clarify the
potential impacts such tools can have on CLW personal wellbeing and professional
practices and, in turn, client welfare. Overall, this project will solidify the
team, partnerships, and foundational knowledge needed to pursue research at the
level of a FW-HTF-R proposal. This project has been funded by the Future of Work
at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to promote deeper
basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work
contexts by advancing design of intelligent work technologies that operate in
harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.