* 2128451
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Wideband Spectrum Coexistence Enabled by Photonic Circuits: Cross-Layer Design and Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wade Trappe, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 170,000.00

Evolving communication systems rely on using increasingly higher frequencies for
larger channel bandwidths. The increased channel capacities enabled by higher
carrier frequencies provide high speed communication for commercial and active
users, however, these benefits do not extend to passive users, such as radio
astronomy. The focus of the proposed effort is to create a framework for
spectrum coexistence that is beneficial for both active and passive users.
Instead of simply switching to higher and undeveloped frequencies - which
passive users cannot - the proposed research uses high frequency, optical signal
carriers for interference separation, enabling the coexistence of active and
passive users at the same time and in the same physical location. The proposed
coexistence solution will enable continuous availability of wideband spectrum
for passive users, an important requirement for detecting unknown signals, since
the bandwidth and the time window for unknown astronomical, atmospheric and
geospace signals cannot be manipulated. The proposal involves collaboration
between one private and two state universities in New Jersey, and will support
education at various levels: for pre-college students, the PIs will develop
games and instructive presentations that integrate the explanation of science
fundamentals. Undergraduate students will access the evolution of communication
technologies through Rowan University’s 8-semester research-based Engineering
Clinic program. Commercial applications will be explored through industrial
partners within local area of the PI campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since there
is a projected increase in interference at both high and low RF frequencies,
which will impair the success of both commercial and scientific use of spectrum,
it is necessary to develop technologies that will mitigate the interference
observed by all users of the radio spectrum, ultimately allowing better
coexistence between the wide range of applications dependent on radio spectrum.
The proposed system is implemented by redesigning the hardware and exploring
communication protocols at multiple layers. In the physical layer, the photonic
system separates a mixed received signal in the congested radio spectrum by
upconverting the signal carriers to optical frequencies, providing over 100GHz
of bandwidth in a single channel. In the network level, communication protocols
are redesigned to enable passive users to continuously access to wideband
spectrum and coexist with active users. The network layer protocol will optimize
the deployment of the hardware system to minimize the cost of new
infrastructures, better share spectrum, and improve communication throughput.
The intellectual merit stems from the completely orthogonal approach proposed to
address the challenges of radio spectrum, and the seamless integration of
hardware innovation with communication protocols. By harnessing the unique
properties of optical carriers, the photonic system processes analog signals
before digitization, which eliminates both the current bandwidth limit and the
resolution limit. The hardware innovation creates unprecedented resources for
communication applications. The photonic system functions as a platform that
provides new resources for both the existing and emerging spectrum sharing
methods, specifically, dynamic spectrum allocation, interference alignment, etc.
With a multi-layer design, the proposed system will advance the understanding of
spectrum usage by enabling conexistence of systems with diverse power levels and
large bandwidths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.