* 2128823
* FW-HTF-P: Collaborative Research: Exoskeleton-Assisted Worker Performance Augmentation in Construction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Peter Adamczyk, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Billions of dollars per year are spent on workplace-related injuries in the
U.S., while construction trade workers are more likely to report poor health and
severe pain due to undertaking demanding physical work and facing a high risk of
injuries in poor working environments. Promoting the use of exoskeletons and
exosuits (collectively called EXOs) is expected to alleviate this situation.
However, several fundamental questions regarding the EXO technology, the
workers, and their work due to the use of EXOs have not been well answered yet,
including “what are the indicators, criteria, and assessment procedures that
could be used to measure the performance of the EXO technology scientifically in
construction workplaces?”, “how could these measurements help to shape the
development of EXO products in the future?”, “what are the best practices and
strategies to help to reduce potential wearing risks?”, and “how are the work
organizations and modes changed to fit the use of EXOs?” To answer these
questions, it requires synergizing multidisciplinary expertise that fosters
convergent research capacity. This research will advance the knowledge base of
the worker-EXO-construction frontiers for enhancing workforce productivity,
reducing the risk of work-related injuries, broadening workforce participation,
and extending the career life expectancy of the construction workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) planning research project is to investigate the
impacts of wearing EXOs for the future of construction trade workers. The PIs
plan to conduct human-centered investigations in three thrusts to accomplish
this objective. First, the research team led by the PIs will conduct field
evaluations of existing EXO products for three construction trades (drywall
installer, plumber, and laborer) and collect their feedbacks about wearing EXOs
to complete construction tasks for a long period. Second, the research team will
work with trade unions, construction contractors, and NIOSH research scientists
and design a series of work studies for the future full research project to
learn and identify how routine trade work organizations and modes could be
changed to maximize the benefits of wearing EXOs and minimize their side effects
on the workers. Third, the PIs will organize a one-and-a-half-day workshop to
share the initial results and findings with academic researchers, industrial
experts, and government officials and formulate important research questions and
hypotheses for developing a full FW-HTF research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.