* 2128438
* Linking optical characteristics of small particles (50 - 500 micrometer) with their sinking velocities in the mesopelagic environment
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Alexander Bochdansky, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 517,370.00

Globally, the ocean removes more carbon dioxide than it releases into the
atmosphere storing a portion of the excess carbon in the deep sea. Sinking
particles, both living plankton and non-living detritus, are major contributors
to this flux of carbon. Modern camera systems and image analysis techniques have
made it possible to count, measure and classify these particles, thus providing
oceanographers with a tool to estimate carbon transfers to the deep ocean at
high resolution in space and time. Unfortunately, it is not enough to know the
sizes of particles to estimate how fast these particles sink because shape and
particle density also influence the sinking velocity. This project examines the
velocities of individual particles as they sink into the deep ocean using a
camera attached to a particle trap. For each of these particles, classification
criteria, such as size, shape factors, optical density, and in the case of
plankton, taxonomic identification, is determined and compared to their
individual sinking velocities. This information serves to calculate overall
sinking velocities from surveys of particles in the water column and thereby
produce more reliable estimates of carbon fluxes from camera images. This
project supports technology development in underwater imaging systems, graduate
and undergraduate student education, and science literacy initiatives for
middle-school students and their mentors through public outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shipboard and autonomous vehicle surveys of
oceanic particle inventories hold great promise for estimating carbon fluxes at
high temporal and spatial resolutions. However, while the sinking velocities of
larger particles such as foraminifera shells and fecal pellets of salps, krill,
and larger copepods are relatively well constrained, the dynamics of the smaller
particle size pool (50–500 micrometers) remain more elusive. Despite their size
and presumed slow sinking velocities, small particles occur in large numbers in
the mesopelagic layer and sediment-trap material. Their abundance in the
mesopelagic could be the result of deep mixing, or small particles could be
remnants of digested larger particles, particles with a high excess density such
as lithogenic dust particles, minipellets egested by protists, protist spores,
or the result of fragmentation at depth due to the activity of flux feeders,
among other possibilities. This project addresses some unanswered questions
about the small particle pool by linking individually-resolved optical features
with sinking velocities. Using Stokes’ law, excess density is being estimated
from size and sinking velocity and then assigned to particles from optical
surveys. A horizontally installed camera system records sinking velocities,
sizes, and features of particles in a sediment trap attached to the Oceanic Flux
Program mooring array. The recorded particles are being characterized using 1)
classic image analysis, taking various shape factors into account; 2) opacity of
individual particles; and 3) image classification with supervised and
unsupervised deep learning using convolutional neural networks. A second
identical camera surveys the particle inventory at the same station and time in
the water column to integrate flux estimates over the existing and undisturbed
particle pool. Niskin bottle samples and microscopic examination of particles
augment the interpretation of image data. The results of this project contribute
to the overarching goal of achieving higher predictive power for carbon flux
models based on optical particle surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.