* 2128684
* FW-HTF-P: Augmenting Healthcare Professionals’ Training, Expertise Development, and Diagnostic Reasoning with AI-based Immersive Technologies in Telehealth
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Roger Azevedo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Telehealth is greatly affecting our nation’s healthcare system, economy, and
workforce, including the training of healthcare professionals (i.e., physicians,
residents). This project advances health, psychological, educational, medical,
engineering, and computing sciences related to human-machine AI collaboration in
delivering high-quality patient care and augmenting medical training and
expertise development in telehealth. An interdisciplinary team of researchers
from the University of Central Florida (UCF), along with hospital and
educational partners from UCF’s College of Medicine, Orlando VA Medical Center,
Nemours Children’s Hospital, and AdventHealth University, will augment
healthcare-professional training, expertise development, and diagnostic
reasoning using AI-based immersive technologies in telehealth. Given the
transformative and disruptive impact of telehealth across all societal facets
(e.g., racial disparities, economic burden on patients, organizational
disruptions, lack of medical training in telehealth), this project assembles,
connects, engages, and addresses current local, state, and national disparities
by involving academics across disciplines and leveraging evidence-based research
with a variety of stakeholders, including government officials, hospital
administrators, healthcare professionals and patients, employers, and industry
partners. The interdisciplinary research team and collaborating stakeholders
work together in the design of a paper-based prototype intelligent collaborative
immersive telehealth system for training healthcare professionals and
interacting with real human patients, transforming current medical training,
fostering expertise development, and significantly enhancing patient
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant has three goals. (1) To
secure, engage, collaborate, and develop a network with stakeholders, academics,
and industry partners across multiple sectors to advance understanding of
workforce, health, economic, organizational, AI, technological, and social
issues related to telehealth. (2) To test the effectiveness of existing
telehealth technologies used by healthcare professionals to understand their
impact on diagnostic reasoning by collecting multiple sources of data from
healthcare professionals and patients to examine physiological-cognitive-
affective-metacognitive-social processes during telehealth interactions. And (3)
to design an intelligent collaborative virtual telehealth system prototype that
supports healthcare professionals’ diagnostic reasoning, expertise development,
and training that can be used in various healthcare scenarios. Intelligent
collaborative immersive telehealth systems will augment and transform healthcare
professionals’ education, training, and delivery of high-quality medical care.
Such systems are key to addressing major societal, health, educational,
technological, economic, organizational, and human challenges (e.g., quality of
medical care, lack of quality telehealth education and training). The project’s
immediate impact will be broadening participation across local, state, and
national stakeholders in addressing major issues related to telehealth and how
it will transform and disrupt society. Various data types collected from this
project will provide evidence of the issues related to medical expertise,
diagnostic reasoning, medical errors, and organizational disruptions, and new
metrics for measuring the impacts of telehealth. Additionally, hundreds of
community members from all sectors will participate in workshops, data
collection, and design sessions where they explore current telehealth
environments and design a paper-based prototype intelligent collaborative
telehealth system to enhance medical education and training to accelerate
expertise development, minimize medical errors, and deliver high-quality medical
care while fostering the workforce pipeline in healthcare professions and AI in
medicine. Additionally, these findings will be broadly applicable to training
middle-schoolers and high-schoolers interested in STEM and healthcare
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.