* 2128569
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Enabling Intelligent Pinpoint Space-Spectrum Utilization and Sharing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jie Luo, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Future generations of communication systems must support vast numbers of mobile
devices that share the spectrum efficiently with different priorities. To meet
such a demand, this project goes beyond the traditional techniques of multi-
antenna communications and explores a novel paradigm of wireless design by
considering the spatial characteristics of signals, in addition to spectrum.
This research aims to increase data rates and enable efficient spectrum sharing
that could benefit 5G and 6G communication systems, as well as legacy systems.
It is increasingly evident that efficient and high-speed communication systems,
which are part of the nation's critical infrastructure, help improve society's
productivity and maintain the nation's competitive edge. The project will also
help train the workforce for the high-tech communication
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For achieving the above goal, the key tasks of
the project are 1) to estimate and learn the possible spatial signal
transmission paths between nodes that form the multipath network, 2) to perform
cross-layer design of signal paths selection, coding, broadcast and multiaccess
transmissions, 3) and to undertake an experimental verification of the multipath
network using software defined radios. Machine learning assisted algorithms will
be designed to learn the multipath networks by taking advantage of the repeated
patterns. Optimization and coding will be employed to jointly select signal
transmission directions and design transmit signals so that the spectrum can be
efficiently shared. The expected outcomes are methods for highly effective
utilization and sharing of spectrum via a dense reuse of frequency across
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.