* 2128535
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: SHIELD: A Software-Hardware Approach for Spectrum Coexistence with Rapid Interferer Learning, Detection, and Mitigation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Arun Natarajan, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The last two decades have witnessed enormous increase in wireless data transfer,
impacting every aspect our lives and our nation's economy. This has led to a
spectrum crunch in frequency bands below 6 GHz that are the most useful for
intermediate and long-range wireless communications. Even as new spectrum is
allocated for different wireless networks and systems, satisfying the increasing
demand of high data rates will lead to coexistence of active users (that
generate signals) and passive users (that sense signals for weather sensing,
astronomy, and other applications). Inevitably, interference occurs when these
users share the same frequency band or when active users operate in bands close
to that used by passive users. Therefore, there is a critical need for an
approach to efficiently manage and reduce such interference, which will allow
for further improved spectrum usage. This project will address this challenge
and focus on a cross-layer software-hardware approach for spectrum coexistence
with rapid interferer learning, detection, and mitigation (SHIELD). On a
societal scale, the proposed research can improve spectrum utilization and
increase access to in-demand wireless data without adversely impacting existing
users, which will have direct economic impact. The broader impacts also include
major outreach activities involving high school students and aiming at
broadening the participation of women and underrepresented minorities, as well
as incorporation of new hardware, software, and network architecture into
undergraduate and graduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
interdisciplinary project will bridge the gap between the broad areas of
integrated circuits, communications, networking, and machine learning, and will
focuses on enabling rapid interferer learning, detection, and mitigation for
spectrum coexistence based on the co-design of novel RF hardware and network
control architecture. The main activities include: (i) extensive spectrum
measurements and data collection for characterizing the spectrum usage and
properties of potential interferers, (ii) development of a novel reconfigurable
0.4-4.0 GHz MIMO receiver architecture leveraging a concurrent auxiliary
receiver for rapid interference detection and N-path sequence-mixing for nulling
specific interferers, and (iii) design of an intelligent control plane, which
integrates software-defined networking and machine learning techniques, for
efficient spectrum monitoring, management, and resource allocation across
spatially distributed receivers. The developed hardware and software will be
evaluated in the lab setting and in real-world environments through their
integration in a city-scale wireless testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.