* 2128897
* Increasing retention of part-time and full-time STEM students with scholarships, mentoring and mathematics tutoring
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2028
* Edward Evans, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2028
* USD 1,499,239.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at The University of Akron (UA). UA is a commuter campus located in the
center of downtown Akron, Ohio. Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 103 unique students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees
in Biomedical Engineering, Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Civil
Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Biology, or
Chemistry. Three S-STEM scholar cohorts will receive scholarship support from
their first year to graduation. Approximately half of the scholars will be
directly admitted to their department of choice, half will be non-direct admit
students, and approximately 10% will be enrolled part time. Inclusion of part-
time students will provide financial support to a student group often overlooked
and has the potential to increase retention rates of these students. In addition
to scholarship support, the proposed program will provide the scholars: an
S-STEM specific learning community; cohort-specific laboratories; peer and
faculty mentoring; cohort-specific mathematics recitation/tutoring spanning
weekends, weekdays and evening times; additional academic advising from project
investigators; and research opportunities. These collective support programming
activities will enable us to increase the retention and graduation rates of
students from the most economically disadvantaged regions of the State of Ohio,
including Appalachia. Within the framework of a case study, documenting which
interventions achieved the most impact on student retention can provide tools
that can be implemented at other universities to support retention and
graduation of talented full-time and part-time students with financial needs,
especially students from underrepresented groups, including women and persons
with disabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This project will examine the increase in
retention and graduation by providing students with interventions focusing on
addressing financial barriers, targeted academic supports in math courses, peer
and faculty mentoring and engagement in learning communities. Frequently, the
lack of retention in engineering disciplines is attributed to the calculus
sequence. The need to retake Pre-Calculus, Calculus I or Calculus II often leads
to students taking longer to graduate. This effect is more pronounced for part-
time students. This project will investigate if a dedicated math
tutoring/recitation, used to specifically address retention issues associated
with the calculus classes, will improve pass rates. Peer and faculty mentoring
aims to increase students’ sense of belonging. The project will also examine
ways that participating in the S-STEM program influences students' self-efficacy
in STEM, sense of belonging and career awareness for STEM. The impact of program
activities on students' retention will be investigated using a convergent mixed
methods design. This project has the potential to advance understanding
pertaining to student success in first-year math classes, social-cognitive
factors impact the persistence and career choice of part-time and full-time
students. The results of our study will be disseminated on the UA campus via
Institute of Teaching and Learning (ITL) seminars. Results will also be
disseminated to other urban commuter schools by presentations at the national
ITL conference and articles submitted to discipline specific journals. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.