* 2128759
* Strategic Communications for Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (SCAC)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Aaron Dubrow, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Gulbransen
* 05/31/2022
* USD 0.00

The societal value of cyberinfrastructure (CI) impacts on science and
engineering research are not as evident or understandable to the public as they
should be. Targeted communications can strengthen the understanding of the
connection between publicly supported CI resources and U.S. competitiveness,
health, and security. Strategic communication satisfies the long-term goals of
an organization by facilitating advanced planning and implementation, developing
consistent messaging, and enabling successful information sharing. It involves
clarifying messages, managing information flow, and cultivating an
organization’s image over a long-term horizon, and serves to enhance the
strategic positioning of an institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator (PI) proposes a two-part strategic communications research project
with objectives to: &lt;br/&gt;1. Identify the key goals, objectives, audiences,
and messages, by which to elevate the awareness and understanding of the value
of NSF-funded CI for the U.S; and &lt;br/&gt;2. Develop a framework for
strategic communication that can be applied by NSF’s Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure (OAC), its funded projects, principal investigators, and
partners, to build support for CI investment nationwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will gather CI successes of NSF and its
awardees, as well as broaden conversations about CI in government, the media,
and society, and seek to find means by which to best advance the goals of NSF
and OAC. Strategic Communications for Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (SCAC) has
the potential to advance methods for capture of knowledge and visions, for
engaging CI leaders, practitioners, and stakeholders, and for synthesizing these
perspectives into digestible forms for community use. Project impacts will
include broadening the corpus of research on scientific communications and
strategy and serve as a reference point for organizations and academic
institutions seeking to contribute to the advancement of CI in the U.S. The
effort will directly engage underrepresented minority-serving institutions to
tailor communications across a more diverse community of stakeholders and
potential participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.