* 2128620
* RAPID: A Longitudinal Investigation of the Social Outcomes of Participatory Stakeholder Engagement Processes
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Rebecca Niemiec, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 187,221.00

Participatory stakeholder engagement processes are increasingly recommended to
help guide decision making about contentious and value-based natural resource
management issues. These processes typically involve bringing stakeholders
together through facilitated, open dialogue, which can then lead to the
development of co-created solutions that incorporate diverse values. A growing
body of literature suggests that these processes can result in numerous
benefits, including enhanced stakeholder and public trust in decision-makers,
increased learning and public acceptance of decisions, and reduced conflict
between stakeholder groups. Few studies, however, have systematically examined
the impacts of such processes on these social outcomes over time. This research
addresses this gap in the literature by conducting an analysis of social
outcomes from a participatory stakeholder engagement process being developed to
inform wolf reintroduction into Colorado as mandated by passage of a state
ballot initiative in November 2020. This marks the first time voters have
decided to reintroduce a species in the U.S., providing an unprecedented
opportunity to implement participatory stakeholder processes on wolf restoration
and to evaluate their impact. The findings will directly inform natural resource
management agencies and organizations about which aspects of stakeholder
engagement processes are effective and why. Additionally, through this project,
the research team collaborates with Colorado Parks and Wildlife to directly
inform the adaptive management of the stakeholder process for wolf
reintroduction in Colorado to improve social outcomes (i.e., trust, conflict
reduction, acceptability) on this issue.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through repeated
interviews and surveys of stakeholders and members of the public, the
researchers examine how indicators of four proposed social outcomes of
stakeholder processes change over time: 1) social learning; 2)
public/stakeholder acceptability of management strategies; 3) trust in
institutions; and 4) social conflict. To examine these outcomes, the team builds
on existing literature by measuring trust, learning, and acceptability and also
develops and adapts novel metrics of the social-psychological drivers of social
conflict (i.e., perceptions of the in-group, out-group, and conflict context).
This builds on the broader literature on conflict resolution in the specific
context of natural resource management. In addition to the longitudinal
analysis, the scholars examine stakeholder and manager perceptions of the
process and compare them with longitudinal indicators of social outcomes. The
research also contribute to the literature on stakeholder engagement processes
by examining the extent to which learning from such processes diffuses to
broader society, and whether this results in different social outcomes among
additional stakeholders and members of the public with differing various levels
of engagement. Specifically, the research examines how information from the
stakeholder process on wolf reintroduction is shared with others and whether the
same four social outcomes change among other stakeholders and the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.