* 2128939
* Collaborative Research: Towards a Better Understanding of Tl Isotope Cycling under Different Redox Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Elizabeth Swanner, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 11/30/2024
* USD 53,559.00

The element thallium (Tl) is gaining momentum as a tool for reconstructing the
history of molecular oxygen (O2) in Earth’s ancient oceans. Reconstructing this
history is important because the availability of O2 in Earth’s ancient oceans
played a key governing role in the origin and evolution of life on our planet.
Furthermore, ongoing deoxygenation of modern oceans will affect every human on
Earth, and we can better predict and prepare for this deoxygenation if we
understand comparable events in Earth’s past. The utility of Tl to track changes
in marine O2 stems from the fact that its isotopes are strongly fractionated by
interactions with manganese (Mn) oxide minerals, which are formed and buried in
marine sediments today only where O2 is present. Indeed, many studies show that
Tl isotope ratios preserved in ancient marine rocks can provide important
information about past O2 availability in the ocean. Yet, our understanding of
the modern Tl isotope cycle is far from complete, due largely to the extremely
low abundances of Tl found in environments today, which make it difficult to
collect enough material for accurate Tl isotopic analysis. The PIs’ preliminary
work in a brackish pond on Cape Cod (Siders Pond) show that it is feasible to
generate quality Tl isotope data for water, particles, and sediments in an
environment with very low Tl abundances. Furthermore, early results from this
work provide important new information about the links that connect Tl isotopes
to Mn oxides, and Mn oxides to O2 – links that were probably also present in
ancient marine environments. It is the PIs’ plan to upscale their work in Siders
Pond and extend it to two freshwater lakes in Minnesota (Deming and Steel
lakes). The results of this work will vastly improve our understanding of the
modern Tl isotope cycle, in-turn allowing for more confident reconstructions of
Earth’s past ocean oxygenation using Tl isotopes. This research will be led by a
postdoctoral investigator and will further the education of several
undergraduate summer interns. K-12 outreach efforts associated with this
research will introduce students and teachers in the greater Boston area to
biogeochemistry and Earth science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements of Tl
isotope ratios in ancient marine sedimentary rocks have rapidly accelerated over
the past half-decade because there is reason to think they can track changes in
past ocean oxygenation. Unfortunately, the modern Tl isotope investigations
necessary to guide and hone interpretations have not kept pace with the ancient
applications. The PIs’ preliminary data from a redox-stratified and brackish
pond (Siders Pond, Cape Cod) show that it is feasible, even under very low Tl
concentrations, to generate quality Tl isotope data for waters, particles, and
sediments in a natural setting. Moreover, these preliminary data identify a
strong and temporally dynamic link connecting Tl isotopes to local manganese
(Mn) oxide cycling. These results highlight the direct role that Mn oxide
minerals – and not O2 – play in driving Tl isotope fractionation effects. The
PIs are proposing to expand their Tl isotope investigation of Siders Pond, and
also to target two additional geochemically distinct freshwater settings in
Minnesota (Deming and Steel lakes). Guided by the preliminary data, the PIs
predict that Tl isotope cycling in these additional settings will also be most
directly coupled to local Mn cycling, with comparatively little to no effects
being driven by other Tl interactions. Objectives guiding this research are (1)
to better understand and quantify how Tl and its isotopes are partitioned
between waters and particles under different redox conditions, and (2) to better
understand and quantify how Tl and its isotopes are retained in sediments under
different redox conditions. These objectives will be addressed via a combination
of fieldwork, trace metal and isotope ratio measurements, and synchrotron-based
techniques. An improved understanding of modern Tl isotope cycling will only
serve to strengthen interpretations of ancient sedimentary Tl isotope ratios –
and their connections to past ocean oxygenation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.