* 2128869
* FW-HTF-P: Connectivity and the Future of Remote Work
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Toni Antonucci, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in unpredicted and unprecedented levels of
remote working. There is an urgency for understanding the critical issues
related to creating a dynamic, flexible workforce through connectivity,
technology adoption and design, and life-long learning. This Future of Work at
the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) Planning Grant project will lead to new
knowledge for optimizing the use of existing and emerging technology as well as
identify technology gaps that will further improve remote work and the
experience of the worker. The project team will promote the progress of science
by developing a dynamic ecological model for interpreting how humans interact
with other people and equipment to perform jobs remotely. This model will have
potential to guide the study and design of remote work and the development of
new technology for the near and foreseeable future. The project team will use
outcomes from this project to inform the design of a full FW-HTF research
proposal. This project will advance the national prosperity and welfare by
addressing issues impacting future remote work within the context of life-long
learning, access and inclusion at multiple levels, and a fundamentally dynamic
perspective on work and productivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This FW-HTF project
leverages the expertise of social scientists, engineers, and health
professionals to plan a dynamic ecological model that will maximize benefits and
minimize problems in the ever-expanding and evolving landscape of work. Project
objectives include: 1) Identify characteristics of work that are or can be done
remotely; 2) Create measures of productivity that flexibly meet the employers’
and remote workers’ needs; 3) Identify the major mental and physical stressors
affecting remote workers; and 4) Identify current and future major technologies
that make remote work possible. The project uses a mixed-methods sequential
design approach to accomplish these goals. The project team will begin with
secondary data analysis of the nationally representative Pew Survey of Work
Patterns During The Pandemic. Informed by the results of the secondary analysis,
they will conduct workshops with managers and interviews with workers from
companies varying in size and industry (e.g. education, service, manufacturing),
which will touch on similar topics, but from each groups’ perspective. Finally,
the team will develop a survey instrument that will be administered to a
nationally representative sample through the University of Michigan’s Survey of
Consumer Attitudes ( a component of the Leading Economic Indicators). The nation
is in the midst of a natural experiment that can provide insights to how it may
be possible to optimize the potential of remote work in terms of productivity
and worker well-being. This planning grant will provide the foundation for
further research that can capitalize on that natural experiment to the benefit
of national health, prosperity, and welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.