* 2128856
* FW-HTF-P/Collaborative Research: Designing a Market-based Optimization Tool for the Future of Work: Balancing Remote Work and Community Vitality in Post-COVID American Cities
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Braden Allenby, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 12/31/2023
* USD 70,000.00

Remote work practices, which have been greatly accelerated due to the COVID-19
pandemic, will likely play an increased role in post-pandemic work and life for
many businesses and their employees. While there are benefits to remote work for
some, if remote work persists to a significant degree, it may lead to “hollow
towns” wherein city centers experience a serious decline in the absence of
office workers. This trend is placing American cities in peril and threatening
the livelihoods of many lower-income service workers who depend on people’s
coming to the city core to work, shop, and conduct business. This phenomenon is
in stark contrast to the pre-pandemic era when cities served as hubs of
innovation and economic activities, but also suffered from negative
externalities such as traffic congestion and vehicular emissions. This project
will build capacity toward designing more desirable future of work scenarios
where workplace decisions by skilled workers, i.e., those who can work remotely,
can be coordinated across firms in such a manner that the vibrancy of the city
as an economic catalyst and an innovation hub is maintained; local businesses
and service workers thrive; and traffic congestion is reduced. If successful,
this Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) Planning Grant
project will advance the national well-being by helping to retain inner-city
service jobs, generate opportunities to re-train service workers, and help
maintain American cities' long-standing reputation as economically vibrant
clusters of innovation, while mitigating the negative externalities that have
plagued city centers for decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three
thrusts: 1) conduct preliminary analyses to quantify the impacts of increasing
levels of remote work on local economy and inner-city service workers; 2)
perform exploratory work to understand firms’ responses to alternative policy
options that cities may implement to optimize worker presence; and 3) engage
stakeholders to assess policy feasibility and their attitudes towards and trust
in using technologies to optimize worker presence in offices. The project will
focus on Seattle and Phoenix, two cities with very different spatial
distributions of economic activities. A novel hierarchical Stackelberg game
framework will be developed by leveraging knowledge from behavioral economics,
as well as methods in neural networks and evolutionary programming, to model
firm behavior in a realistic but uncertain environment. Critical thresholds at
which city centers may hollow out and potential early warning signals will be
investigated. The project will lay the groundwork in generating new methods and
knowledge at the intersection of operations research, economics, public policy,
and transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.