* 2128584
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Context-aware Spectrum Coexistence dEsign aNd implemenTation in satellite bands (ASCENT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Reed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 562,500.00

Radio spectrum is the raw material of the modern connected economy. Today, all
usable spectrum is assigned for one purpose or another. However, there is more
and more demand for wireless systems, such as 5G and Next-G, and thus more
demand for the spectrum. In some bands, existing spectrum users share their
spectrum with other users when they are not using it. This is the concept of
dynamic spectrum sharing. Legacy spectrum sharing techniques, such as those used
in the Citizen Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) band, have been effective.
However, as we proceed to share even more spectrum where there are complex
spectrum operations, especially satellite bands, more sophisticated sharing and
dynamic policies are needed. Spectrum sharing in these bands is more complex due
to passive incumbents, fades due to rainfall and other environmental effects,
the inability to move incumbents, and the often-critical nature and high
sensitivity of the incumbent's application. This project proposes to create a
holistic, multi-disciplinary, context-aware spectrum sharing approach to address
the spectrum coexistence of broadband wireless systems in satellite bands. Such
an approach will enable more effective sharing, allowing the new applications
promised by 5G and Beyond, while at the same time providing more protection for
legacy applications such as satellite communication, weather forecasting,
positioning, and radio astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will result in following key technical innovations: (1) context-aware spectrum
sharing and interference analysis tools for developing policy recommendations;
(2) an implementation of a prioritization approach for context-aware dynamic
spectrum sharing; and (3) an interference-resilient context-aware PHY layer to
enable robust and seamless adaptation of user quality of service to meet the
demands under varying contextual factors, and finally (4) simulation and
experimental demonstrations, to assess, validate, and demonstrate proposed
policies as well as their implementation using various framework features and
algorithms. Experimentation will occur in the 12 GHz band using Virginia Tech’s
Fixed Satellite Service facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.