* 2128846
* Understanding and Exploiting the Favorable Role of Non-Stoichiometric Oxygen in Bulk Metal Oxide Catalyzed Partial Oxidation of Light Alkanes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jeffrey Rimer, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 499,842.00

Our Nation’s transition to clean energy requires more efficient utilization of
fossil fuels combined with a transition to sustainable or biorenewable fuels
generated through alternative energy sources such electricity produced from
solar or wind energy. The current chemical market relies heavily on ethene –
produced from the steam cracking of ethane (from natural gas) - to manufacture a
wide range of commodity chemicals. Steam cracking is an energy-intensive
process. The project explores an alternative, less energy-intensive, process for
ethene manufacture via the oxidative dehydrogenation of ethane (ODHE).
Controlled introduction of oxygen – in ways that promote ethene production
without deeper oxidation to waste products such as carbon monoxide (CO) and
carbon dioxide (CO2) – has been a major impediment to the commercial
introduction of ODHE technology. The project addresses this technology gap by
exploring a novel catalytic approach for enhancing ethene production while
decreasing energy consumption. New catalyst synthesis techniques will be
combined with reaction engineering concepts to achieve optimal supply of oxygen.
In addition to facilitating the clean energy transition, the project includes
educational and outreach efforts that raise awareness of the need for clean
energy as related to carbon emissions and climate impact, while also training
future scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Introduction of excess,
non-stoichiometric oxygen in light-alkane ODH, while favorable for producing
exothermicity and lowering the reaction temperature, has traditionally been
avoided due to lower olefin selectivity associated with production of CO and
CO2. The project seeks a paradigm shift in the study and design of bulk metal
oxide catalysts by evidencing and exploiting a potentially favorable role of
oxygen present in excess of that stipulated by metal oxide catalyst
stoichiometry. Novel methods for assessing active site requirements on oxide
surfaces, involving a range of kinetic, isotopic, and spectroscopic tools to
assess the mechanistic function of non-stoichiometric oxygen, will be combined
with advanced synthetic strategies for manipulating the catalytic function of
surface oxygen moieties through control over dopant distribution and crystal
habit. This synergistic approach - combining mechanistic investigations and
advanced crystallization techniques such as molten salt syntheses - although
applied specifically to nickel oxide catalyzed ODHE, may prove broadly
applicable to high temperature catalytic partial oxidation reactions of
industrial importance. Catalysts developed as part of the proposed work could
form the basis for an inexpensive, energy-efficient route to producing ethene
due to significantly lower operation temperatures compared to conventional
processes. The investigators will use the findings of these studies in graduate-
level courses at their institution, while continuing on-going STEM outreach
activities in the Houston area including UH Energy Day and Chevron Girls
Engineering the Future Day, providing high school students with hands-on
research experience (Project ACS SEED), and mentoring undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.