* 2128271
* Collaborative Research: EDGE FGT: Establishing functional genomics in anaerobic fungi for applications in agriculture, sustainability, and carbon cycling
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Michelle O'Malley, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 480,000.00

Anaerobic fungi are powerful microorganisms native to the digestive tracts of
ruminants and hindgut fermenters, including important livestock such as cattle,
sheep, and goats. Within their hosts, these fungi provide essential nutrients
and compounds that drive animal growth and behavior. Specifically, they promote
the digestion of fiber-rich feedstocks, secrete metabolites that sustain the
growth of other microbes critical for digestion, produce compounds that enhance
host health, and control the production of methane. This project develops and
optimizes methods to engineer anaerobic fungi allowing scientists to study and
control these molecular processes for diverse applications. Undergraduate and
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, K-12 students, and the public will be
integrated into the studies through coursework, laboratory research, YouTube
videos and local outreach to communities in Southern California and the Mid
Atlantic. Training materials will also be developed to broadly disseminate
project findings to the scientific community, accelerating research into these
unusual microbes. This project has far reaching impacts on plant biomass
breakdown, economical biofuels, renewable chemical production, climate change,
animal nutrition and health, and drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project develops foundational genetic tools to study anaerobic gut fungi. To
date, only a handful of reports exist for the transient transformation of these
species. However, the advent of CRISPR-Cas technology and the recent acquisition
of complete genomes for these species enable new strategies for permanent
genetic modification. Focusing on representative isolates from several genera
within the Neocallimastigomycota phylum, this project optimizes methods to
deliver genetic materials to fungal zoospores, the juvenile life stage of this
phylum, which will be quantified through selection and fluorescence-activated
cell sorting. Next, the project develops two strategies l to introduce or knock
down/out genes. In the first strategy, CRISPR-based tools will be deployed and
optimized to engineer novel cellular phenotypes. In the complementary second
approach, the project leverages LTR retrotransposons distributed throughout
anaerobic fungal genomes as platforms to enhance DNA integration frequency and
identify fungal promoters. Research findings will be distilled into training
materials that will be disseminated through international and interdisciplinary
research communities such as the Rumen Microbial Genomics (RMG) Network and the
Anaerobic Fungi Network (AFN) to catalyze scientific advancement in a number of
allied fields. Similarly, the public will be engaged through partnerships with
organizations such as the Santa Barbara Zoo. This research will result in the
first experimental tools to test gene function in the anaerobic fungi, enabling
insight into their lifestyle and providing a path to microbial engineering and
hypothesis testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.