* 2128146
* IntBIO: Disentangling the genetic, biomechanical, and deep-time factors underlying mammalian skeletal diversity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Leslea Hlusko, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2024
* USD 656,957.00

Understanding the relative contributions of genetic and environmental factors
involved in the evolution of life (commonly framed as “nature versus nurture”)
is paramount to determining how biodiversity is maintained at different scales
in space and time. This project examines the role of nature versus nurture in
shaping skeletons and their characteristics, such as evolutionary innovations in
locomotion and eating. This multi-faceted project incorporates student research
teams assembled from a broad spectrum of educational backgrounds and aims to
provide opportunities for students with financial need, those from community
colleges, and those from underrepresented backgrounds. A mentoring-research
cooperative network composed of faculty, educational program directors, and
postdoctoral, doctoral, and undergraduate researchers will provide training at
all participant levels. Research findings will be shared broadly through an
educator short course and accessible online educational
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the greatest challenges and opportunities
for biology in the 21st century is the integration of knowledge from dispersed
scientific disciplines into a generalized framework. This project focuses on the
intersection of genetic heritability, biomechanics, and deep-time evolutionary
patterns to disentangle the relative contributions of each factor in allowing
carnivorans (dogs, cats, bears, and relatives) to become the most widespread and
diverse mammalian predators in post-dinosaur Earth. To gain insights into the
genetic underpinnings of skeletal diversity and variation, the team will use a
mouse model to construct a heritability map of phenotypic variation and
covariation. This model then will be applied to carnivoran species to test
hypotheses that explain skeletal variation in this group. Deep-time patterns
over the past 55 million years will then be analyzed in conjunction with long-
term patterns of environmental changes such as thermal maxima and ice ages. The
expected outcome is an integrated framework to explain the generation and
evolution of skeletal variability in a group of diverse and adaptable
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.