* 2128517
* Collaborative Research:SWIFT:Facilitating Spectrum Access by Noise Guessing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Starobinski, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 375,000.00

Wireless technologies play an essential role in enabling growth and prosperity
in societies by supporting business, government, science and education, defense,
and health sectors. The boom of connected Internet of Things (IoT) nodes and 5G
wireless communications will lead to a many-fold increase in wireless data
traffic. This data storm and connectivity-in-everything model will result in
spectrum scarcity and increased attack surfaces, thereby driving an urgent need
for wireless security and dynamically shared spectrum access technologies. To
facilitate the successful deployment of such technologies, the overarching goal
of this project is to overcome fundamental challenges in spectrum utilization
and sharing, energy efficiency, and security through cross-layer optimization of
hardware, algorithms, and systems. Tightly integrating research with education
and outreach plans, the project will train a next-generation diverse workforce
in state-of-the-art wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program holistically integrates multiple areas, including information and coding
theory, wireless communication and networking, security, and hardware
architectures to enable efficient and robust wireless spectrum utilization. A
key innovation resides in separately managing noise effects and interference
effects so that stations employing different codes and rates may collide.
Specific research questions being addressed include (1) achieving successful
simultaneous use of spectrum by allowing collisions without coordinating coding
schemes in the MAC layer; (2) designing energy-efficient and code-agnostic
decoder algorithms and hardware architectures exploiting assumed channel noise
while incorporating interference cancellation techniques; (3) exploring new
physical-layer approaches to prevent, mitigate, and detect attacks on energy-
and spectrally-efficient wireless communications. The theoretical insights will
be verified via simulations and experiments with practical system
implementations, leveraging custom-designed chips and software-defined radio
platforms. Broader impacts of this research include (1) advancing the frontiers
of research in secure spectrum utilization and coexistence for future
dynamically-shared spectrum access scenarios with broader impact on healthcare,
manufacturing, and education businesses; (2) developing software-defined radio
labs for undergraduate courses; (3) fostering K-12 students' interests in STEM
subjects by organizing a “5G Day” event focusing on the future of wireless
communications; (4) increasing participation of under-represented and
undergraduate students in research enterprise by establishing internships and
research positions; and (5) organizing interdisciplinary mini boot camps on
wireless spectrum sensing and security technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.