* 2128544
* Building Capacity to Support Career Acceleration and STEM Workforce Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Walter Lee, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2023
* USD 79,980.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating and then assessing
the impact of a workshop series designed to engage students from
underrepresented racial/ethnic groups to consider entering the corporate world.
The goal is to build the capacity of the National Action Council for Minorities
in Engineering (NACME) to advance knowledge related to broadening participation
and STEM workforce development. NACME is the largest provider of scholarships
for college students from underrepresented racial/ethnic groups pursuing
undergraduate engineering degrees. Through collaborations with partner
institutions and corporate supporters across the country, NACME also provides
students with other resources and professional development opportunities.
Leveraging the NACME infrastructure, the project team will first develop a
workshop series envisioned to better prepare students of color (e.g., African
Americans, Hispanic Americans, Native Americans) to enter the corporate world.
An internship will also be part of the activities. Concurrent with the operation
of the series the project team will collect information from participants that
can help companies improve student internship experiences. The workshop series
will begin before students report to their internship assignments and
participating interns will be introduced to coping techniques for navigating
corporate environments, including potentially hostile
workspaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will engage an interdisciplinary
team of STEM educators, social scientists, industry professionals, and event
planners. The proposed activities will be grounded in Career Construction Theory
(CCT). CCT is primarily used within career counseling spaces to help people
cultivate and apply their vocational self-concept. The specific part of CCT that
the research team will use is Career Adaptability Resources and Adapting
Responses, which will represent the manner in which each intern is able to cope
with workplace challenges and responsibilities. Over the course of the project,
the research team will use a two-phase strategy to aid corporate sponsors with
offering high-quality internship experiences. Phase 1 will focus on developing,
delivering, and evaluating the professional development workshop that is central
to this project. Phase 2 will focus on collecting and analyzing additional
information about the internship experience from the perspective of the
undergraduate students. The overarching goals are to (1) monitor students'
development of adaptability resources, vocational identities, and organizational
commitment during the internship period; (2) study how interventions offered by
NACME impact the internship experience; and (3) identify areas of opportunities
for corporate partners to improve the internship experience. These goals will be
achieved through a pre-test, post-test quasi-experimental design, followed by
in-depth interviews, that are intentionally integrated with the evaluation plan.
The intellectual merit of the project lies in its potential to contribute to
foundational knowledge related to providing inclusive and welcoming workspaces
as students transition from academic settings to internships at technical
companies. This project is funded by the NSF IUSE: EHR Program which supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the IUSE program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.