* 2128962
* Collaborative Research: All-Optical Fabrication of Low-Loss, High-Index-Contrast, Silicon-in-Silicon Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Shuting Lei, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2024
* USD 161,500.00

Title: All-optical fabrication of “silicon-in-silicon”
waveguides&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a direct
laser writing method to produce three-dimensional (3D) optical waveguides
embedded inside silicon with low propagation loss. Although low-loss 3D
waveguides have been demonstrated inside glass, the typical loss for waveguides
written inside silicon so far is more than one order of magnitude higher. Two
main challenges faced by the research team are insufficient energy deposition
and random material change inside silicon, which are tackled through novel beam
delivery and fundamental understanding of material response under intense laser
irradiation. The direct laser writing method developed in this project
simplifies fabrication procedures for silicon photonic devices, increases
communication bandwidth, facilitates device miniaturization, and significantly
enhances on-chip and chip-to-chip data processing capabilities. This method has
the capability to be integrated with selective wet etching to fabricate
microfluidic channels, enabling the integration of photonic, electronic and
fluidic functionalities in a single chip. The team’s strong connection with
local and national photonics industries enhances the societal impact of the
project by expediting lab-to-fab transition with the proposed technology. The
research is tightly integrated with education through undergraduate and graduate
student training, classroom teaching modules, and K-12 outreach events for
future workforce development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This grant supports basic
research on laser-induced phase transformation in confined environment, with the
goal to create low-loss, high-index-contrast, three-dimensional (3D) waveguides
deep inside silicon (“Si-in-Si”). Current Si-in-Si waveguides have large loss
and low contrast of refractive indices, making them unsuitable to be used in
most photonics applications. The poor performance is due to micro- and nano-
scale inhomogeneities consisting of mixed Si phases driven by local temperature
in the laser focal region. In this project, femtosecond-nanosecond laser pulses
will be used to achieve energy density required for the transition to amorphous
and high-pressure phases. Modelling, simulation and experiments will be
conducted to identify transition pathways leading to thermodynamically stable Si
phases. A 3D splitter will be fabricated as a testing structure and its optical
performance will be measured and compared with theory and simulation. This
project will advance the understanding of (1) space-time confinement of
ultrashort laser pulses in Si which exhibits high nonlinearity and strong two-
photon absorption; (2) pressure-induced phase transition of Si, especially
toward uncommon high-pressure phases; and (3) optical performance of waveguides
with 3D architecture, such as bending radius and mode
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.