* 2128484
* Collaborative Research:   Diversity of modulation and functional flexibility in small neuronal networks: An evolutionary and mechanistic approach
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2024
* David Schulz, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 353,378.00

Rhythmic movements, such as heartbeat and locomotion, must be flexible to allow
animals to alter their behavior in response to changing conditions. Rhythmic
movements are controlled by networks of nerve cells that interact with one
another to produce patterns of nerve impulses that drive appropriate muscle
movements. To alter movement patterns, these neural networks rely on the actions
of chemical compounds called neuromodulators; these compounds alter (modulate)
the properties and interactions of the cells in the network, thereby enabling
them to alter the pattern of movements that are generated by the network. Such
alterations include, for example, changes in the speed of the resulting behavior
or the coordination of muscles that control different portions of the movement
pattern. There is evidence, however, that the extent to which similar networks
can be altered ("modulatory capacity") varies among species. This project
addresses two fundamental questions related to this variability in modulatory
capacity: first, on an evolutionary timescale, what variables determine the
extent to which networks can be modulated, and second, what factors/mechanisms
underlie differences in modulatory capacity. In addition to addressing these
questions using as exemplars the stomatogastric network and the cardiac network
in a crab that eats only kelp versus a crab that eats many different kinds of
food, the current project also prepares the next generation of scientists by (1)
training high school students and undergraduates in a variety of research
techniques, as well as in designing experiments and in analyzing and presenting
data, and (2) providing continuity and potential expansion of the neuroscience
component of a program that engages 7th grade Native Americans in Maine in
science to enhance their educational aspirations and success in high school and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses the stomatogastric and cardiac
networks of closely related majoid crab species with vastly different dietary
diversity to test the hypothesis that modulatory capacity is an important
evolutionary substrate for diversity within any given behavior, and to ask what
mechanisms underlie differences in modulatory capacity. Current data suggest
that the stomatogastric network in Pugettia producta, a species that eats only
kelp, is not responsive to many modulators that alter the network in another
majoid, Libinia emarginata, which has a highly diverse diet. This project
expands the number of neuromodulators tested, as well as examines and compares
modulation of the cardiac network in the same species. The investigators use
transcriptomics and mass spectrometry to identify native isoforms of peptide
modulators in these majoids, then use physiological recordings to compare the
modulatory capacities of the Pugettia and Libinia stomatogastric and cardiac
neuromuscular systems. The prediction is that modulatory capacity in the
Pugettia stomatogastric system is less than that of the opportunistic feeder,
but that modulation in systems that are presumably subject to similar demands
for flexibility, e.g., the cardiac neuromuscular system, is not markedly
different. To examine the mechanisms that underlie changes in modulatory
capacity, the investigators use transcriptomics, testing the hypothesis that the
mechanism underlying decreased modulatory capacity of the Pugettia
stomatogastric system is an absence or decreased abundance of receptors to those
modulators. Transcriptomics results are confirmed using qRT-PCR and through
expression of the receptors of the two species to compare relative binding
affinities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.