* 2128506
* SWIFT: Electronically-Reconfigurable Surfaces for Improved Coexistence Between Radio Astronomy and Satellite Communications Systems
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Ellingson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2024
* USD 748,463.00

The next few years will see a dramatic increase in the use of satellites in low
Earth orbit to deliver world-wide continuous broadband low-latency
communications to rural and remote locations. Radio telescopes will need to
contend with increased interference from satellites in the largest sidelobes.
The gap between what can be achieved by spectrum regulation and administrative
coordination, and what is needed for productive science, must be bridged by
technical methods. This project intends to study the use of electronically-
reconfigurable surfaces (ERS) to enable large reflector antennas to dynamically
modify their sidelobes. ERS is an array of patch-type antennas with
characteristics that can be individually electronically controlled. Such an
array in the outer portion of a dish antenna can strongly reduce interference
from the side. However, the characteristics of the dish must be known.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extent to which this problem can be ameliorated by
spectrum regulation or administrative coordination between satellite system
operators and radio astronomers is limited: Ultimately, satellite system
operators have the right to operate at the carrier frequencies allocated to
them, whereas astrophysical considerations dictate the need to observe at times
and frequencies affected by these transmissions. The gap between what can be
achieved by spectrum regulation and administrative coordination, and what is
needed for productive science, must be bridged by technical methods. A practical
ERS occupying the outer 17% of a reflector can effectively null interference
from any from direction beyond the main lobe, with negligible effect on gain and
pattern within the main lobe. The principal difficulty in the implementation of
a practical ERS is control; that is, determining the set of unit cell phase
shifts that implements the desired pattern. Because the sidelobes of large
reflectors are not accurately known, and because interference direction of
arrival is rapidly varying, any deterministically determined solution will be
approximate at best, so real-time optimization will be required. This research
will investigate the use of ERS for practical coexistence between radio
astronomy systems and satellite transmissions, potentially leading to advanced,
wide-ranging sharing techniques applicable to many situations. It will also
support undergraduate students in a project that addresses a full range of
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.