* 2128198
* Exposure to Trauma and Political Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Byron Orey, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 509,767.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;People undergo mental distress
when they are exposed to multiple traumatic events. For example, individuals
indirectly exposed via the media or via personally witnessing events such as the
September 11 attacks or the Boston Bombings are psychologically
impacted.&lt;br/&gt;The impact of witnessing negative interactions with the
police on political attitudes and behavior has not been studied adequately. The
PI proposes that the inclusion of such events in political analyses will help to
determine if the interaction between trauma and demographic characteristics
affect political attitudes and behavior. Furthermore, the PI examines the degree
to which living in an urban area versus a rural area conditions the manner in
which citizens from different demographic groups respond to trauma. The PIs uses
surveys and focus groups to collect data from hard-to-reach groups in rural and
urban areas. By examining these various groups and communities, the research
offer greater understanding of how trauma manifest differently in citizens from
various groups to influence political behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The bulk of the research related to mental
health and exposure to traumatic events fails to&lt;br/&gt;distinguish among
various demographic groups concerning the effects of cumulative traumas. A
typical study employs controls for race and ethnicity by including dummy
variables in statistical models. The current literature fails to explore whether
the unique predispositions of certain demographic groups exacerbate their
emotional response to cumulative traumatic events. In this study, the PI
conceptualizes negative interactions with law enforcement as racially traumatic
stressful stimuli (RTSS) and includes RTSS in models to analyze cumulative
stress and political behavior. Survey methods and focus groups are used to
collect data from hard-to-reach groups such as rural people in minority
demographics. In addition to the survey, the PI conducts four community-level
case studies that draw on interviews with community historians, communities
where truth and reconciliation initiatives were present, interviews with mental
health professionals in the area, and focus groups. Through these various data
gathering efforts, the PI examines how the inclusion of RTSS in political
analyses will help to determine if the interaction between trauma and
demographic characteristics affect political attitudes and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.