* 2128896
* FW-HTF-P: Data Science to Save Bees and Transform the Future Work of Beekeepers
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* German Perilla, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,947.00

The world faces a worsening crisis for the bees that pollinate one in every
three bites of food that humans consume. Due to colony collapse disorder,
invasive mites (varroa destructor), use of pesticides, and the rise of
monoculture farming, honey bees are dying at unprecedented rates. Traditional
approaches to beekeeping have been unable to stem the tide of colony collapse.
The decline in pollinators also threatens economic stability. U.S. honey
production since 1987 has declined precipitously and the costs of crop
pollination have climbed. In the face of this situation, the future of the
beekeeping workforce faces is at risk. A better future of work for beekeeping
will involve mastering research-driven practices that respond to bee health in
different landscapes, and that deploy technology to monitor bee hive health and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves planning for a
multidisciplinary approach to upskill and transform beekeeping and the education
of future beekeepers. The project is a joint effort of the George Mason
University College of Education and Human Development and the School of Business
(that houses the George Mason University Honey Bee Initiative), and many experts
on beekeeping and data science. The project is studying how to deploy sensors in
hives to generate data colony health with measures of temperature, acoustic
activity, weight, vibration, CO2, humidity, and solar radiation, and is
designing a cloud computing capacity to integrate the hive sensor data with
field data to scientifically describe pollinator and ecosystem
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.