* 2128543
* Functional organization of locus coeruleus projections to CNS motor circuits
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Barry Waterhouse, Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/28/2026
* USD 399,998.00

This project addresses major unanswered questions about the structure of the
locus coeruleus-norepinephrine (LC-NE) transmitter system in the mammalian brain
and its influence on CNS motor circuit operations and movement. The LC-NE system
projects broadly throughout the CNS and has been shown to regulate cognition and
sensory signal processing across all stages of wakefulness. Although it
prominently innervates motor centers of the brain, a similar role for the system
in regulating posture, balance, reflex and goal-directed movement across the
waking state is largely unexplored. With development of new methodology for
visualization of LC neurons that send projections to CNS motor circuits, the
anatomy and physiology of LC-NE inputs to motor centers will be determined.
These experiments will provide information that will advance our thinking about
how the LC-NE system exerts influences on not only motor activity but also
sensory signal processing and executive function in the context of adaptive
behaviors. More broadly there are brain-wide applications for this approach
relative to a host of transmitter-specific pathways in the CNS and the project
itself can be used as a training platform for a next generation of
neuroscientists. The project will also facilitate training of high school
students in research through the High School Biomedical Science Scholar program
as well as of undergraduates from under-represented groups through the Rutgers-
Camden MARC program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the current project
focuses on the innervation of CNS motor circuits by the brainstem nucleus locus
coeruleus (LC) and its impact on motor network function. For more than 50 years
LC was considered homogeneous in structure and function such that its primary
transmitter norepinephrine (NE) could be released uniformly and act
simultaneously on cells and circuits throughout the brain and spinal cord.
However, recent studies from our laboratory and elsewhere have provided
compelling evidence that LC is modular in design, with segregated output
channels to sensory, motor, and cognitive circuitries throughout the CNS and the
potential for differential release of NE in these functionally diverse
projection fields. These findings have prompted a radical shift in thinking
about LC operations and demand revision of theoretical constructs regarding the
impact of the LC-NE system on behavioral outcomes involving not only sensory and
cognitive domains but also movement generation. Within this context, a major gap
in our knowledge is the anatomical and physiological relationship between the
LC-NE system and CNS motor control centers. The investigators' approach using an
intersectional genetic mouse model, retrograde viral vector tracing, and ex vivo
electrophysiology will allow them to determine if LC-motor circuit projection
cells express unique electrophysiological properties and maintain an organized
network of dendritic arbors and axon collaterals that is specific to motor
terminal fields and capable of supporting selective, synchronous release of NE
in CNS motor centers for the purpose of coordinately regulating operations
responsible for balance, postural adjustments, and execution of voluntary
movements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.