* 2128367
* Encapsulated perovskite in NiO nanotube for topological meta-photonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jingbiao Cui, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 382,621.00

A photonic crystal is a periodic structure for manipulating light propagation
and optical applications, which is analogous to semiconductor crystals such as
silicon for electronics. A perovskite is a semiconductor material with potential
applications in solar cells and other devices. In this project, PIs will combine
perovskites with photonic crystals for light generation and absorption. The
perovskites will be confined inside tiny tubular material in order to improve
their stability when they are under harsh environment such as intense light,
moisture, and oxygen. The photonic crystal will be made in a way that light will
be localized and amplified even if the photonic crystal has a fabrication
imperfection. If successful, the project will lead to high-efficiency integrated
lasers and solar cell devices. This project will enhance the abilities in the
education arena by enriching program offerings for graduates and undergraduates,
including minority and underrepresented students, adding new capabilities in
scientific research, expanding the range of laboratory exercises available to
students, and training them as competitive next-generation workforce in
nanotechnology, clean-energy, photonics technology. It also includes outreach
activities targeting the general public via the Fort Worth Museum of Science and
History. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
part&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to design, fabricate and characterize
meta-photonic devices with high absorption and topological photonic devices
using encapsulated perovskites in NiO nanotubes with a topological configuration
that is immune to local disorders. Three approaches will be used: PIs will study
the photo-stability of perovskites/NiO nanotubes under multiple-photon exposure,
and their photoluminescence and electroluminescence in light emitting devices;
Bound states in the continuum in the graded photonic super-crystal will be
applied to the design of the resonant cavity with a very high quality factor for
the lasing of the active medium of perovskites/NiO nanotubes. Disorders or
broken in-plane inversion symmetry will be incorporated into asymmetric graded
photonic super-crystals to achieve quasi bound states in the continuum that will
be immune to the fabrication imperfection of NiO nanotubes; High-order Mie-
resonances in individual NiO nanotube and bound states in the continuum will be
utilized to achieve the broadband high absorption in perovskite/NiO nanotubes
patterned in asymmetric graded photonic super-crystal. The goal is to achieve
high-efficiency solar cells and electrically pumped laser in perovskite/NiO
nanotubes patterned in the graded photonic super-crystal. The proposed research
will have a significant impact on lasing medium in stabilized perovskites,
micro/nano-cavity lasers, integrated optical circuit, miniature optical devices,
and photovoltaic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.