* 2128246
* Collaborative Research: MFB: Ultra-Fast Development of Portable Small Molecule Sensor-Actuators
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Francis Peterson, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

In this project, funded by the Molecular Foundation of Biotechnology (MFB)
initiative and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program of the Division of
Chemistry, and the Biosensing program of the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET), Tim Whitehead of
the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at the University of
Colorado-Boulder, Sean Cutler and Ian Wheeldon at the University of California-
Riverside, and Francis Peterson at Medical College of Wisconsin together are
developing new ways to control biological systems at will using engineered
molecular circuitry. To do this, they will evolve and characterize multiple
chemical sensors and derive design rules that enable others to rapidly create
new chemically controlled biological responses in any organism of interest. This
project seeks to understand how this occurs and define the limits of chemical
sensing by specific protein receptors. In doing so, their work will have broad
impact on diverse areas of biotechnology, including the precise control of
cellular therapies, sensing of illicit drugs or environmental contaminants, and
the microbial production of metabolites. This project lies at the interface of
chemical biology, organic chemistry, cell and biochemical engineering, and
structural biology, and is therefore will provide cross-disciplinary training
for the students engaged in this science at all levels. The primary goals of
their outreach and education programs are to attract young people to careers in
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) and improve training in
chemical biology and industrial biotechnology. The outreach plan involves a
multi-pronged effort focused on pre-college and community college engagement,
engaging undergraduates through discovery-based labs, and through multiple
Research Experiences for Undergraduates programs at all three performance
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The discovery and exploitation of chemical-induced
dimerization (CID) modules was transformative for chemical biology and
biotechnology. Chemical-induced dimerization systems have enabled users to
construct ligand-controlled systems to modulate cellular and biochemical
function, but are constrained by a relatively small number of available protein
modules and controlling ligands. This project seeks to develop the foundational
knowledge required to understand how CID modules can be reprogrammed to
recognize new ligands and to define the limits of chemical space that can be
recognized by such systems. To accomplish this, the research team will build and
screen computationally designed mutant libraries of PYR1 (PYRABACTIN RESISTANCE
1). PYR1 is a plant hormone receptor that functions through a CID mechanism and
possesses a malleable ligand-binding pocket. The project will evolve new
PYR1-based sensors controlled by a diverse range of drug-like small molecules.
Structural, informatic, and biochemical characterization of these sensors will
then be used to develop “rules of recognition” for the PYR1 scaffold and build
foundational knowledge required for PYR1-based sensor design. In parallel, a
rapid yeast-based system to accelerate PYR1-based sensor development will also
be developed. Together, these studies are expected to lead to a detailed
understanding of sensor design using the PYR1 system and establish a strong
foundation for this enabling and generalizable sensor-design
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.