* 2128661
* III: Small: NeuroDB: A Neural Network Framework for Efficiently Answering Database Queries Approximately
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Cyrus Shahabi, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

We are witnessing the age of data explosion. Large amounts of data are
continuously generated by people, sensors and computers and then stored in
computer systems. Many modern applications require these systems answer
questions about the data quickly, accurately and with low storage costs. This is
a challenging task, because increasing speed comes at the expense of accuracy,
and there is a trade-off between the three goals (speed, storage overhead and
accuracy). The traditional approach to address these issues was to develop
customized computer algorithms, each designed to answer a specific type of
question (called query type), by striking a compromise between these goals. Such
a process has proven to be time consuming and needs to be repeated for each
query type. The ultimate goal is to design a system that can automatically
search among possible algorithms to find the ones with the best
time/space/accuracy trade-offs for each query type. This project takes a first
step in this direction by utilizing Artificial Intelligence (AI) to replace all
customized algorithms for different query types with a single neural network
system (similar to network of neurons in human brain) that can answer any query
type after seeing enough examples of questions and answers. Such an approach
will significantly reduce (or eliminate) human intervention in
designing/choosing algorithms for different query types, while improving upon
the time/space/accuracy trade-offs for answering them. This will benefit a broad
range of application domains, especially given the data-driven nature of most of
today's applications. For example, this approach will greatly benefit data-
driven areas, such as smart-cities, transportation, energy, environment and
health. Finally, this project will also be extremely attractive to diverse
students (both undergraduates and graduates) who are these days more attracted
to AI, and will recruit them to contribute to the field of data
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main thesis of this project is that queries
can be represented by functions which can be approximated. Thus, a generic
neural network framework will be developed, dubbed NeuroDB, that can learn a
model to approximate the query function. The learned model can then be used to
find approximate answers to any type of query. The initial focus of NeuroDB will
be on distance-to-nearest-neighbor queries and range aggregate queries, two
important building blocks of many real-world applications. Preliminary results
show that for these two query types, NeuroDB is orders of magnitude faster
compared to state-of-the-art hand-crafted algorithms, and only uses a fraction
of the data size for storage, while providing similar accuracy (the model
concisely learns query and data distributions). NeuroDB will then be extended to
a generic framework that can answer a broader set of query types, thus replacing
different database operations with neural networks. The challenges in doing so
are twofold. First, designing a neural network even for answering a specific
query type is challenging. It requires a deeper understanding, both
theoretically and empirically, of the approximation power of neural networks,
and how it changes with network architecture and training process, for the
specific query type. Second, the observations about specific query types need to
be generalized to design a framework that can answer other query types, and a
learning methodology is needed that is able to train accurate models for
answering them. NeuroDB will be developed as an open-source software system to
be used and extended by the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.