* 2128578
* Modeling, Design and Operation of Robotic Tether-Net Systems for Reliable Capture of Targets
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Souma Chowdhury, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 511,573.00

This project will contribute new scientific knowledge related to the design and
operation of robotic tether-net systems, thus advancing the national prosperity,
welfare and security. The new robotic system consists of a tether-connected net
with corner masses that can be launched from a chaser vehicle to capture a
moving target object. The launched net can also be actively closed using a
variety of embedded mechanisms. A tether-net system provides a potentially safer
and more reliable alternative compared to traditional solutions for capturing
non-cooperative targets. These advantages could translate to important
applications, primarily in the capture and removal of space debris that pose
increasing threats to orbital operations, as well as in the recovery of derelict
drones. Currently, there is a lack of systematic approaches to study various
tether-net configurations and compatible autonomous control paradigms. Moreover,
capture has to happen under imperfect sensing of targets of different shapes and
tumbling motions, and the effects of these real-world uncertainties on net
operation remain poorly understood. This award supports research to address
these knowledge gaps by bringing together net dynamics and contact mechanics,
engineering optimization and machine learning. Immediate impact of the outcomes
of this project will be towards the use-case of space debris removal and thereof
continued safe exploitation of commercial orbits. This will benefit satellite
operators, as well as U.S. national agencies and the public who rely on earth
observation satellites, and will help strengthen U.S. leadership in Space. This
multidisciplinary project will also help broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) and
promote exposure of engineering students to the emerging technology of net-based
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inherent structural flexibility of a net
presents various under-explored operational paradigms, ranging from passive nets
relying on entanglement to complex active solutions with maneuverable corner
elements that are equipped with varying degrees of sensing and control
capabilities. The overall goal of this research is to develop computational
approaches to perform a formal exploration of the resulting distinct operational
paradigms and associated design choices that are jointly effective at capturing
different types of targets in the presence of uncertainty. To accomplish this
research goal, the following key fundamental contributions are envisioned: 1)
Develop physics-infused machine learning approaches to model the complex
dynamics of the net and its interactions with a target object, at computing-
cost/accuracy trade-offs that are desirable for controls and design
explorations. 2) Construct, compare and contrast standard centralized control
architectures and novel decentralized formation control techniques to regulate
the net launch and closure. 3) Explore the interplay of form (net design) and
behavior (net control) in affecting capture performance, by adopting a
reliability-based optimization process informed by design-adaptive neuro-
controllers that will alleviate the computational burden of this concurrent
control/design exploration process. These fundamental contributions will be
reduced to practice through lab-scale physical experiments with targets such as
hanging objects and hovering drones. This, along with the public release of
resulting software artifacts that interface with benchmark robot learning
environments, will provide a tangible foundation for the robotics community to
invent, design and evaluate newer robotic systems based on the tether-net
concept. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.