* 2128480
* Immobilization and in-situ biodegradation of microcystins using engineered biofiltration for drinking water production
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sunny Jiang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2024
* USD 335,395.00

Harmful algal blooms (HABs) in surface waters are caused by massive growth of
algae often with associated toxins called ‘cyanotoxins’ produced by
cyanobacteria. HABs threaten the Nation’s water supplies and cost millions of
dollars per year in responses and lost revenue. Microcystin is the most common
cyanotoxin produced by cyanobacteria blooms in freshwater lakes. Microcystin is
highly toxic to humans and animals, and large concentrations have resulted in
the temporary shutdown of an entire municipal drinking water system. Despite
large investments in HAB mitigation, cyanotoxins continue to be a great
challenge for safe drinking water production. The goal of this project is to
address this challenge through the development of novel engineered nanomaterials
to remove microcystin from drinking water and break it down to non-toxic
products. The engineered nanomaterials will be fabricated using biochar
(charcoal produced from plants) with specific modified surfaces to trap
microcystin and remove it from water. Special bacteria then degrade the toxins
trapped on the surface in a microscale bioreactor. Successful development of
this ‘trap and destroy’ technology has potential to transform our ability to
remove cyanotoxins from drinking water. Additional societal benefits result from
the training of graduate students in multidisciplinary science to enhance the
Nation’s STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project
is to develop new three-dimensional net-like functional hydrogel-biochar
composite materials to selectively capture and degrade microcystin in drinking
water. This goal will be achieved through four specific objectives to: i)
develop materials for selective microcystin adsorption through complementary
pore size, ion exchange, and π-π electron donor-acceptor interactions; ii)
optimize microcystin uptake kinetics through strong electrostatic interactions
or ion exchange with positively charged quaternary ammonium groups; iii)
encapsulate microcystin-degrading bacterial consortia into functional
biomaterials to enable in situ biodegradation of microcystin; and iv) remove
clogging and regenerate adsorbent binding sites in the biofiltration system
through a chemically enhanced backwash. Novel advances in this research include
the synthesis of a new cationic poly(diallyldimethylammonium-co-styrene)-grafted
cellulose nanofibril and biochar composite, elucidation of microcystin
adsorption/biodegradation mechanisms using Thomas, Adams-Bohart, and CXTFIT
models, and sorption site characterization using density functional theory. The
viability and function of microcystin-degrading bacteria encapsulated in
biomaterial composites will be evaluated by coupling scanning electron
microscope and culturing methods. Reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR, 16S
rRNA gene sequencing, and metagenomics analysis will be used to develop
genotypic insight into microcystin degradation mechanisms. Successful completion
of this research will help advance water treatment technologies by integrating
novel targeted biodegradation with new functional nanomaterials as an effective
water treatment technology. Societal benefits will result from effective and
low-cost treatment technology for microcystin removal to protect the Nation’s
drinking water supplies from HABs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.