* 2128981
* FW-HTF-P: Impacts of Artificial Intelligence and Remote Conferencing on Work Practices and Equity in State Courts
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Andrea Miller, National Center For State Courts
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 149,962.00

State courts hear about 95 percent of all legal matters in the United States,
and they are facing a pivotal moment. The rapid advancement of new technologies,
along with the societal impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and renewed calls for
racial justice, have dramatically shifted the work of the state courts. New
technologies affecting the state courts include the automation of case filing
and case processing, the integration of Augmented and Artificial Intelligence
(AI) in legal decision-making, and the movement of court operations from
physical space into virtual space. As these technological developments
accelerate, courts will need the help of researchers to identify which legal
decisions can be made by AI systems or by human-technology teams, reconfigure
the composition of different occupations and skill sets within the court
workforce, address job satisfaction, learning, and well-being among court
practitioners, promote equity in court employment outcomes, promote equity in
case outcomes for court users, and foster public trust in the legal system as a
whole. This project will lay the groundwork for a comprehensive research agenda
on the future work of the state courts. The potential outcomes of the research
that stems from this award will include improved access to the courts for
individual litigants, more equitable justice outcomes for different groups in
society, more equitable employment outcomes within the court workforce, court-
system-level changes in efficiency and case processing, and improved perceptions
of the legitimacy of the courts and rule of law in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together experts in
organizational psychology, social cognition, science communication, computer
science, design, engineering, adult learning, and legal decision-making, as well
as court practitioners and court stakeholders, for a year of guided ideation and
discussion. The research team will: 1) develop a detailed review of relevant
literature in the areas of automation, AI, and virtual space; 2) conduct an
environmental scan regarding the current use of automation, AI, and virtual
space in the state courts; 3) convene an interdisciplinary workgroup to review
the literature and current practices, identify research and knowledge gaps, and
craft a convergent research agenda; 4) identify methodologies for examining
automated legal processes, AI-based tools, and virtual court spaces for evidence
of bias; and 5) develop recommendations for future education and training of the
court workforce around new technologies. The primary outcome of this project
will be a research agenda with clearly defined research questions and methods
regarding the future work of the state courts at human-technology frontiers.
This project will also result in a communication network of researchers and
practitioners across multiple disciplines and sectors with a shared vision for
research on this topic. The knowledge produced by this research can be leveraged
to inform recruitment, retention, and promotion strategies within the court
workforce, educational and retraining opportunities for court leaders, science
communication strategies for court workers and members of the public, and the
development of future technologies themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.