* 2128034
* IntBIO COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Deep Time, Development, and Design: Evolution of shark skin teeth from genotype to phenotype to prototype.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Pincelli Hull, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 474,066.00

The skin of sharks is unique among vertebrate animals because it contains tooth-
like scales, called dermal denticles, that create a hard external armor. These
tooth-like denticles evolved over millions of years and equip the shark with
hydrodynamic skin that reduces the cost of moving through the water. This
advanced streamlining is currently a subject of great interest, with many
industries attempting to take advantage of shark skin technology to create more
efficient swimming designs. This project aims to provide a complete integrated
understanding of shark denticles: how they form in embryonic sharks, how
denticle shape has changed over years of evolution, and which denticle types are
the best for drag-reduction and further design advances. This knowledge will
enable better use of shark skin technology to make advanced design solutions
that help to make a better and more environmentally friendly world. For example,
one possible use of shark skin technology is the development of surface
structures on airplanes or boats to reduce drag during movement and decrease
fuel emissions. In addition to its scientific impact, this project has impact on
the STEM workforce by supporting principal investigators and trainees across a
wide range of career stages and by providing a unique, much-needed accessible
research training program for undergraduates with disabilities in
interdisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shape and pattern of shark
skin teeth, or denticles, has been refined over millions of years of evolution
for functional improvements in aquatic locomotion. This project addresses the
evolutionary and developmental trajectories that have led to a vast diversity of
shark skin denticle types with the goals of determining why sharks have
different shaped denticles among and within species and what functional
advantages these different denticle shapes might offer these animals. From an
integrated developmental, genetic, and evolutionary framework, the project will
investigate how denticles develop and what factors lead to changes in shape. The
approach will include studies of embryonic denticle development from the level
of single cell transcriptomics to phenotypes and function to learn what key
genes are essential to the production of various denticle shapes in a range of
shark species and how these shapes are achieved via developmental innovation.
Goals include understanding what shapes are most efficient for drag-reduction in
both modern and extinct species to enable modeling and testing of new
engineering designs to reduce drag in air- and water-borne vehicles and devices.
Combining 3D printing with engineering methods, new shark-inspired surface
structures will be used to create a shift in design solutions for a changing and
more environmentally friendly world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.