* 2128121
* Nonclassical mechanisms to modify and control organic crystal nucleation and growth
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Peter Vekilov, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 529,193.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Solution-grown single crystals serve as
semiconductor, optoelectronic, and photovoltaic devices and detectors for high-
energy radiation. These studies, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry Program in the Division of Materials Research, fill a gap in
understanding crystallization of organic materials that carry promising optical
and electronic properties for use as semiconductors, solar cells, and field-
effect transistors. Additionally, the research can provide valuable information
about crystallization processes, which are essential for a myriad of industrial,
natural, and physiological processes. Researchers at the University of Houston
take on the grand fundamental science challenge to control crystallization by
designing robust control strategies that rest on understanding the fundamental
thermodynamic and kinetic mechanisms, and in particular the role of foreign
compounds. In industry, soluble foreign compounds that interact with the
solution or the crystal-solution interface are deployed to promote or inhibit
crystallization. Nature achieves remarkable diversity of shapes, patterns,
compositions, and functions of the arising crystalline structures by applying
ingredients that control the number of formed crystals and their rates of
growth. Insights gained from this project advance the science of organic
crystallization in general, and the influence of foreign compounds on the
synthesis of solid state organic materials in particular. The researchers also
involve a diverse cohort of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in
carrying out this research, which provides them with training in advanced
science and engineering concepts and methods. This in turn contributes to
narrowing the gap between the demand and availability of educated workforce in
Houston, which is among the widest in large U.S.
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;As part of this
project, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in the Division of Materials Research, the PI and this team design novel
strategies to control the nucleation and growth of crystals from organic
solvents that employ foreign compounds to regulate nonclassical crystallization
behaviors and the nucleation and growth precursors. The accepted models of
modifier activity presume that crystal nucleation and growth advance along
classical pathways. Recent experiments have accumulated significant
discrepancies with the classical theories. The highlighted nonclassical features
involve mesoscopic crystallization precursors, ordered or disordered, which
assemble in the solution independently of crystallization and may both
facilitate nucleation and feed a fast mode of crystal growth. How additives
impact the properties of the crystallization precursors to enhance or suppress
crystal nucleation and growth has not been examined. The researchers bring
complementary expertise in molecular thermodynamics and kinetics of
crystallization, crystal design and advanced characterization, and molecular
simulations to pursue three specific aims: 1. Design strategies to control
crystal nucleation by manipulating precursors involved in nonclassical
nucleation modes. 2. Elucidate molecular and mesoscopic crystallization
mechanisms that persist after removal of the modifier from the growth medium by
exploiting the interactions of modifiers with crystal growth precursors and with
step bunches on the crystal surface. 3. Characterize interactions between pairs
of modifiers mediated by the step structures and dynamics that lead to
antagonistic, additive, or synergistic cooperativities between modifiers; these
interactions have been disregarded by classical inhibition models. To cover a
diverse array of nucleation and crystallization behaviors, the researchers
employ organic crystals that carry promising optical and electronic properties
for use as semiconductors, solar cells, and field-effect
transistors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.