* 2128836
* Upskilling Workers and Re-designing Workplaces for the Future of Automation in the Hospitality Industry
* CSE,IIS
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2025
* Christine Riordan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2025
* USD 446,021.00

This multi-institutional collaborative research project seeks to envision,
design and engage in worker-oriented research and training related to the
proliferation of automation in the hospitality industry, which has been
accelerated by the COVID-19 pandemic. Large numbers of hospitality workers, who
are majority female and from underrepresented groups, are being displaced by
these technological changes. Workers’ positions are currently being augmented
with algorithmic management and robotic assistance, replacing some jobs and
transforming others that cannot be completely automated — for example, high-
touch, face-to-face service interactions which are critical to the success of
the hospitality industry. The research team will investigate ways that
technological innovations of the future can be developed and implemented with
input from the workers who are best suited to understand their benefits and
pitfalls. It is expected that this project will positively impact the
hospitality workforce by preserving jobs, giving people more job satisfaction,
reducing the way technology drives inequality, and developing policies and
training programs that will generalize to other high-touch service
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together several
disciplines, including hospitality, human-computer interaction, service design,
learning science, labor economics, and industrial relations. The research team
has partnered with UNITE HERE, the largest hospitality union in the United
States, which will provide a unique opportunity to research, prototype, and
evaluate the research outcomes in training facilities and hotels, casinos, and
food service establishments. The investigator team is structured to achieve
multiple convergent goals. This process will have four iterative, overlapping
phases: (1) to qualitatively and quantitatively understand the current state of
union hospitality workers, hospitality work, and automation technology; (2) to
co-design technology deployment models; (3) to identify workforce needs and
training materials to prepare for the future; and (4) to evaluate outcomes to
understand how they may impact the future of work. The project will address the
lack of worker voice on the impact of future automation technology in the
hospitality industry, and to make suggestions for enhancing future workers and
future work. This project is funded by the NSF Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to promote deeper basic
understanding of the interdependent human-technology partnership in work
contexts by advancing the design of intelligent work technologies that operate
in harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.