* 2128820
* Controlled Environment Facilities for the Marine Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Anne Giblin, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 437,022.00

This project will provide funds for new controlled environment facilities at the
Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL - https://www.mbl.edu). This will provide new
capabilities to expand research on plant and soil processes, and microbial
interactions with plants and animals. Global change is a multi-factor phenomenon
making the study of how organisms and ecosystems will respond to future changes
all the more challenging. Facilities which can simultaneously control multiple
relevant environmental drivers are needed to address relevant global change
questions. These facilities will be used to support research and education on a
broad array of topics, which include the effects of climate change and human
land use on terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, controls on greenhouse gas
release from soils and sediments, studies on the evolution of photosynthesis,
studies on the microbiome of plants and animals, and investigations into the
metabolic capabilities of microbial communities and microbes living in extreme
environments. The facility will be used by faculty, visiting scientists and
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will install two new Conviron
growth chambers equipped with state of the art temperature, CO2, humidity, and
lighting systems to replace older systems. The two new chambers will also be
equipped with a new control system allowing for remote monitoring of the
chambers and experiments. The room housing the new growth chambers will be
greatly improved by moving three compressors outside, reducing the noise in the
room. For studies of environmental controls over microbial activities the
project will also include the installation of a Coy anaerobic chamber enabling
preparation of anaerobic microbial cultures and experiments requiring strict
anaerobic conditions. This chamber will enable new capacity for diverse work
with anaerobic microbes year-round at the MBL. The room housing the new growth
chambers will be greatly improved by moving three compressors (those for the two
new chambers, and one for an existing chamber) outside, greatly reducing the
noise in the room. MBLâ€™s growth chambers have been heavily used for education at
all levels, from high school to Ph.D. level work and students will continue to
have access to the new facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.