* 2128337
* Collaborative Research: Does responding to stressors prime greater resilience? Testing the long-term effects of challenges on behavior, physiology, epigenetic state, and fitness.
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Conor Taff, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 01/31/2026
* USD 863,173.00

When faced with a major challenge – severe weather, the attack of a predator, an
injury – organisms mount a coordinated physiological and behavioral stress
response. This response can be vital for surviving and recovering from immediate
threats. This project will test whether activating the stress response system
has another overlooked benefit that operates over much longer time-scales:
priming the system to respond better to future challenges. Coordinated
experiments will address fundamental questions about when and how environmental
challenges prime greater resilience to future challenges, and examine whether
those effects persist across generations. This study will also adapt and refine
newly developed sensor technology that enables non-invasive monitoring of heart
rate in free-living animals – a tool that could yield considerable advances
across fields. A more comprehensive understanding of the lingering impacts of
challenges will also be valuable for other fields, including conservation and
human health. Additionally, the team will lead a career development program that
combines a field research internship – in which students participate in
addressing the research objectives outlined in this proposal – with a
laboratory- and classroom-based skills development program for students from
underrepresented groups who are interested in careers in STEM fields. This
opportunity is designed to foster interactions among students from a small
liberal arts college and from a large research-intensive
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test the hypothesis that
transient challenges experienced in adulthood prime greater resilience or
robustness to future challenges, defined as the ability to return to or maintain
a stable state. Research will use a long-term study population of tree swallows
(Tachycineta bicolor) in which large-scale behavioral and physiological data can
be collected from free-living individuals. In the first year of study adult
females will be exposed to either an ecologically relevant challenge or a
simulated glucocorticoid stress response. In the following year(s) a diversity
of phenotypic traits, and context-dependent performance and fitness, will be
measured. This study design will enable comparison of the direct effects of
exposure to a challenge with the effects of exposure to a mediator of the
response to that challenge. These experiments will also reveal whether the long-
term effects of stressors on behavior, physiology, and fitness are mediated by
glucocorticoids and by glucocorticoid-induced changes in DNA methylation. This
research will also test whether parental exposure history carries over to affect
the phenotype and fitness of offspring produced in the year(s) after the
challenge. By combining targeted experiments in a free-living population with
integrative methods of behavioral, physiological, and epigenetic assessment this
project will provide insights important for developing and revising conceptual
models of stress and phenotypic plasticity. It will also broaden our
understanding of the mechanisms of behavior, how organisms are shaped by their
environments, and how sub-organismal responses contribute to organismal
resilience and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.