* 2128707
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Modeling Precolonial and Colonial Niche Construction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,01/31/2024
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 13,948.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will undertake
research to better understand how and why humans modify their natural
environments, and what happens when they stop doing so. Humans have had far-
reaching effects on the environment across the planet, so it is important to
research the specific demographic and economic drivers of these impacts.
Archaeology can provide a useful means to address these issues, as the past is
full of case studies which can be analyzed to understand such activities and
trace the history of environmental impacts. Such research can also inform
solutions to environmental degradation and contribute to understanding the
environmental impacts of human population changes and how different economic
systems can lead to either ecological destruction or long-term
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of both computational
modeling and archaeological data analysis to better understand human
environmental impacts. The modeling will contribute to theory about
environmental modification by building computer simulations to investigate the
impacts of human population size and economic forces on the environment. The
analysis will evaluate environmental data from a time of colonial settlement and
integration into a new global economy. This analysis will test the predictions
of the model and attempt to determine the ecological impacts of colonization and
how the environment was impacted by resulting changes in forest management,
farming, and hunting. The results of this research will contribute to knowledge
of environmental modification and natural resource management, both in theory
and in terms of the history of environmental changes that have led us to the
present. This information can help researchers to better understand how to
improve the ecology of our planet today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.