* 2128365
* EAGER: Chasing the elusive syntrophic partners in direct interspecies electron transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Heyang Yuan, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,851.00

Anaerobic digestion is widely utilized worlwide to treat waste streams and
convert them to biogas such as methane. Biogas fom anerobic digestion typically
consists of 50-70% methane and thus needs to be treated to remove impurities
including carbon dioxide and water vapor. To eliminate the need for addtional
treatment and purification of biogas from existing anaerobic digesters, it is
critical to understand and quantify the metabolic pathways of the microbial
consortial involved in biogas production. The overarching goal of this high-risk
and high-reward EAGER project is to characterize and quantify the metabolic
pathways that drive methane production during anaerobic digestion. To advance
this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) of this project proposes to carry out
an integrated experimental research program to test the hypothesis that
interspecies hydrogen transfer (IHT) and direct interspecies electron transfer
(DIET) play an equally important role during biogas production by methanogenesis
in electrically conductive environments. The successful completion of this EAGER
project could provide new fundamental knowledge that could be leveraged to
develop and implement new engineering reactor design and operational strategies
to increase the methane content of biogas produced by anaerobic digestors.
Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including the mentoring of a doctoral student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interspecies hydrogen transfer (IHT) and direct
interspecies electron transfer (DIET) have been shown to contribute to biogas
production by methanogenesis in electrically conductive environments. However, a
fundamental understanding and quantification of the relative contributions of
IHT and DIET to methanogenesis have remained elusive due to the lack of
experimental techniques to directly measure the associated microbial metabolisms
and activities. The overarching goal of this project is to address this
knowledge gap. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator (PI) of this
project hypothesizes that IHT and DIET play an equally important role during
biogas production by methanogenesis in electrically conductive environments.
This hypothesis is based on the results of preliminary studies by the PI that
identified a novel Geobacter species (Candidatus Geobacter eutrophica) that was
abundant in anerobic reactors supplied with conductive granular activated
carbon. The PI also found that the Candidatus Geobacter eutrophica bacteria
actively expressed genes encoding proteins for both extracellular electron
transfer and hydrogen metabolism. To test this new hypothesis, the PI proposes
to carry out an integrated experimental research program structured around two
specific aims: 1) enrich DIET-capable Geobacter bacteria and elucidate their
extracellular electron transfer mechanisms (Specific Aim 1) and 2) enrich DIET-
capable methanogens and characterize their extracellular electron uptake
mechanisms (Specific Aim 2). To enrich the DIET-capable Geobacter and methanogen
bacteria, the PI proposes to use electrochemical stimulation in
bioelectrochemical systems with specially designed electrodes. By combining
cyclic voltammetry with measurements of biogas production, ion chromatography,
resonance Raman microscopy and omics (metagenomics and metatranscriptomics), the
PI hopes to unravel the metabolic pathways responsible for DIET in both
electron-donating and electron-accepting microbial partners. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development of new
bioprocesses such as electro-methanogenesis that could convert waste streams to
biogas with much higher methane yields than existing anerobic digestion
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.