* 2128789
* RAPID: A Researcher-Practitioner-Partnership to Assess the Impact of COVID-19 Recession on NGSS Implementation
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Niu Gao, Public Policy Institute of California
* Standard Grant
* Xiufeng Liu
* 05/31/2022
* USD 173,584.00

Today 44 states serving 71 percent of U.S. students have education standards
influenced by the Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). Local implementation
is the key to the success of NGSS, yet little is known about the extent to which
NGSS have been implemented in K-12 schools during COVID-19. Policymakers,
educational leaders, and researchers urgently need data to know whether and how
NGSS implementation is taking hold in their schools in light of changes due to
COVID-19 so that they may design better supports for implementation in
anticipation for school reopening for in-person learning in September 2021. This
project will investigate how NGSS has been implemented in California schools
during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. Through a state-wide survey, analysis of
administrative data, interviews and case studies, this project will assess the
impact of COVID-19 on NGSS implementation on a large scale, and more
importantly, the extent to which high minority, high-poverty districts are
disproportionately affected. It will also identify policy options available to
state and school districts. By collecting critical and timely data, this project
will contribute new knowledge to understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on NGSS
implementation. This knowledge is a necessary step towards policy and practice
solutions that support schools and teachers in continuing implementation of NGSS
and expanding educational opportunities to underrepresented minorities, English
learners, and students with disabilities in post-COVID-19.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to (1) assess the impacts of
COVID-19 on NGSS implementation in California; (2) examine whether and how high-
minority, high-poverty districts are impacted more acutely than other districts;
and (3) identify policies and programs state and local districts could
prioritize to mitigate the impacts. A mixed methods approach will be used to
answer research questions related to the above goals. Specifically, a survey of
all school districts in California will be conducted. Text mining of school
district administrative data will also be performed. Qualitative methods will
include interviews and case studies. Extensive outreach efforts, including one-
on-one briefings with the members of the legislative and executive branches,
will also take place throughout the year. A researcher-practitioner partnership
will be formed through engaging the California State Department of Education in
allocating resources for NGSS implementation and local school districts in
developing guidelines to support teachers in NGSS-aligned instruction. Project
findings will be widely disseminated through online resources and digital
libraries to school districts, science teachers, and curriculum developers.
Project findings will inform state policymaking and increase the partnerships
between research institutions and state government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
RAPID award is made by the Discovery Research preK-12 (DRK-12) program in the
Division of Research on Learning. The DRK-12 program seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.