* 2128026
* Collaborative Research: Neuro-Cognitive Feedback to Enhance Engineering Design of Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* John Gero, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 10/31/2024
* USD 299,756.00

Engineering design is a critical process to ensure national health, prosperity,
and welfare. An important step during engineering design is the generation of
new ideas. Anything that enriches this step can help improve outcomes that
benefit society. However, the generation of new ideas tends to peak early and
decline over time during the engineering design process. This can prevent
innovation because engineers tend to fixate on older ideas instead of generating
new ones. To help engineers sustain their ability to generate new ideas, this
project will test a novel solution through the self-regulation of brain
activation. Neuro-cognitive feedback measures change in blood flow in the brain
and visually provides this information on a computer screen to designers, who
are asked to keep their brain activation high through self-regulation. Neuro-
cognitive feedback can improve cognitive performance by making information about
hidden brain states accessible. Neuro-cognitive feedback has the potential to
help design engineers better understand their own performance abilities and help
them adjust their mental approach. Developing more self-aware engineers that can
quickly adjust their mental approach can lead to more innovative solutions and
more skilled problem-solvers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to test the effects of neuro-cognitive feedback on engineering design. The
questions that this research project will answer are: (1) what is the effect of
neuro-cognitive feedback on the fluency and creativity of ideas generated by
engineers; (2) what is the effect of neuro-cognitive feedback on brain
activation; and (3) how does brain activation correlate with the types of ideas
that are generated? Engineers will be randomly selected to receive neuro-
cognitive feedback about themselves, random feedback, or no neuro-cognitive
feedback. Each engineer will then be asked to ideate design solutions to an
engineering problem. The research team will measure patterns of activation in
their brain over time, the number of solutions the engineers develop, when they
develop these solutions, and the creativity of these solutions assessed by a
panel of experts. This project will lead to a better understanding about why
neuro-cognitive feedback sustains brain activation and will offer new insight
about how self-regulation of neuro-cognitive activation affects design. Self-
regulation is not a part of current models or theories in engineering design.
The findings from this project will extend current understanding and offer new
characterizations of the neuro-cognitive functions that occur during the
engineering design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.