* 2128556
* National High Magnetic Field Laboratory Renewal 2023-2027
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Alan Marshall, Florida State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Leonard Spinu
* 12/31/2027
* USD 38,276,435.00

High magnetic fields are a powerful tool for scientific research, and have wide
spread technological applications. The most popular applications include
magnetic resonance imaging for medical diagnosis, high-speed magnetic levitation
trains, and power generation. Scientists use high magnetic fields to explore new
physical phenomena, develop materials for future generation computers, overcome
energy challenges, and increase our understanding of the human brain and life in
general.&lt;br/&gt;This award to Florida State University supports the operation
of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in 2023-2027. Home to
many world-record magnet systems, the NHMFL is located at three sites: Florida
State University, the University of Florida and the Los Alamos National
Laboratory. More than one thousand six hundred scientists from academia,
government laboratories, and industry around the world come to the NHMFL sites
each year, and use the powerful magnets and state-of-the-art instruments for
research in materials science, condensed matter physics, chemistry, biology, as
well as magnet technology. The results of this research are published in more
than four hundred papers each year, and lead to the creation of start-up
companies. The Magnet Science and Technology division and the Advanced
Superconductivity Center at NHMFL meet the laboratory’s mission to develop new
materials and to build new magnet systems to advance the frontiers of high
magnetic field science.&lt;br/&gt;The mission of NHMFL also includes the
education and training of the next generation of scientists as well as to
increase the scientific awareness of the broader scientific community. A large
number of scientists, including 500 undergraduate and graduate students, 200
postdoctoral scholars, and 250 early-career scientists, use the NHMFL as their
training ground. The NHMFL reaches tens of thousands of K-12 students, teachers,
and the public through classroom lessons, summer and winter camps, internships,
tours, and web-based interactive tutorials and activities. An open house event
organized by the scientific and technical staff at the NHMFL brings more than
10,000 members of the general public to perform hands-on experiments each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NHMFL includes seven user facilities: Steady
State or DC Field, Electron Magnetic Resonance, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, and
Ion Cyclotron Resonance at Florida State University; Pulsed Field at Los Alamos
National Laboratory; and High B/T and Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
Spectroscopy at the University of Florida. User access is provided through a
competitive proposal review process. &lt;br/&gt;Magnetic fields both probe and
manipulate quantum materials through coupling to electron spins, orbitals, and
currents, controlling nuclear spins, imposing commensurabilities in energy or
length scales, breaking symmetries and/or inducing magnetic vortices. Scientific
research at the NHMFL is primarily focused, but not limited to, on advancing our
understanding along seven broad frontiers: (a) emergent behaviors that results
from electronic interactions in quantum materials; (b) the role of topology in
giving rise to new physics in quantum matter; (c) exploring the new physics
revealed in atomically-thin materials from monolayers to multi-layers to
structures with multi-layer structures with twisted interlayer orientations; (d)
extracting atomic-level descriptions of complex ‒ often disordered ‒ materials,
including catalysts, glasses, and batteries, using both nuclear and electron
magnetic resonance; (e) using resonance techniques on metabolites, biomolecular
assemblies, and living organisms to measure structure, dynamics, and development
under physiological and in vivo conditions; (f) using ion cyclotron resonance to
probe chemically-complex organic mixtures at a molecular level, from dissolved
organic matter to anthropogenic contaminants; and (g) researching high-strength
conductors and superconductors necessary to advance magnet
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.