* 2128581
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Collaborative Interference Cancellation for Radio Astronomy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Aveek Dutta, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 635,901.00

This project seeks to enhance coexistence in shared frequency bands between
wireless cellular networks and passive radio telescopes. This project helps
address challenges created by growing congestion of the radiofrequency spectrum.
If successful, the project will improve radio telescope capability through
reducing interference problems. It will reduce barriers to further deployment of
wireless networks, thus facilitating the high bandwidth reliable and ubiquitous
connectivity needed for continued growth in the benefits of telecommunications.
Interference problems between communications and radio telescopes have existed
for a long time. One approach studied to overcome them has been active
interference cancellation, in which the telescope receiver estimates the
interfering communications signal then subtracts it from the astronomical
measurement in order to expose the desired information. Most prior work on
active cancellation assumes no cooperation from the cellular networks; this work
studies how the telescope and cellular network could work together to improve
cancellation performance. Most prior work measures the interfering signals at
the telescope site, while this work measures the interfering signals at their
transmission location; most prior work uses external spectrum monitoring
devices, while this work characterizes the interference in the digital domain of
the transmitter; these attributes of the approach give a clearer picture of the
interfering signals at much less cost, but also create challenges that the
project will seek to overcome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach used focuses on
active interference cancellation at the telescope supported by active
bidirectional collaboration between the telescope and neighboring cellular
networks. Key aspects include: characterize cellular system signals using
software running inside the cellular base stations that analyzes the digital
representation of the transmissions; decompose the cellular signals at the base
stations into an orthogonal stochastic component representation (the Karhunen-
Loeve Transformation); perform the decomposition using a neural network
architecture with domain specific knowledge to combine high accuracy and
computational efficiency; intelligently aggregate information about multiple
emitters in the cellular network using topology aware distributed learning;
perform the same decomposition on the astronomical signal at the telescope then
combine it with the aggregated information about the cellular signals to cancel
the interference; and use continuous quantitative feedback from the cancellation
algorithms at the telescope to the cellular network to optimize the performance
of the decomposition and aggregation algorithms. The research will be validated
with a prototype deployment of the interference measurement and cancellation
apparatus at the Deep Synoptic Array telescope (DSA-110) at the Owens Valley
Radio Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.