* 2128109
* Biology Opportunities and Scholarships for Success II
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Mark Davis, University of West Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,857.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of West Alabama (UWA). Located in rural Alabama, UWA is
designated as a Predominately Black Institution (PBI) and Predominately
Undergraduate Institution (PUI). Building on the experiences and lessons learned
from a prior S-STEM award, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique
full-time students pursuing bachelor's degrees in biological and environmental
sciences. It will also expand student support services including a summer boot
camp to aid with the transition to college life, training to improve students'
study strategies, monitoring students' well-being, and improving their
communication skills. Scholars will also be involved in peer- and faculty-
mentoring, research opportunities, presentations at professional conferences,
and participation in field trips. The project plans to increase retention and
graduation rates, monitor student success in obtaining jobs or entering graduate
school, and measure the significance of the project’s services and activities in
helping students achieve their goals. The project will advance understanding of
the role well-being assessments, metacognitive study strategies, and
communication skills in increasing student retention and success. The knowledge
generated from this project is of significance to UWA and many other similar
higher education institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The Biology Opportunities and
Scholarships for Success II project aims to increase participants' persistence
in science, success in academic careers, and, ultimately, diversity in the
scientific workforce. Two specific goals serve as driving forces for the
project. The first is to increase the enrollment and graduation rates of
academically talented students majoring in biological and environmental sciences
and improve student success in obtaining jobs or entering graduate programs. The
second is to evaluate the role of student support services (boot camp, student's
well-being, metacognitive study training, and enhancement of students'
communication skills) in improving students' retention and graduation rates. The
project will generate knowledge through a mixed methods quantitative and
qualitative study that investigates the effectiveness of the project's support
services. The work will help to fill a knowledge gap about how the student
support services impact students' retention and overall success, particularly on
minority students in rural settings. The project will disseminate the generated
knowledge via articles in peer-reviewed journals and presentations at regional
and national STEM education-related conferences. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.