* 2128311
* Multi-modal Haptic Stimulations Using Micromachined Ultrasound Processors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Liwei Lin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 398,311.00

Emerging wearable electronics having a variety of functions are desirable in
seamless human-machine interface applications, including sensors to detect
environmental signals and actuators to generate mechanical sensations. Today,
numerous sensing systems have been developed for human-machine interfaces to
sense signals such as physiological parameters relevant to human health
conditions, including electro-cardio signal, pulse wave, blood pressure, and
body motion. On the other hand, the progress of wearable mechanical stimulators
remains very challenging. For example, traditional actuating systems have used
large linear resonators, eccentric rotating masses, and voice coils to generate
mechanical stimulations. As a result, these systems are bulky and often
stationary with very limited applications. There are several “wearable”
prototype stimulators in various research stages such as tactile devices on the
fingertips to recreate interaction forces for virtual reality applications, but
these systems are still bulky. Several soft and thin actuators have been
reported to address the size issue based on piezoelectric polymers to make
flexible, thin, and light-weight actuators. However, they require very high
driving voltage (hundreds of volts) and they don’t have good spatial resolution
for multi-modal stimulations to mimic complex sensations. The proposed project
provides unique opportunities by using the acoustic pressure of piezoelectric
micromachined ultrasonic transducers (PMUTs) to build small-form factor,
wearable, touchless haptic feedback systems via the micromachining process for
low-cost manufacturing. The synergy of research and education interaction and
integration between manufacturing, material sciences and physical transduction
principles will be an engine for the multidisciplinary fusion in research and
education expertise for the next-generation scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The desirable features of wearable haptic
devices include: (1) low driving voltage and high output force and/or
deformation; (2) thin and small form-factor constructions; and (3) multi-modal
stimulations with high spatial and temporal resolutions. This project proposes
three innovative approaches to address these challenges: (1) a piezoelectric
micromachined ultrasonic transducers (PMUTs) array to generate high ultrasonic
radiation force for touchless stimulations irrelevant of skin surface profiles;
(2) high temporal and spatial resolutions by a single PMUT chip with multiple
actuator units; and (3) varying modals of haptic tactile sensations by amplitude
and frequency modulations on individual actuators. As such, this micromachined
ultrasound processor could enable exceptional functions and usages in a variety
of current and future systems, including cell phones, augmented reality (AR),
virtual reality (VR), robotics, … etc., by providing alternative/additional
haptic stimulations that are not possible from the current haptic feedback
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.