* 2128743
* FW-HTF-R: Fostering Learning and Adaptability of Future Manufacturing Workers with Intelligent Extended Reality (IXR)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2025
* Nicholas Wilson, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

This research project imagines the future of work in precision manufacturing
where the spatial and causal reasoning and decision-making abilities of workers
are augmented through teaming with intelligent extended reality (IXR)
technologies. Evidence suggests that the newer wave of automation in
manufacturing is not so much to replace workers but rather to complement human
work to increase precision, safety, and product quality. Yet, U.S. manufacturers
are not adequately addressing the changing nature of skill requirements which is
anticipated to leave 2.4 million manufacturing jobs unfilled by 2030. This
project will address the urgent need for breakthrough technologies that enable
workplace-based learning and rapid upskilling of the manufacturing workforce on
complex, cognitively demanding, and hard-to-automate tasks. The project will
focus on precision machining and inspection in the aviation industry as the
specific work context for building and validating the IXR technologies, which is
also expected to inform the technology development in other industries such as
medical, automotive, semiconductor, and defense. The convergent research team
will create new technological pathways to enable intelligent worker-XR teaming
and advance the fundamental understanding of its impacts on labor economy and
worker learning and innovation. This project aims to create new perspectives,
methods, and discoveries to unleash the full potential of America’s
manufacturing workforce, and as such, strengthen national prosperity and
economic competitiveness in precision manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings together several disciplines, including engineering, learning
sciences, social sciences, economics, computer sciences, psychology, and
workforce development. The investigator team is structured to achieve multiple
convergent goals across the three dimensions of the Future of Work at the Human-
Technology Frontier: (1) The Future Work dimension will investigate the changes
in employer skill requirements for precision manufacturing including education,
years of experience, and actual skills, using a proprietary database of 160
million online job vacancies. Expert interviews, firm-level surveys, and in-
depth case studies will investigate training and upskilling practices for
incumbent and entry-level workers, explore accessibility of the IXR approach for
certain groups of workers and firms, and identify economic barriers and
opportunities for adopting the IXR technology. (2) The Future Technology
dimension will advance the fundamental understanding of how new sources of
multimodal data captured by XR devices, digital thread, IoT, and cloud-based
analytics can be harnessed to interpret, predict, and guide the behavior of
precision manufacturing workers. A novel IXR technology will be built and
validated that adapts the scientific methods of computer vision, natural
language understanding, and inference engines to provide intuitive and
personalized assistance to workers performing complex reasoning and problem-
solving tasks. (3) The Future Worker dimension will generate new knowledge about
the affordances of worker-XR teaming to support the development of workers’
adaptive expertise for increasingly complex manufacturing tasks, building on
research from the learning sciences that examines cognitive processes associated
with complex reasoning and problem solving. It is expected that the knowledge
generated in this project will elicit new pathways for the design of future
collaborative human-technology systems for training adult workers beyond XR.
This project has been funded by the Future of Work at the Human-Technology
Frontier cross-directorate program to promote a deeper basic understanding of
the interdependent human-technology partnership in work contexts by advancing
the design of intelligent work technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.