* 2128233
* Collaborative Research: Chemotactic signaling in Sinorhizobium meliloti symbiotic plant host interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Ann Stock, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2025
* USD 394,580.00

Chemotaxis enables motile bacteria to move away from harmful and towards
beneficial chemicals. One unique group of motile soil bacteria are rhizobia,
which can engage in specific symbiotic relationships with leguminous plants such
as peas, soy beans, and alfalfa. This symbiosis supplies the host plant with
nitrogen, which is the most limiting nutrient for plant growth. The process of
chemotaxis allows rhizobia to recognize and move towards its host, which
improves the symbiotic relationship, and consequently, enhances plant growth.
Multiple chemoreceptor proteins are being used by rhizobia to sense a wide
spectrum of chemical compounds secreted by the host plants. However, little is
known about the specific processes involved in the regulation of sensitivity and
adaptation, which are essential features for an effective chemotactic response.
The overarching goal of this project is to decode the pathway that controls
stimuli adaptation. Outcomes will transform our current concepts of the biology
of bacterial chemotaxis and their interaction with their eukaryotic hosts. The
results of this research can directly benefit future agricultural and
environmental issues by potentially reducing the use of artificial fertilizers,
resulting in less expensive and less polluting agriculture. Broader Impacts
activities include the intrinsic merit of the research as nitrogen fixation is
one of the most important processes in the biosphere. In addition, the project
will involve the interdisciplinary training of graduate students. The team is
committed to mentoring graduate and undergraduate students, especially
underrepresented populations and women. Public outreach activities include
hands-on demonstrations for elementary and high school students, both on- and
off-campus, and involvement of undergraduate and high school students in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemotaxis system of the model plant symbiont
Sinorhizobium meliloti evolved a greater complexity than that of enteric
bacteria. Although several unique components and features controlling chemotaxis
have been recently uncovered, regulation of pathway sensitivity and stimuli
adaptation are unknown. The aim of this research project is to elucidate the
receptor modification system, which plays a pivotal role in this process.
Specifically, the function of a novel chemotaxis protein, CheT, which
unprecedentedly interacts with a conserved element of the adaptation pathway,
will be deciphered. First, the investigators will characterize the chemotactic
pathway controlling adaptation. Two chemoreceptors with a central role in host-
plant sensing, namely amino acid sensor McpU and betaine sensors McpX, will
serve as models because they are expected to exhibit different modes of
interaction with the adaptation pathway. Behavioral, microscopic, and mutational
analyses, as well as mass spectrometry will be used to uncover the molecular
basis for stimuli adaptation. Second, the role of CheT in chemotactic signaling
will be elucidated through genetic, behavioral, phosphorylation, and structural
analyses. The proposed research will advance knowledge of complex sensory
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.