* 2128030
* RAPID: Operationalizing the Capabilities Approach in the Context of Disaster Resilience: Measuring the Social Burden of Infrastructure Disruptions
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Susan Clark, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,434.00

This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project assesses the impacts of
power outages and associated infrastructure disruptions (e.g., water and
transportation) on households by conducting a residential survey in Texas of
people impacted by the February 2021 Winter Storm. During the storm, millions of
households without power and water struggled to meet their basic needs. Cooking
food, accessing clean water, and staying warm proved difficult without
electricity and water. Focusing on these interrupted household services and the
additional effort necessary to complete important household tasks enables
research to understand how critical infrastructure facilitates the achievement
of basic household needs. Moreover, through the examination of the additional
‘costs’ (e.g., extra time and money spent) required to meet these needs and
maintain household capabilities during disruptions, the project contributes to
developing a metric that captures the social burden of infrastructure
disruptions. This metric of the social impacts of infrastructure disruptions can
inform infrastructure planning and investment decisions by capturing currently
unmeasured consequences of infrastructure failure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to advance the Capabilities Approach (CA) framework for
understanding human development and well-being by investigating the social
impacts of infrastructure disruptions on households. The primary objective is to
empirically examine the impacts of the recent power outages (and associated
infrastructure disruptions) in Texas on household basic capabilities (i.e.,
being healthy and feeling safe). The research team conducts a representative,
outage-wide survey of Texan households to identify the type and intensity of
capability losses experienced, and examines the role of prior outage experience
in mediating impacts. The event in Texas is particularly distinct because a
significant portion of the population impacted has not experienced significant
outages in recent memory. By comparing the responses of people with varying
levels of prior outage experience, this research elucidates the role of
experience in mediating outage impacts, and enables the researchers to more
accurately measure the true burden of disruptions on households caught off-guard
by Winter Storm Uri. This research goes beyond prior work by obtaining granular
data on the links between critical infrastructure services and basic
capabilities by analyzing the impacts of power outages as they cause cascading
infrastructure system disruptions (i.e., water, food, etc.). The research maps
the linkages between the disruption of household infrastructure services (i.e.,
lighting, refrigeration) and the disruption of day-to-day household activities
critical for maintaining basic needs (i.e., keeping warm, eating) that may limit
the achievement of critical capabilities and functions important for human well-
being (i.e., being healthy and felling safe). This work supports a novel and
augmented Capabilities Approach framework that can be used to understand the
social impacts of infrastructure disruptions on households as well as the ways
in which households adapt to meet basic needs. Second, the data collected are
used to develop a metric that quantifies the social burden of infrastructure
disruptions on households, which is estimated according to the extra time and
costs required of households to fulfill basic needs during infrastructure
outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.