* 2128970
* FW-HTF-R: Collaborative Research: Worker-AI Teaming to Enable ADHD Workforce Participation in the Construction Industry of Future
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Vincent Duffy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 800,000.00

While people with neurodiversity have been marginalized in the construction
workplace due to potentially higher risks of injuries, their unique talents
could be leveraged using an ecosystem of co-bots driven by artificial
intelligence (AI). For humans and machines to become true teammates—and
correlatively, for technology to extend occupational opportunities to people
with such neurodiversity—intelligent machines must assess, adapt, and respond to
both workers and their environment. Such agility requires a reciprocal teaming
capability wherein workers can engage their AI counterparts as more than tools,
and AI systems can collaborate with workers seamlessly by predicting their
behaviors. To extend future occupational opportunities for people with
neurodiversity, this project builds an AI-driven learning platform to enable
distribution of AI teammates in construction workplaces to support employment
opportunities and safety outcomes for construction workers with varying
abilities. This study also investigates the intended work scenarios of worker-AI
teaming, the unintended consequences of AI-teaming for workers, and the well-
being of society. Considering that 4.2% of workers are diagnosed with attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)—a disorder that is associated with more
than 120 million lost workdays in the USA each year, equating to a human capital
value of $19.5 billion—this project’s efforts to enable diverse workforce
participation in the construction industry will have positive social and
economic impacts. Additionally, this project will educate a new generation of
leaders in worker-AI teaming and will create partnerships between academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To lay the necessary foundations for building
this human-AI teaming workspace for construction workers with neurodiversity,
this proof-of-concept project will translate non‐invasive biomechanical and
neuro-psychophysiological responses into information a personalized AI-based
training systems can assess, model, and leverage to predict workers’ behaviors
for improved worker‐machine teaming without cultivating technological over-
reliance or threats to privacy. In this project, a multidisciplinary team of
researchers integrates expertise in civil engineering, computer science,
cognitive and behavioral psychology, industrial engineering, and public policy
and economics to address fundamental questions regarding the risk taking
behavior and cognitive processes of workers with ADHD, barriers to adopting AI
and wearable technologies, and the socioeconomic impacts of improved access to
construction jobs for ADHD-diagnosed workers, especially in the context of
interdependent human-AI partnerships. As this project’s global paradigm moves
toward deeper human-machine teaming, the knowledge gained through this project
advances the science and technology that influences diverse workforce
development, education, and positive work outcomes for workers and society at
large. By demonstrating the effectiveness of this AI-driven platform, this
project illustrates how human-machine teams can progress on job sites and within
communities across all sectors to augment human cognitive
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.