* 2128679
* EAGER: Compressibility of Nanopore-Confined Liquids Probed by Ultrasonic Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Gennady Gor, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Understanding how waves propagate through geological material is important
because it forms the basis for creating powerful characterization tools. For
example, seismic waves can be used to learn about geological formations, and
ultrasonic waves can be used to analyze rock samples in the laboratory. Wave
propagation speed is determined by the compressibility of the material through
which it passes. Because many geological materials are porous and filled with
liquids (water, brine, petroleum, etc.), wave propagation depends on the
compressibilities of both the solid and liquid parts. Therefore, by knowing the
individual compressibility properties one can use wave propagation to determine
how much liquid is contained within the pores of a solid. However, when the pore
diameters measure a few nanometers across, the liquids confined in those pores
may have very different compressibility properties than in bulk. This research
project aims to quantify how confinement in nanopores changes the
compressibility of a range of liquids. This research will advance the
understanding of wave propagation in important nanoporous media, such as
hydrocarbon-bearing shale. The knowledge gained from this research could
contribute towards the more efficient exploration and development of energy
resources, carbon dioxide sequestration, and large-scale energy storage
technologies. This research project will contribute to improved STEM education
through the inclusion of research-related topics in the undergraduate courses
taught at the university. During the summer months high school interns from the
NJIT ACS-SEED program for economically disadvantaged high-school students will
work on projects related to this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this research project is to explore the effects of confinement on the
compressibility of fluids by means of adsorption-ultrasonic experiments. When
fluids are confined in nanopores, many of their physico-chemical properties
change as compared to bulk. A small number of experimental studies suggest that
the compressibility of fluids confined in nanopores also deviates from the
compressibility of the same fluids in bulk. Modeling studies predict that the
departure of compressibility progressively increases with decreasing pore size.
Thus, the central hypothesis of this research project is that confinement will
change the elastic properties of all fluids when the pore size is comparable to
the fluid molecule size and that the extent of this change is determined by the
pore size and strength of the solid-fluid interactions. This research project
will test this hypothesis experimentally and explore the effects of other
parameters, such as the properties of the pore surface and the structure of the
fluid molecules. Experimental confirmation of a significant departure of nano-
confined fluid compressibility from the corresponding bulk values has
transformative potential, requiring the revision of wave propagation theory in
porous media when the media are nanoporous. This research project also will
promote novel interdisciplinary perspectives by connecting the studies of
compressibility of confined fluids (molecular thermodynamics) to studies of wave
propagation in porous media (geophysics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.