* 2128594
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Intelligent Dynamic Spectrum Access (IDEA): An Efficient Learning Approach to Enhancing Spectrum Utilization and Coexistence
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Yang Yi, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

With the growing importance of wireless connectivity for social and economic
interaction, there have been rising demands for greater spectrum use by both
primary and secondary active radios, amidst the critical requirement of quiet
spectrum for scientific exploration by receiver-only passive systems. To improve
the overall spectrum utilization of the wireless ecosystem, this project
develops a holistic Intelligent Dynamic spEctrum Access (IDEA) framework that
can substantially enhance the spectrum utilization, energy-efficiency, and
coexistence capability of spectrum sharing networks. In IDEA, enabling technical
innovations across multiple disciplines are synergistically developed, including
neuromorphic design of energy-efficient computing hardware at the device and
circuit level, and artificial intelligence for spectrum sensing and dynamic
access at the network level. The spectrum and interference management in IDEA
conscientiously treats the coexistence constraints imposed by passive services,
in support of scientific and societal returns from remote sensing investments.
The outcomes of this research are expected to broadly impact next-generation
wireless networks and Internet of Things applications with high traffic demands,
such as autonomous driving, smart cities and remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop an
intelligent dynamic spectrum access framework with unprecedented spectrum
utilization efficiency and agility to support spectrum coexistence. The
developed IDEA network platform supports heterogeneous devices from both primary
and secondary active radios as well as passive radios. Key technical innovations
are developed across the network to substantially enhance system-level spectrum
utilization and active-passive radio coexistence. Specifically, analog/mixed-
signal spiking neural network (SNN)-based neuromorphic computing hardware is
designed to provide on-board intelligence at ultra-low power for resource-
constrained secondary active radios. Model-free deep reinforcement learning is
integrated with wireless domain knowledge and the SNN platform to accelerate
learning-based spectrum access and coexistence. Advanced spectrum monitoring
techniques are developed to quickly detect and characterize various signal
emitters in both active and passive services. Finally, software and hardware
testbeds are developed for system level evaluation and tradeoff optimization.
The IDEA framework not only empowers efficient spectrum access in highly dynamic
wireless environments, but also facilitates holistic system design and
optimization across devices and circuits, sensing and communications, and
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.