* 2128439
* SBIR Phase II: Three Dimensional Monocular Thermal Ranging Camera
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Eugene Petilli, OWL AUTONOMOUS IMAGING INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,498,177.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact/commercial
potential of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is
to improve the safe operation of Advanced Driver-Assistance Systems (ADAS)
equipped vehicles and robotic mobility machinery while helping overcome the
sensing challenges that have delayed autonomous vehicle (AV) adoption and
acceptance. Degraded Visual Environments (DVE) such as solar glare, darkness,
smoke, and dust impact the safety of vehicle occupants, as well as those
external to the vehicle, especially pedestrians and cyclists. The new sensor
modality of the 3D monocular thermal technology developed as part of this
project may improve the safe operation of on-road and off-road vehicles alike.
The system seeks to detect and locate pedestrians, cyclists and objects in all
conditions, improving vehicle automated braking, obstacle avoidance,
localization, and navigation. Beyond improving safety, the new 3D monocular
thermal modality devise will improve the utility and commercial value of
vehicles and robotic machines by extending the operating range to include the
most challenging environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop a new sensor
modality that addresses the shortcomings of camera, radar and LiDAR sensors used
in current automotive and robotic mobility applications. This project seeks to
develop the simple, yet powerful innovation of thermal monocular ranging where a
single thermal camera produces 2D video detail concurrent with a range map or
point cloud of much higher spatio-temporal density than contemporary sensors.
Drawing inspiration from monocular convolutional neural network (CNN) ranging
work recently published in the visible domain, this project creates a new field
of monocular 3D thermal imaging. Unlike visible-based CNN systems that rely on
color information and reflected light, this project will construct from first
principles new thermal networks and ground truth sets to train the CNN. The
extreme price pressures of the automotive market can only be met through
adoption of a new thermal detector technology. This project further develops new
thin-film detector technology and the detector to readout interconnect
application process with potential breakthroughs in thermal camera performance,
utility, and affordability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.