* 2128558
* SWIFT:  Interference Mitigation using Spatial and Frequency Nulling for Wideband mm-Wave Transceivers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ali Niknejad, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Currently deployed fifth generation (5G) solutions operate in frequency bands,
mostly below 6 GHz, and to a limited extent at 28/39 GHz, and expansion to other
emerging frequency bands is under consideration. When operating at 28 GHz or 39
GHz, hundreds of antennas are needed to boost the power of the transmitted
signal to form a focused beam to increase the communication range. On the
receiver, there is a unique opportunity to take advantage of the many antenna
elements to also cancel out or attenuate interference from unwanted directions.
This proposal seeks to understand the most power efficient and optimal means of
achieving interference cancellation. Furthermore, as the transition of high-
speed applications starts to occur from sub-6 GHz frequency bands to higher
frequencies, especially at 28/39 GHz, traditional means of cancelling unwanted
interference operating in other frequency bands (other “channels”) using high
quality acoustic resonators does not seem viable. As such, this project will
explore the application of filters that are electronically tunable and take
advantage of the switching properties of modern digital devices as a means of
overcoming these limitations. While addressing the coexistence issue is a major
hurdle for commercial radios, many other radios are also in danger of losing
functionality and sensitivity if steps are not taken to address the problem of
interference. Many important sensors, such as weather radars and radio astronomy
telescopes, may cease to function if interference levels increase as expected.
It is therefore imperative to protect such radios by directly collaborating with
the radio astronomy community. This research will also lead to the training of
students in the engineering of modern communications systems and wireless
communications. &lt;br/&gt;Future generation of radios utilize broader band
millimeter-wave (mm-wave) front-ends, higher channel bandwidths (1 GHz or more),
and beamforming. Multi antenna array signal processing techniques naturally
provide some spatial filtering of unwanted signals. By placing nulls in the
antenna pattern to purposefully “zero-out” interference, one can improve signal-
to-distortion ratio, achieve better spectrum utilization, and realize more
robust radios. While all these benefits can be realized using digital signal
processing, the wide dynamic range requirements on the analog-to-digital
converter make the hundred element array radio high power and even unfeasible.
Furthermore, out-of-band interference will likely pose an issue when the mm-wave
spectrum is more crowded. Traditional ways of removing interference using sharp
filters based on high-Q resonators is not viable above 10 GHz. To address these
issues, interference cancellation will be explored in several locations in the
receiver, at the radio frequency itself (using tunable electronic notch
filters), at the boundary between radio frequency blocks and analog blocks
(spatial notch), as well as inside the analog-to-digital converter itself. In
this way, interference will be rejected before (or during) quantization, which
will reduce the dynamic range requirements of the receiver greatly. This is
especially important at wider channel bandwidths proposed in 5G and future
generation radios. Cancellation of interference, though, requires knowledge of
the location and frequency of the interfering signal. Digital and baseband
tracking loops will be explored to identify the properties of the interfering
signal and feedback loops will then allow interference cancellation to be
performed in the various forms. Application of these techniques for the
protection of passive radio sensors, such as radio astronomy telescopes, will be
studied and techniques for interference tracking from the radio astronomy
community will be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.