* 2128739
* FW-HTF-P: Engaging Stakeholders to Understand and Prepare for Future Work and Future Technology in the Home Care Setting
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jason Etchegaray, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,998.00

This planning grant will develop a specific research agenda focused on how
Future Work, Future Workers, and Future Technology are expected to change and
impact workers in home care settings. These workers - home care aides – are at
the front line of providing care to vulnerable individuals in their homes yet
rarely receive standardized training. Furthermore, home care aides have
historically worked in isolation with little interaction with other home care or
healthcare workers, which is in contrast to caregivers who work in institutional
settings. The isolated nature of home care aides appears to be changing,
however, given an increasing focus on serving as boundary spanners, which refers
to home care aides who coordinate a client’s care between a health care system
and a community-based setting, such as a client’s home. Boundary spanners in
home care settings can be responsible for attending physician visits with the
client, sharing information about the client’s needs with the client’s
healthcare team, and ensuring that the client adheres to needed health protocols
and discharge instructions once the client has returned home from a visit or
stay in a healthcare system. Additional challenges for home care aides include
working in environments designed for clients to live and not for home care aides
to provide services as well as working with technologies that purportedly
facilitate better patient care yet were designed exclusively for other settings
– hospitals and nursing homes in particular. Further, as Future Technology is
developed and implemented, Future Work and skills of Future Workers will need to
evolve from the current state to adequately and equitably leverage these
technological solutions to provide care to clients in home settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together several disciplines,
including several stakeholders - ranging from home care aides to leaders in the
home care field to technology experts who create innovations for home care
settings – to develop a future research agenda that reflects the intersection of
home care and technology by considering Future Workers, Future Work, and Future
Technology. We are supplementing external stakeholder expertise with our project
team expertise, which includes experts knowledgeable about home health care,
industrial/organizational psychology, medicine, sociology, demographers, public
health, and evaluation. The investigator team is structured to achieve multiple
convergent goals to develop a research agenda that identifies immediate, short-
term, and long-term research needs to 1) study the way that Future Workers
provide services to clients in their homes and 2) enhance the ability of Future
Workers to function as boundary spanners between a client and the client’s
physician and/or healthcare team. Our project team will use multiple data
collection approaches, including an environmental scan, subject matter expert
interviews, and monthly meetings with our stakeholder partners to develop an
impactful and substantive research agenda. This project has been funded by the
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to
promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.