* 2128345
* Meteorological Islands: How the Atmosphere Interacts with Large Individual Patches of Heterogeneity
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Elie Bou-Zeid, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 557,420.00

Cities, lakes, small islands, and wind farms are various manifestations of a
common pattern of land surface variability of significant relevance to humans:
they tend to form a large, isolated patch with very distinct features
(roughness, temperature, wetness) from the surroundings. This surface contrast
perturbs the atmosphere at multiple scales ranging from 1 to 100 km, and
previous research has established that these perturbations impact cloud
formation and rainfall, extreme heat and pollution, and wind flow patterns,
among others. While these various surface features have been examined
individually before, their similarities have not yet been consolidated to
develop a broad understanding of this class of heterogeneous surfaces, hindering
the formulation of theoretical frameworks that are needed for better
environmental prediction. This project will investigate this type of
“Meteorological Islands” in all its manifestations; it will result in improved
weather forecasting and climate projection models in the vicinity of these
important areas; and will guide land use planning and policy aiming to avoid
human perturbations to the land surface that can result in adverse impacts on
the environment, ecosystems services, and society more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a state-of-the-science
turbulence simulation approach (large eddy simulation) to capture the energetic
three-dimensional secondary circulations that these patches generate and through
which they perturb atmospheric dynamics. The first goal is to use these
simulation data for dimensional reduction: the overarching project hypothesis is
that this class of heterogeneity is primarily modulated by four non-dimensional
parameters that are sufficient to capture all its various manifestations. The
second goal is to understand how the contrast in roughness, temperature, and
wetness interact to impact the atmosphere in the vicinity of these patches.
Finally, these analyses will be synthesized into a coherent theoretical
framework that will allow better parametrization of the unresolved impact of
such patches on the atmosphere in weather and climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.