* 2128951
* FW-HTF-P: Assessing the profession of ethical technology for the future of tech work
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Matthew Harsh, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,888.00

The last five years of what has been called a “techlash” have pressured a
growing number of technology companies and public sector workplaces to hire
workers equipped to respond to ethical challenges. These challenges include
addressing biased technical systems, threats to privacy, the growing information
credibility crisis, and exclusionary inequities in employment. Consequently,
there is now a vision for a new kind of technologist equipped to tackle
questions of ethics and equity, and a move toward a profession we call “Ethical
Technology.” This profession constitutes one of the most important and quickly
growing employment fields. Tech companies already have created thousands of jobs
with titles such as “Ethical Hacker,” “Data Ethics and Integrity Coordinator,”
and “Ethics Officer”. However, there is little data or existing understanding
about the skills, training, and knowledge these new “Ethical Technologists” need
to perform these roles, or how to equip this workforce with a background that
will allow them to succeed. This project seeks to understand the scope and the
character of Ethical Technology as an emerging profession, and to address the
future of Ethical Technology work. The project further seeks to enlist this
understanding in order to create a novel approach to STEM and humanities
education. Such an understanding will increase the efficacy of workers in these
roles and influence how universities train students for this new
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured around a number of
complementary activities. First, the project will explore Ethical Technology as
a profession and organizing concept for the future of work and assess the
functions of Ethical Technologists in the workplace. The project will also
identify key terms in Ethical Technology job listings and explore the key
components of the profession that constitute the demand in the these listings.
The team will also convene stakeholders from the private sector, public interest
technology, and education to define an Ethical Technology profession and
research agenda based on the findings. Finally, the project will support
development of an interdisciplinary class to pilot educational strategies to
introduce students to major concepts and practices essential to this emerging
profession. The project brings together interdisciplinary expertise of social
scientists, computer scientists and engineers, and humanists, whose
contributions will provide an intellectually intersectional understanding of the
nature of ethics and technology. Such an approach is necessary to explore and
define the multiple dimensions of this emerging profession, and to produce
robust knowledge about its utility, dynamics, and impact in the broader
technological ecosystem. The project thus fills in critical gaps in knowledge
about the exact needs and function of ethical reasoning, skills, and practices
in the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.