* 2128495
* FW-HTF-P: Office Work in the AI Age
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Andrew Kusiak, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2023
* USD 149,675.00

Office work is an important part of the American workplace across sectors,
involving tens of millions of workers. Further, doing office work is not just
about the processing of paperwork and information; it also involves
organizational knowledge, communication and relationship building, and other
interpersonal skills. These twin issues of job reliance and job complexity raise
concerns for the design of artificial intelligence-based office automation tools
that use software agents, machine learning, and data analytics. Many such tools
are designed without workers' needs or organizational complexity in mind;
mistakes here can lead to reduced quality of life and job loss for workers, and
worse outcomes for firms and customers. This planning project will develop a
multi-disciplinary research agenda toward the careful scientific study of both
office work and the design of automation that affects it, with the goal of
improving both office automation and training and outcomes for
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves three main activities. The
first is a comprehensive literature review using a combination of the critical
review method, the systematized review framework, and a review of state-of-the-
art office automation systems. The second involves qualitative analysis of a
series of focus groups conducted with a broad sample of office workers about
their daily work practices and challenges, their professional development and
training, and their perceptions about the future of their job and of office
automation. The third main activity is a three-day ideation workshop that will
build on the findings from the first two activities. The research team will
convene multidisciplinary academic and industry experts from human factors,
computer science and artificial intelligence, economics, labor and human
resource management, public policy, and equity and diversity to identify domains
of office work and research themes that look most interesting, promising, and
impactful for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.