* 2128671
* Metamaterial Design Platform and Dynamic Building Blocks for Non-Equilibrium, Symmetry-Violating Manipulation of Mechanical Waves
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jayson Paulose, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 646,563.00

This grant will fund research that enables manipulating information stored in
sound waves and mechanical vibrations, with application to sonar, medical
ultrasonic, and structural diagnostic technologies, thereby promoting the
progress of science, advancing the national prosperity and health, and securing
the national defense. The development of programmable microelectronic circuits
in the 20th century ushered in the information age by enabling fast, precise,
and on-demand manipulation of electrical signals. Similar technologies for
manipulating mechanical information do not yet exist. They require devising
microscale acoustic circuit elements that can be chained together in large
arrays and individually programmed. This project will make critical advances
toward programmable acoustic microchips by investigating methods to manipulate
the vibrational properties of atomically thin micromechanical elements, as well
as developing new mathematical and computational techniques to predict their
collective behavior. These activities will be incorporated into pre-collegiate
summer programs and undergraduate research experiences, which are tailored to
improve retention in STEM and boost participation of individuals from currently
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to create a new
class of individually addressable and reconfigurable micromechanical building
blocks, as well as to derive a mathematical model to predictably manipulate
vibrations in coupled assemblies of such building blocks, thereby realizing
essential sound manipulation capabilities: amplification, rectification, binary
information storage, and logic operations. The building blocks and interconnects
will consist of graphene nanoelectromechanical membrane resonators, whose unique
physical properties enable the use of electrostatic or optical fields to locally
modulate elasticity and coupling with unprecedented speed and strength. The
parallel theoretical effort will combine finite-element simulations with
discrete Floquet analysis to model mechanical systems with time-modulated
parameters, space-time periodicity, and nonlinear response. These advances will
be showcased through experimental demonstrations of nonequilibrium acoustic
functionalities, such as coherent amplification, phase-synchronization, digital
information processing, PT-transition-edge sensing, and one-way sound
transmission at spatial and temporal scales relevant to future acoustic
technologies. Beyond advancing the engineering design of acoustic circuits and
active materials, the work provides an experimental foundation for testing
fundamental concepts in modern physics and materials science, such as parity-
time symmetry breaking, non-Hermitian topological protection, and resonator-
based neuromorphic computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.