* 2128489
* Collaborative Research:SWIFT: Exploiting Application Semantics in Intelligent Cross-Layer Design to Enhance End-to-End Spectrum Efficiency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 480,995.00

The growing demands for network capacity have spurred existing wireless networks
to expand into millimeter-wave radio bands with enormous spectrum resources.
Theoretically, wireless link capacity grows linearly with the amount of
spectrum. Unfortunately, the capacity gain does not straightforwardly translate
into improvement of application-layer quality of experience (QoE). This project
advocates for the key notion of end-to-end spectrum efficiency and argues that
it is imperative to intelligently exploit application semantics to achieve high
end-to-end spectrum efficiency. The basic idea is that wireless networks should
be made aware of the “utility” of application data when allocating radio
resources, while applications should refactor data to better expose and encode
application utility and service requirements for end-to-end spectrum efficiency.
This project will contribute to a new paradigm for re-architecturing 5G and
future wireless networks to support and enable a wide range of innovative future
applications, many yet to be imagined, thereby bringing significant benefits to
society at large. The outcomes from this research project will be incorporated
into the academic curriculum to equip the workforce with the skills needed to
develop future wireless networks. The project team will actively recruit,
engage, and mentor a diverse group of undergraduate students and budding
researchers, with an emphasis on broadening participation by under-represented
groups in advanced wireless and computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advances a vertically integrated, machine-learning-guided, intelligent
cross-layer framework to exploit application semantics for end-to-end spectrum
efficiency. It aims to re-architect the radio network protocol stack for 5G
&amp; beyond networks through fine-grained refactoring of application data in
accordance with application semantics and service needs. The proposed framework
is designed based on three key principles: 1) exploiting application semantics
and data refactoring, so that the radio networks can intelligently allocate the
heterogeneous radio resources with different reliability-efficiency properties
to match the utility of data; 2) adopting learning as a guiding principle in
wireless system design and integrating learning-based methods across the entire
network stack, instead of piecewise application; 3) incorporating intelligent
real-time decision mechanisms to mitigate the long-tail performance of machine
learning methods. This project will spur the broader research community and
industry in exploring new directions in enhancing spectrum efficiency from an
end-to-end application/service-centric perspective. It will produce open-source
hardware, software, and datasets. The project team will engage students at all
levels for integrated research and education activities, and will contribute to
the Broadening Participation in Computing programs in the PIs'
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.