* 2128302
* IntBIO COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Integrating trait diversity across hierarchical scales to predict biological resilience in an era of extreme environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Kevin Wilcox, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 09/30/2026
* USD 878,147.00

Extreme climate events, such as drought or wildfire, may occur in high frequency
and/or in tandem. These extremes are likely to occur more frequently over the
coming decades and will likely have more severe effects on natural and human
landscapes than when extreme events occur alone. Many parts of southern Africa
suffered the effects of compound extremes in 2015 and 2016 when drought and
heavy wildlife use caused substantial declines in vegetative cover and mass
wildlife mortality in national parks. Many areas are yet to fully recover.
Ecosystem recovery after compound extremes is critical for maintaining important
services that landscapes provide, such as wildlife habitat, food production, and
carbon storage. The mechanisms behind recovery after extreme events are not well
understood, although there is mounting evidence that the diversity of organisms
(i.e., biodiversity) within ecosystems may be key. This award will
experimentally impose compound extremes in a South African savanna and
incorporate measured outcomes into computer models to understand how diversity
of plant life controls ecosystem recovery after compound extremes. The
information and tools created by this project will be important for land
managers and policy makers to maximize the recovery potential of public and
private lands through the promotion of biodiversity. Additionally, this project
will provide important training and education opportunities for a diverse
assemblage of people (local South African stakeholders, high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars), and will
prioritize advancement of diversity, equity, and inclusion in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, the importance of biodiversity for
ecosystem recovery (i.e., resilience) is recognized at the community level, but
the mechanisms underlying species diversity that can extend these concepts to
other spatial and hierarchical scales are not well understood. Organismal traits
provide a useful framework for understanding these mechanisms because the
coordination of physiological, morphological, and anatomical characteristics
determine the response of individuals to their environment; this facilitates
scaling from organisms to populations, communities, and ecosystems using first
principles. This study will first extend biodiversity-resilience ideas beyond
simple species diversity by using methods to examine diversity of plant traits
(e.g., functional dispersion). Second, it will scale biodiversity-resilience
relationships from individual organisms, through populations and communities, to
entire ecosystems. To these ends, this project will experimentally impose
extreme drought, extreme grazing, and extreme fire, singly and in combination,
in a South African savanna and determine (1) diversity of functional traits
before, during, and after treatments to link with (2) responses of individuals,
populations, communities, and the ecosystem during and after treatments.
Empirical data will then be used to parameterize and benchmark a mechanistic
demographic vegetation model to expand the inference of these effects to longer
time frames and a wider range of biodiversity scenarios. The three overarching
questions this project will address are: (1) How does diversity at different
hierarchical scales control resilience of biological function after
perturbations? (2) How do perturbations affect biodiversity at multiple
hierarchical scales? (3) How does diversity and resilience change with frequency
and compound perturbations?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for Biological Sciences and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.