* 2128907
* FW-HTP-P: Firefighter Exoskeleton for Navigation In eXtreme Environments (FENIXE)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Sean Banerjee, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,707.00

This project investigates adoption and perception of automated, adaptive, and
intelligent firefighter exoskeleton suits by career and volunteer firefighters
in order to mitigate injury, increase workplace safety, and address challenges
experienced by underrepresented groups, such as women in firefighting. Given the
critical role of firefighters and that nearly two-thirds of all firefighters are
volunteers, it is essential to increase longevity and retention of firefighters,
especially in ageing rural communities. To improve safety and inclusivity in
firefighting, the team is designing a novel exoskeleton suit that is
personalized to a broad range of firefighters by studying how firefighters from
various backgrounds perform tasks and how they may be equipped with knowledge of
the environment through intelligent sensing. The team is forging partnerships
with local fire departments, groups involved in firefighting safety, companies
involved in manufacturing equipment and components that enable low-cost
exoskeleton development, and organizations advocating for underrepresented
groups such as women in firefighting. Through these connections, the team is
gathering information on challenges faced by firefighters to inform the design
of integrated adaptable exoskeleton suits for firefighting. The project has
direct impact on improving safety, productivity, longevity, and inclusion for
rural firefighters and fire departments, strengthening firefighter retention and
recruitment for this essential societal service. The project is providing
research opportunities to women and students from underrepresented groups
through programs supported by the Community of Underrepresented Professional
Opportunities at Clarkson.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team integrates expertise
from ergonomics, biomechanics, dynamics, control, materials, structures,
sensing, user interfaces, artificial intelligence (AI), and sociology to
accomplish the project objectives during the planning phase. The team is
conducting studies to analyze the biomechanical and ergonomical characteristics
as firefighters perform functional tasks while being recorded by dense
multimodal environment sensors. The team is collaborating to create a design for
an integrated exoskeleton suit that assists the firefighter as needed and that
adapts to a broad range of firefighters. The project involves extensive stress
testing of sensors and AI algorithms to equip the suit with intelligent
detection of human and object targets under extreme conditions. The team is
conducting meetings and surveys to evaluate the perceptions of firefighters and
the firefighting community related to exoskeleton adoption, safety
considerations, potential for injury mitigation, and barriers faced by
underrepÂ­resented groups that deincentivize volunteering or pursuing
firefighting as a career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.