* 2128521
* Investigating the genetic correlation hypothesis of signal-preference evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Kerry Shaw, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 08/31/2026
* USD 911,974.00

The genetics of behavior is a frontier in many respects, and its understanding
is fundamental to many areas of biology, including conservation, sustainability
and human health. This work explores the genetic correlations that may exist
between male calling behavior and female mate choice in Laupala kohalensis, a
cricket species in Hawaii, and how this correlation impacts the expression of
male behavior and the associated female preference for calls. Undergraduate,
graduate and post-doctoral students supported by this project will gain research
experiences in integrating behavioral and genetic/genomic studies related to
animal behavior questions in natural populations. Rigorous cross-training in
these areas has tremendous potential for making transformative progress in the
study of behavior. Students will gain experiences in experimental design, field
collecting, animal husbandry, behavioral measurements, DNA manipulations,
sequencing and bioinformatics. Students working on the project will also gain
outreach experiences, including projects with Hawaii Volcanoes National Park,
where we will develop public exhibits to teach about the unique Hawaiian
biodiversity and their scientific importance, as well as studies of the
interactions between invasive species and Hawaiian biodiversity. Public lectures
will be planned to participate in the Science in the Park series. Our work also
provides leadership on how to study behavior at multiple levels of analysis and
to value the role of non-model organisms in the study of behavioral diversity
and genetics. Our work will provide vital genome sequence data from a non-model
genome, specifically that contains genes involved in rhythmic behaviors with
many analogs across diverse forms of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical
work supports the concept that genetic correlations underlying diverse behaviors
are vital to healthy population function such that these genetic structures can
be engaged rapidly during changing environments. While theory demonstrates its
deep relevance, the presence of genetic correlation is empirically not well-
established. Our proposal offers a strong empirical system, sound methodology
and exciting technological advancements aimed at producing a complete study of
genetic correlation in the species Laupala kohalensis. The present proposal uses
a design that contrasts contributions to genetic correlation from female
preference and the physical location of genes underlying male and female
behaviors in natural populations. The genetic correlation will be further probed
in a selection experiment on male song, and its indirect effect on female
acoustic preference. The proposed work will capitalize on a powerful
experimental design to produce genome wide sequence data that can characterize
the response to selection, in order to identify the genes underlying these
behaviors and test the hypothesis that the responding intraspecific genetic
variation shares the same genetic basis found between species. In the process of
doing this research, we will also estimate natural levels of linkage
disequilibrium across the genome in Laupala kohalensis in relation to the
location of acoustic behavior genes. Understanding the genetics and identifying
the genes underlying these traits will provide a much-needed empirical basis on
which to judge numerous theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.