* 2128407
* GOALI: Gas Phase PFAS and Organofluorine Release from AFFF: Measurement, Identification, and Exposure Mitigation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Chase Holton, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,938.00

Aqueous film-forming foams (AFFFs) are used primarily to extinguish fuel fires.
AFFFs consist of mixtures of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs),
chemicals that are toxic to humans. Their persistence in groundwater is well
known, but less is known about their potential to become gasses and contaminate
the air. This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project will study the potential for a wide variety of PFASs contained in
commercial AFFFs to be transported in the gas phase from different sources. The
research will also investigate potential human exposure pathways from the
released PFAS gasses. Successful completion of this research will advance
knowledge on the fate and transport of PFASs, as well as provide data for use by
remediation professionals, regulators, public health professionals, and other
stakeholders to better understand the health risks of PFASs. Collaboration with
the industrial partner will combine complimentary skillsets on PFAS fate and
transport, provide test samples for laboratory study and model validation, as
well as provide industrial training opportunities for student researchers.
Additional benefits to society will result from outreach to families about
chemical exposure through a partnership with a local non-governmental
organization, thus increasing scientific literacy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;AFFFs
contain large concentrations of PFAS compounds. Recent results by the research
team have shown that many PFASs are rapidly volatilized to the gas phase.
Although the human health risk from exposure to PFASs in water is well
characterized, comparatively little is known about human exposure to PFASs from
gaseous sources. Such knowledge is critical to accurately assess exposure to
population subsets such as firefighters that may be exposed to greater
concentrations than the general population. The overarching goal of this GOALI
project is to determine the release of gas-phase PFAS evolved from AFFF during
handling, use, and from contaminated water. This research is guided by the
underlying hypothesis that both volatile and aerosolized PFAS are released to
the gas phase. The specific research objectives designed to test this hypothesis
are to: i) investigate PFAS volatility, Henry’s law constants, and PFAS
fragmentation via mass spectrometry, ii) identify and quantify gaseous AFFF-
associated PFAS by total organofluorine, nontargeted, and targeted methods, and
iii) determine potential gas phase transport pathways and mechanisms of
exposure. Successful completion of this research will provide fundamental
measurements relevant to the broad field of environmental PFAS contamination.
The GOALI industrial partner, Geosyntec, will provide critical expertise and
groundwater and vadose zone samples from active AFFF-contaminated sites to
enable validation of gas-phase exposure predictions. The collaboration of
academic and industry experts with complimentary expertise in PFAS occurrence,
analytical chemistry, and vapor intrusion will greatly facilitate achieving the
research objectives. Additional benefits result from measuring Henry’s law
constants for PFAS compounds. These data will enable Geosyntec and the broader
remediation industry to produce vapor intrusion models to more accurately assess
PFAS fate and transport. This is a key outcome for industry, which cannot
otherwise model intrusion due to the complete lack of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.