* 2128568
* Asymmetric Gait Generation for Legged Locomotion in Complex Environments via Off-Line Model Reduction and Real-Time Optimal Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Pranav Bhounsule, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 08/31/2024
* USD 581,643.00

This Foundational Research in Robotics (FRR) project will create new control
tools to improve the locomotion capabilities of legged robots in real-world
environments. The goal is a generalizable and broadly applicable control
framework for legged robots with highly articulated limbs. These new control
tools will address the complexity of the robots, the hybrid dynamics caused by
intermittent ground contact, and the limited control authority provided by small
motors. Although current humanoid robots are highly proficient at moving at a
constant speed in a straight line, they can be challenged in situations
requiring unanticipated changes in speed and direction. Overcoming this
challenge will facilitate the broader adoption of legged robots for mainstream
applications in homes, offices, factories, and warehouses. This project will
also train the next generation of engineers and roboticists through
undergraduate research, capstone projects, and robotics outreach to minorities
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
most extensively investigated control approach for legged robots is to use
symmetric force/torque profiles, which leads to symmetric gaits characterized by
a constant speed, straight-line movement. However, to move at variable speed and
to steer, robots need to use asymmetric torque/force profiles, which leads to
asymmetric gaits. The high degrees of freedom of the legged system makes
asymmetric gait generation to be computationally demanding and the
underactuation (fewer actuators than degrees of freedom) makes gait
stabilization to be challenging. The central idea of the grant is to use data-
driven methods to approximate the dynamics between key instances in the gait.
These approximations are done with low-order polynomials and they capture the
asymmetry of the gaits. These reduced-order models, when incorporated within an
optimization framework, can be solved in real-time. Finally, extensive
experimental verification and validation is planned on a high-dimensional
bipedal robot in real-world scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program,
jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and
Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.