* 2128593
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Cognitive-IoV with Simultaneous Sensing and Communications via Dynamic RF Front End
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Future transportation is promising safer and more efficient traveling via
connected intelligence among vehicles as well as with the transportation
infrastructure. At the same time, travelers can also be relieved from tedious
driving and use vehicles as offices or entertainment rooms on the move.
Essential to all these is a reliable and resilient Internet of Vehicles (IoV).
Given the unique transportation environment, a satisfactorily functioning IoV is
confronted with many challenges. For example, data services for transportation
safety/efficiency and/or traveler convenience/comfort are often very sensitive
to delays and require large bandwidth. The vehicular environments are also
filled with various communication services as well as active sensing devices,
which can potentially cause interferences to each other. In addition, the high
mobility inherent to transportation and fluctuation of the transportation
information exchange depending on the specific traffic scenario can both lead to
fast-changing and possibly unpredictable dynamics. To address these challenges,
this project organizes collaborative efforts to enhance spectrum utilization,
sharing and management in IoV. The project will promote the interactions among
multi-disciplinary experts such as electromagnetic waves, electronics, signal
processing and wireless communications to create wireless innovations at
different network layers. The developed technologies will provide valuable tools
for foundational science and engineering research and promote societal embracing
of the emergent cognitive IoV technologies. The project also has an integrated
education plan that aims to prepare the workforce to address future challenges
of spectrum utilization and wireless communications, while promoting and
embracing diversity in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop a cognitive IoV framework with simultaneous sensing and
communications via a novel dynamic RF front end. Targeting the aforementioned
challenges, the proposed IoV research has three distinctive features. First, the
proposed research is centered at simultaneous communications and sensing. Based
on a dynamic RF front end that is innovatively designed to facilitate full
duplex modes, communications and simultaneous monitoring of multiple spectrum
bands with tunable granularity become possible. Secondly, the resultant IoV
framework is cognitive in two counts: i) cognitive in the spectrum environment -
the spectrum sensing information from devices equipped with the dynamic RF front
end is used to develop algorithms to learn and track the spatiotemporal radio
tomography with quantifiable uncertainty; and ii) cognitive in the physical
environment - with judiciously designed waveforms that enable simultaneous
communications and active physical environment sensing, the acquired information
will be leveraged to enhance communications. Last but not least, the proposed
cognitive IoV framework is dynamics-ready via hardware, architecture, and
algorithm design: the dynamic RF front end boasts real-time tuning and control
capability, the network architecture incorporates unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV)
to mobilize on-demand support for transportation/traveler data service hotspots,
and reinforcement learning algorithms developed to achieve closed-loop control
and management of spectrum resources will remain robust when the dynamics are
unknown or unpredictable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.