* 2128747
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: A Microevolutionary Analysis of Population change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Tisa Loewen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 25,191.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses data from
archaeological cemeteries to study the interactions among borderland peoples
engaged in power struggles for territory and how impacts by conquerors influence
regional population relationships. Previous research has shown that cultural
groups respond differently to expansion into their homeland. What is not yet
clear is whether biological relatedness correlates with the sharing of cultures
and lifestyles that result from these interactions. Specifically, how prominent
was the change in regional gene pools as societies became more culturally
intertwined? Nevertheless, it is well established that colonized people adopt
richly diverse identities despite expectations to culturally integrate. When
common regional histories are known, identifying groups with shared genetic
relationships provides a key component towards understanding their social
identity construction. Closed and unchanging societies have not proven to be the
norm in the past, and exploring these concepts archaeologically is important
because it questions typological and static ideas about culture. This research
provides a reading of the past that finds traction in modern discussions of
social identities and self-determination. The project provides open-source data
to be shared with other scholars for additional comparative studies. It
generates a novel bioarchaeological model for understanding regional
relationships and enhances educational and training opportunities for students
and mentees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses changes in heritable
dental phenotypes as indicators of gene flow, a methodological approach which
can be applied in other contexts, with existing data sets, and is non-
destructive. Assessment of shared genetic histories is used to determine if
contacted populations were subject to biological assimilation. Recognition of
unanticipated ancestral ties can be an indication of crafting of identities that
flourished in complex ways and encourages archaeological studies to reconsider
typological classifications. Only after resolving what is unknown, “how were
people related?”, can what is known historically be appropriately
applied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.