* 2128653
* CNS Core: Small: Offline Inference for Ultra-Efficient Memory Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Harry Xu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Machine learning (ML) has made its way into systems of various kinds, helping
them make informed decisions at critical points. A typical approach to ML-for-
systems is to perform inference online by querying a model with runtime data.
Online inference incurs non-trivial overheads, imposing a tight restriction on
model size and complexity. In fact, systems that involve ML in their decision
making often use very simple models (e.g., linear models) with inferior
accuracy. This project develops a transformative approach to ML-for-systems -
instead of doing online inference, this project advocates to train models that
can predict runtime properties directly from program source code. As such,
inference can be done offline and their results can be encoded and efficiently
looked up during execution. Given that inference no longer contributes to run
time, the proposed approach removes the above-discussed restrictions, enabling
systems to employ state-of-the-art model architectures. This project further
applies offline inference to memory management tasks that are critical to cloud
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern society relies on services provided
by large-scale systems. Improving the throughput and efficiency of such systems
improves the service-level efficiency and scalability that human can experience
in their lives. Replacing complicated and heuristics-driven decision making in
today’s memory management systems with learning has a potential to dramatically
reduce the cost of allocation and deallocation, which is a significant component
in an application’s execution. Traditionally, inference is performed online,
restricting what models to use and how high the accuracy can reach. This project
develops techniques that make ML a more appealing approach by removing these
restrictions. The techniques proposed span runtime system and ML. This
interdisciplinary nature produces research that has impact in both areas. The
project also makes efforts in education and diversity by incorporating research
into courses and recruiting researchers from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.