* 2128482
* Collaborative Research: SWIFT: Data Driven Learning and Optimization in Reconfigurable Intelligent Surface Enabled Industrial Wireless Network for Advanced Manufacturing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Lijun Qian, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

The next generation of smart factories needs a high-quality and reliable
wireless network that can support extensive information exchange between
coexisted distributed sensors and machines. However, traditional wireless
network techniques cannot be directly applied to manufacturing factories due to
their stringent latency and reliability requirements in confined factory space,
uncertain wireless environment, and unknown disturbance or interference, as well
as security concerns. On the other hand, the emerging reconfigurable intelligent
surface (RIS) technique is a promising solution to significantly enhance the
quality (e.g. latency reduction, reliability improvement, etc.) of traditional
wireless networks and provide security especially under a complex dynamic
wireless environment such as manufacturing factories. Therefore, the goal of
this project is to provide a novel framework of hardware-driven online learning
and optimization of RIS-enhanced industrial wireless networks. To achieve this
goal, the proposed research will provide critical components in facilitating the
reliable and optimal design of industrial wireless networks for both stationary
and mobile users and fostering their adoption. The research is also complemented
by a comprehensive educational plan including curriculum development, lab
enhancements, as well as involving undergraduate and graduate students in
research. Diverse outreach activities have been planned to engage K-12 and
underrepresented students from two HBCUs, one MSI, and other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop foundational analytical and
experimental approaches for reconfigurable intelligent surface (RIS) hardware-
driven cross-layer optimization and data-enabled online learning algorithm
development. The project will provide several novel contributions, including 1)
A new type of hardware-driven cross-layer optimization for the RIS-assisted
industrial wireless network under unknown disturbance, 2) A novel real-time
data-enabled learning approach that can solve the complex cross-layer
optimization under harsh constraints, 3) A robust and computationally efficient
learning framework that can optimize the large scale RIS-enhanced wireless
network in a distributed fashion, and 4) Design and fabrication of a RIS unit
that supports a dynamic beam steering capability, as well as a hardware testbed
for evaluating the developed RIS-enhanced industrial wireless network in
practical settings. Moreover, this project will lead a new direction in
industrial wireless network optimization, machine learning, and resilient
computing and further pave the way for real-time learning-based optimization
development and implementation. The proposed research will contribute to future
wireless revolution and advanced manufacturing which are of national
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.