* 2128632
* RUI: Exploring Nonperovskite Phase Growth Mechanisms in Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jeffrey Christians, Hope College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 09/30/2024
* USD 238,828.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of lower cost solar
cell technologies is crucial for reducing pollution from the energy sector as
well as the cost of alternative electricity generation. The technology to best
achieve this goal might be so-called perovskite solar cells because of very low
material costs and the potential for manufacturing by printing, similar to the
printing of newspaper or photographic film. Under laboratory conditions
perovskite solar cells show performances on par with current commercially
available solar cells. This project, supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, addresses a
major unknown for the technology at a fundamental materials chemistry level:
long-term durability of perovskite films under real-world conditions. To speed
up durability studies - to learn in six months if the solar cells will survive
30 years - it is necessary to be able to understand and predict the various
failure modes of the materials system. Prof. Christians’ research focuses on
understanding a specific known failure mode of perovskite solar cells, a change
in the central material’s crystalline phase or structure leading to a decrease
in solar cell performance. Various aspects of the perovskite materials are
carefully adjusted to gain a predictive understanding of the conditions under
which they degrade and their specific failure mode. The level of understanding
gained from this research is expected to serve as a guide to allow researchers
to accurately understand, quantify and mitigate the effects of this failure mode
during years-long outdoor operation of solar cells. This project also includes
mentoring activities undertaken by Prof. Christians at Hope College, a primarily
undergraduate institution. It allows undergraduate students to participate in
cutting-edge materials research and provides an opportunity for these students
to build their skills as research scientists and to present their work at
national research conferences. This award will also support work done in tandem
with ExploreHope, a campus outreach program, to design and implement a summer
STEM research camp, called "Digging into Photovoltaics", for traditionally
underrepresented local high school students to give these students experience
with solar cells and STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;A material's crystalline phase is one of the most important
aspects of its chemical, physical, and electronic properties. Halide
perovskites, the absorber material in perovskite solar cells, have corner-
sharing metal halide octahedra, but can transform into other crystal phases
where these octahedra tilt to become face- or edge-sharing. This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research at NSF, advances the understanding of the phase
transformation from perovskite phases to nonperovskite phases which is important
to designing halide perovskite absorbers that remain stable in their perovskite
phase during years-long outdoor operation. Nonperovskite phase formation is
sensitive to material composition and crystal size, but these parameters are not
well understood. Prof. Christians experimentally tracks, induces and studies the
phase transformations of halide perovskites materials into their competing
nonperovskite phases. The first phase of the project uncovers the energetics,
rate, and mechanism of this process. Based on these findings the researchers
then explore how compositional and morphological changes to the halide
perovskite materials influence these parameters. This work sheds light on the
role that external stimuli, such as humidity, play in initiating and catalyzing
nonperovskite phase formation. Taken together, this project advances the
understanding of halide perovskite phase stability and phase change and will
thereby play a role in the research community's search for more stable
materials, improved device designs, and better informed accelerated device
lifetime protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.