* 2128628
* Collaborative Research:SWIFT:Ultra Wideband Flexible MIMO Radios for Energy Efficient Secure Spectrum Sharing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* John Volakis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

Worldwide growth in wireless links, navigation, automation, Internet of Things
(IoT), and mobile healthcare has challenged spectrum access. In parallel, we are
witnessing rapid advances in augmented reality/virtual reality (AR/VR),
autonomous driving and vehicle-to-vehicle communications (V2V). Further,
increased adaptation of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) may require large swaths
of bandwidth and high data rates. Indeed, the diversity of radio spectrum
utilization is quickly growing. However, existing wireless networks may no
longer be able to keep pace with these technologies, implying a need for new
rhythms and targeted innovations. Concurrently, security protocols must be
adapted to avoid eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks. Coexistence
of active and passive spectrum utilization is another challenge. To address the
aforementioned challenges, and to circumvent radio spectrum scarcity, this
research brings forward innovations and features to significantly advance next
generation wireless networks. Among them: 1) Increased throughput using robust
spectrum sensing and slicing of legacy frequency bands by identifying gray and
white spaces/gaps across the available electromagnetic spectrum; 2) Frequency
independent and high isolation antenna feeds and RF cancellers to enable
spectrum co-existence; 3) Wideband autonomous multiple-input-multiple output
(MIMO) transceivers using Flex Radio architectures to maximize overall spectral
efficiency; 4) Significant hardware reduction via multiplexing; and 5)
Resilience against Man-in-the-Middle attacks via artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques. This project will also foster workforce development in the rapidly
growing area of wireless engineering. Curriculum enhancements are proposed to
integrate new technologies on spectrum awareness, wireless security, and cross
layer RF transceiver architectures. Further, new degrees and new curricula in
wireless and IoT technologies will be leveraged to promote STEM outreach
programs and coordinate outreach activities. The latter will be aimed at
recruiting larger cohorts of undergraduates and K-12 students from the local
Miami-Dade and Broward counties to be trained in wireless engineering. Examples
of outreach programs to be leveraged include Engineers on Wheels, Engineering
Expo, ENLACE (Engaging Latino Communities for Education), and the Miami PREP
(Positive Youth Preparedness) programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research aims to develop next generation flexible and secure wireless networking
with adaptive RF front ends and back-end cross-layer algorithms that enable
spectrum efficiency and high throughput via novel relay architectures, all with
end user protection in mind. Namely, a new class of low cost and low power
secure MIMO transceivers with &gt;100 dB transmit/receive isolation are proposed
along with Flexible Radio architectures. The following innovations are proposed:
1) AI-based effective spectrum utilization and/or coexistence, 2) Innovative
transmitter and receiver technologies through cross-layer design, and 3)
Improved security by detecting Man-in-the-Middle attacks and other
eavesdroppers. Notably, the transformative nature of the proposed research stems
from the introduced novelties to overcome challenges in developing low-power and
low-cost Flexible Radio architectures and RF electronics with secure data relays
to provide resilience for Man-in-the-Middle attacks. To accomplish the proposed
goals, a strong background is required in the following areas: RF front/back-end
hardware, mathematical network modeling, propagation, optimization, control,
queuing, stochastic analysis, and legacy system operation integrated through the
following thrusts: 1) RF reconfigurability and spectrum aggregation to support
users with decoupled PHY/MAC protocols, 2) Adaptive FlexRadio wireless networks
with increased throughput and protection using high performance PHY/MAC layer
algorithm, 3) RF self-interference cancellation for spectrum co-existence, and
4) AI-based models for security and privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.