* 2128023
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Role of Rhizobial tRNA-Derived Fragments in Soybean Nodule Development and Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Meixia Zhao, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 900,000.00

Since the Green Revolution of the 1960s, nitrogen fertilizers have been widely
deployed to boost crop yields to meet the demands of the growing world
population. However, excessive reliance on fertilizers leads to water, soil and
air pollution; therefore, environmentally friendly sources of nitrogen are
needed for sustainable agriculture. Legume crops such as soybean, common bean,
and peanuts have the capability to harness atmospheric nitrogen for their growth
by establishing symbiotic relationships with a group of nitrogen-fixing soil
bacteria known as rhizobia. The symbiotic interactions begin with a process
called nodulation that forms root nodules, within which rhizobia convert
atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia that can be utilized by host plants – a
process called symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Approximately 50-60% of the nitrogen
needed for soybean production is provided by symbiotic nitrogen fixation, thus
positioning soybean as an important component of the biennial rotation with corn
in the US agricultural system. Both nodulation and nitrogen fixation require
coordinated exchanges of molecular signals between the symbiotic partners, and
transfer RNA-derived small RNA fragments produced in rhizobia have recently been
found to be one type of molecule mediating rhizobia-host plant communications.
This project will address how and to what extent such RNA fragments mediate the
nodulation and nitrogen fixation processes. Such knowledge will facilitate the
development of new biotechnological tools for optimizing the legume-rhizobia
symbioses for sustainable crop production. This project will provide hands-on
experience to underrepresented minority undergraduate and high school students
through an annual “Bioinformatics in Agricultural Science” summer
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant-microbe interactions require cross-kingdom
small RNA (sRNA) interference. While the roles of eukaryotic sRNAs in plant-
fungus interactions have been well characterized, sRNA-mediated prokaryote-
eukaryote communications have just begun to garner attention. Transfer RNA-
derived sRNA fragments (tRFs) are often viewed as degradation products and thus
have been largely ignored in previous studies. Recently, the Ma laboratory
demonstrated that three rhizobial tRFs were able to regulate the expression of
five soybean genes affecting nodulation via soybean Argonaute 1-guided mRNA
cleavage. This project will integrate genomic, molecular, and biochemical tools
to elucidate the extent to which rhizobial tRFs hijack the host cellular
machineries to regulate nodulation and symbiotic nitrogen fixation (SNF) and to
further dissect mechanisms by which rhizobial tRFs regulate these processes
using soybean-Bradyrhizobium diazoefficiens symbiotic partners as an
experimental system. In Aim 1, the dynamics of rhizobial tRFs abundance and
putative target gene expression in developing, mature, and senescing nodules
will be investigated; in Aim 2, the mechanisms of rhizobial tRF-host gene
interactions and relative magnitudes will be determined; in Aim 3, the functions
of a subset of tRFs and their target genes underlying nodule development and SNF
will be characterized; in Aim 4, experimental soybean lines with quantitative
variation of nodule traits will be developed through gene-editing and evaluated
for nodulation and SNF efficiencies and the plant productivity. This project may
shed light on the potential roles of tRFs in diverse host-microbe interactions,
towards translation of the discoveries into practice for control of bacterial
pathogens or to promote beneficial interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.