* 2128069
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Functional Synergy Between Disordered Proteins and their Environment in Desiccation Protection
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Thomas Boothby, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2025
* USD 915,652.00

As our climate changes, animals and plants are increasingly exposed to
dehydration. Remarkably, a common strategy that has evolved to help organisms
across all kingdoms of life deal with desiccation is through the synthesis of a
special class of proteins known as intrinsically disordered proteins. Despite
their importance in protecting animals and plants from drying out, how these
proteins work is unresolved. This project will combine experiments that span
individual molecules to whole organisms to understand how disordered proteins
provide protection from dehydration across all kingdoms of life. As part of this
study, this project will recruit students from rural communities via remote-
learning and include them in cutting edge, interdisciplinary research which will
facilitate their integration into the US STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteomes across all kingdoms of life contain a
significant fraction of sequences that are intrinsically disordered and do not
adopt a stable three-dimensional structure. Instead, these sequences exist in an
ensemble of rapidly interconverting conformations that can be highly sensitive
to changes in the cellular environment in which they function. Interestingly,
many of these disordered proteins are implicated in mediating resistance to
environmental stresses, including desiccation, in which the physical-chemical
composition of the cell changes dramatically. The goal of this project is to
gain a holistic understanding of how disordered proteins and the cellular
environment come together to provide protection to the cell during extreme
desiccation. Towards this goal, the project will employ a multilevel,
interdisciplinary, and integrated approach. Starting at the molecular level, in
vitro and computational experiments will be performed that will provide insight
into how desiccation-protective disordered proteins function in conjunction with
well defined and controllable environments. This information will be integrated
with high throughput, sequencing-based studies of disordered protein-mediated
desiccation protection performed in yeast (cellular level), and a multicellular
animal model (the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, organismal
level).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.