* 2128184
* EDGE CMT: RUI: Roles of Toxin-Antitoxin Systems in Biofilm Formation and Horizontal Gene Transfer in the genus Variovorax
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,01/31/2022
* Paul Orwin, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 01/31/2022
* USD 692,668.00

This proposal will address the connection between the movement of DNA in
bacterial populations and the formation of complex multi-cellular structures
called biofilms. This project is focused on evaluating the role of these
elements in the important soil bacterium Variovorax paradoxus. This bacterium
plays a crucial role in the association of bacterial populations with plant
roots, as well as in many other soil processes. Biofilm formation and DNA
transfer in the environment are connected by the release of genetic material
into the environment by cells within the biofilm. This material forms part of
the structure of the biofilm, as well as a potential source of genetic
variation. The bacteria within the biofilm are lysed to release their cellular
contents, including their DNA, which then becomes part of the structure. The
movement of DNA between bacterial cells is critical factor in understanding how
bacterial populations respond to changes in their environment. These processes
are thought to be connected in many bacterial species from diverse environments,
and the mechanism proposed to be at work here may be widely responsible for
connecting the two phenotypes. Using cutting edge DNA and RNA sequencing
approaches, combined with laboratory experiments, the researchers, which include
many undergraduates, aim to functionally link the structure and function of
specific genetic elements to the formation of biofilms and the transfer of
genetic material between cells via the biofilm matrix. Via course based
undergraduate research experiences, students will have the opportunity to
formulate their own research questions, perform state of the art genomic
sequencing and bioinformatic analyses, and contribute to the writing of peer-
reviewed publications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recently finished genome
assemblies show that Variovorax isolates have diverse genomic architectures
including chromosomes, chromids, and plasmids. These genomes include numerous
putative Toxin-Antitoxin systems in all three types of replicon, that are
proposed to function as addiction or anti-addiction modules depending on
expression level and location. This is hypothesized to be connected with biofilm
formation through a global regulatory system controlling transcript stability
during biofilm formation. An alternative RNA degradosome component is highly
expressed specifically in Variovorax paradoxus EPS biofilms, which is proposed
to decrease TA system RNA stability to promote cell lysis, releasing eDNA
critical for dense biofilm formation and horizontal gene transfer.
Differentially expressed TA operons are potential determinants of both biofilm
formation and horizontal gene transfer. The TA systems in the genus Variovorax
will be identified in silico, expression will be evaluated using RNA-seq, and
addiction module function will be tested using tightly regulated expression
systems. Saturation mutagenesis (RB-TnSeq) will be used to identify accessory
genes that influence the function of TA systems in regulating plasmid stability.
Chromosomal TA systems as anti-addiction modules will be evaluated similarly
with TA systems integrated in single copy using mini-Tn7. The connection between
TA system function, biofilm formation, and HGT will be examined using marked
strains. These experiments will demonstrate that eDNA generation by TA system
toxin activity is necessary and sufficient to allow for natural transformation
in Variovorax biofilms. They will also show that these phenotypes are
inextricably linked through biofilm growth dependent alteration of RNA
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.