* 2128268
* Collaborative Research: EDGE FGT: Functional Genomic Tools for Parasitic Nematodes and their Bacterial Symbionts
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Adler Dillman, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 300,122.00

All animals, including humans live in association with microbes and parasites
that can promote health and cause disease. The mechanisms by which animals
communicate with microbes and parasites to block, initiate, maintain, and
dissolve such associations are just beginning to be uncovered. Because these
mechanisms are often conserved across biology, they can be investigated using
model animals such as roundworms, or nematodes, which associate with microbes
and are themselves parasites. This project will develop new experimental tools
in roundworms that have developed partnerships, or symbioses, with specific
bacteria. Together these roundworms and their bacterial partners infect and kill
insects, using them as a food source. Developing new tools to study this elegant
animal-bacterium system will help expand our understanding how animals and
bacteria form partnerships, and how they work together to parasitize other
animals. The tools and knowledge gained in this project will be rapidly shared
with the community of researchers involved in drug discovery, agricultural
control of crop pests, and in the study of parasitism, infectious disease,
beneficial microbiome function, and fundamental cell, molecular, developmental,
and evolutionary biology. As part of this project, undergraduates will be
involved in a discovery-based microbiology lab where they will practice
isolating and identifying new insect-killing roundworms from the environment.
Young people (K-12) and educators will be engaged through collaboration with the
Science Journal for Kids, where a basic curriculum and summary of key research
findings will be developed for classroom use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Entomopathogenic nematodes in the genera Heterorhabditis
and Steinernema are mutualistically associated with bacteria in the genera
Photorhabdus and Xenorhabdus, respectively. The nematode-bacterium symbiotic
pair obligately parasitizes insects as a nutrient source for reproduction and
has utility as a biological control agent for agricultural insect pests and as a
source of novel compounds. The entomopathogenic pair and their insect hosts are
models to understand fundamental biological principles, including the evolution
and molecular and cellular basis of mutualistic and antagonistic organismal
interactions. Numerous features make this system an excellent experimental model
including ease and cost of husbandry, fast generation time, and optical
transparency. Although genetic techniques have been developed for representative
bacterial symbiotic partners and insect hosts, to date there have been no
broadly adopted, reliable genetic modification tools in either Steinernema or
Heterorhabditis nematodes. This inability to interrogate nematode gene function
has hobbled full use of this system to yield much-needed insights into
parasitism, animal microbiome interactions, and other areas. Here we propose to
capitalize on a recently isolated Steinernema nematode that has promising
characteristics for development of genetic tools, including hermaphroditic
reproduction, amenability to long-term freezing, healthy development on agar
bacterial lawns, resilience to microinjection, and significant pathogenicity to
lab insects and agricultural pests. By fully sequencing the genomes and
developing genetic techniques and tools for both nematode and symbiont,
including CRISPR-Cas9 genome editing in the nematode, and creating an arrayed
mutant library for the bacterium, our team will help realize the full potential
of this elegant animal-microbe model system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.