* 2128185
* Bioorthogonal Chemistries Targeting 5-hydroxytryptophan for Biological Discovery and Biologics Development
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Tim van Opijnen, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

With the support of the NSF Division of Chemistry through the Molecular
Foundations for Biotechnology (MFB) Solicitation, the multi-disciplinary team of
Abhishek Chatterjee, Tim van Opijnen and Eranthie Weerapana of Boston College
are developing technology to study the processes that allow pathogenic bacteria
evade antibiotic treatment and develop antibiotic resistance, a defining
challenge of our time. To understand how antibiotic resistance emerges, it is
essential to study bacterial response to antibiotic treatment in physiologically
relevant live-animal infection models. Such studies require retrieving the
bacteria (or its cellular components) from the infected animal tissue. However,
isolating bacterial components from such a complex milieu poses a significant
technical challenge. The research team will develop a genetically encoded
technology for selectively tagging proteins made in the bacterial cells, which
will enable their efficient isolation from the infection site. Using this
technology, it will be possible to monitor how the bacterial proteome changes
during infection and upon antibiotic treatment, revealing the processes
underlying the emergence of antibiotic resistance. In addition, the precise
protein labeling technology developed by the team will be exploited to attach
bioactive small molecules to antibodies. These studies are designed to
demonstrate proof of principle for the use this new targeted bio-orthogonal
chemistry in the field of 'antibody-drug conjugates.' If successful, such
applications would constitute a potentially far reaching long term scientific
broader impact of this fundamental science on biomedical therapeutics. The group
hopes to engage in industrial partnerships in this
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators are developing a new
class of bioorthogonal conjugation reactions targeted to the noncanonical amino
acid 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP). They will apply this chemistry, which further
leverages an engineered bacterial tryptophanyl-tRNA synthetase (TrpRS) they
recently developed, for incorporating 5HTP into proteins in living cells. The
first application will create a fully genetically encoded system to tag and
purify newly synthesized proteins expressed in pathogenic bacteria. It will
involve: (i) an inducible biosynthetic pathway to generate 5HTP in cells from
tryptophan on demand, (ii) an engineered TrpRS to facilitate stochastic
incorporation of biosynthesized 5HTP into newly synthesized proteins in response
to tryptophan codons, and (iii) the use of 5HTP-selective bioconjugation
chemistry to tag and purify the 5HTP-labeled proteins for proteomic
characterization. This platform will be used to investigate the proteomic
changes in pathogenic bacteria upon antibiotic treatment in live-animal
infection models. The second application will use the 5HTP-selective chemistry
to produce homogeneous 'antibody-drug conjugates.' Strategies for increasing
payload loading and attaching two distinct bioactive small molecules per
antibody will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.