* 2128646
* EVOLUTION of NOCICEPTION in elasmobranchs
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Maria Elena deBellard, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2025
* USD 857,250.00

One striking ability of individual sharks is their survival in the face of
serious injuries, which has led many people who study them to speculate that
sharks do not perceive pain. Pain perception (also called nociception) relies
upon specialized sensory neurons to detect noxious (injurious) stimuli. Pain is
a survival-enhancing experience that enables animals to avoid injury; the lack
of evidence for pain perception in seriously injured sharks suggests that they
lack nociception. The goal of this project is to definitively determine whether
or not sharks experience pain by using molecular biological and histological
techniques to identify whether sharks possess cell types and cell structures
that are specifically associated with nociception in other vertebrate animals.
The findings from this research will lead towards a better understanding about
both the evolution and function of nociceptors in vertebrate animals. This
project will also provide training to underrepresented minority undergraduate
students in fundamental laboratory bench and bioinformatics techniques, as well
as allowing them to participate in cutting-edge transcriptomics research. It
will also expand the bioinformatics capacity and training of collaborating
California State University Northridge faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
feel pain and avoid injury, animals need specialized sensory (“nociceptive”)
neurons to detect noxious stimuli. Nociceptive neurons originate from neural
crest cells that give rise to peripheral sensory ganglia, and previous work has
classified these cells into two primary morphological types (C-fiber or Aδ-fiber
neurons). In principle, all vertebrates have nociceptors since they all have
full-fledged neural crest cells. Sharks belong to a vertebrate group called
elasmobranchs, along with skates and rays There exists a gap in scientific
knowledge regarding elasmobranch nociception because of disagreements about the
types and numbers of nociceptors that elasmobranchs are thought to possess Some
previous researchers have proposed that elasmobranchs lack full-scale
nociception because of low numbers of C-Fiber neurons, and their disregard for
serious bodily injury. The goal of the present study is to whether true
nociceptive neurons exist in elasmobranchs by 1) looking at the shark genomes to
identify specific nociceptor sequences; 2) Isolating shark Dorsal Root
Ganglia/Trigeminal Ganglia (where nociceptive cell bodies reside) and analyzing
their transcriptome to find pain receptors profiles; 3) Using
immunohistochemistry to label nociceptors in the Dorsal Root Ganglia of sharks;
4) Looking at the promoters of two key nociceptor transcription factors, and
studying their regulatory elements to determine differences between
elasmobranchs and other vertebrates, and differences between the Trigeminal
Ganglia and Dorsal Root Ganglia. This project is expected to uncover the extant
capabilities for nociception in elasmobranchs; as well as contributing towards a
better understanding about the evolution of sensory pain perception in
vertebrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.