* 2128244
* IntBIO Collaborative Research: An integrative approach for projecting insect responses to a rapidly changing climate
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Joel Kingsolver, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2025
* USD 506,253.00

Projecting species’ responses to climate change at continental scales is a
current “grand challenge” of ecological research. Insects are sensitive
indicators of both climate and land-use change and recent studies indicate
widespread declines in many geographic regions. To predict changes across entire
ranges, a variety of species distribution models have been developed, but rarely
account for regional variability, ecological interactions or a species’
potential to adapt to changing conditions. This project spans multiple
institutions situated in the United States’ southwest, polar north, and
temperate eastern regions. A series of physiological experiments will be
implemented for five widespread butterfly species with populations sourced from
different biomes within each of their ranges. Caterpillars will be subjected to
a range of conditions mimicking past, current and future climates. Their
development rate, survivorship, immune response, and genetic structure and gene
expression (which genes are actively coding for proteins) will be measured and
used to build models that predict distributional shifts. Data collected by
community (“citizen”) scientists will be used to validate the models. This
project requires substantial cross-disciplinary collaboration, and a central
goal is to recruit diverse trainees at the graduate and undergraduate levels and
train them in the “science of team science”. Project trainees will develop
independent research ideas that align with and expand the project’s scope and
travel between and work at collaborating institutions as an inter-lab exchange
to learn new techniques and be exposed to different research philosophies.
Finally, the project has significant management implications for insect
biodiversity conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Projecting responses to climate
change at continent scales is a current “grand challenge” of ecological
research. Insects are the most diverse and ecologically important terrestrial
animal taxon and are strongly affected by climate change. To predict changes,
species distribution models (SDMs) have been widely implemented across many
taxa. SDMs, however, rarely account for ecological interactions, plasticity or
evolutionary adaptive potential owing to the extensive physiological and
ecological data required to parameterize such models. The biology of
Lepidoptera, particularly butterflies, is extremely well observed, thus it is
logistically feasible to build upon past knowledge and collect additional data
that enables mechanisms to be more seamlessly integrated into SDMs. Multiple
populations for each species will be sourced from different biomes across its
range. Caterpillars will be reared in common gardens under a range of
temperature conditions mimicking past, current and future climates. Their
development rate, survivorship, immune response, genetic structure and gene
expression will be measured and used to build models that predict future
distributions. Distribution data collected by community (“citizen”) scientists
will be used to validate and improve models and allow robust estimates of
uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.