* 2128370
* Sentinels: A plug-and-play RNA sensing technology platform for surveillance and response to emerging viral diseases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 673,890.00

Cells can be programmed to sense infectious agents and, in response, actuate
biomolecular programs to alert, protect the host, or destroy the pathogenic
target. Engineering cells in this manner would provide a transformative approach
to address the threat of emerging viral diseases. The goal of this project is to
develop a novel pathogen detection platform that can be easily reprogrammed to
sense new threats, and in response, produce any protein output. This technology
will forward our ability to engineer sentinel cells for diverse diagnostics and
therapeutic applications. This project will also provide educational and
training opportunities aimed at increasing the number and diversity of high
school students and undergraduates pursuing careers in biomolecular and cellular
engineering, and related STEM fields. As part of this project open-source web-
based design tools for designing sentinel cells will be created through a
student-led initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA-based sensors present a
particularly attractive option for programming cells to detect pathogens because
they rely on designable RNA base pairing interactions and enable detection of
RNA encoded genomes (genotypes) and mRNAs (phenotypes) of both the pathogen and
host, allowing for potentially more accurate readouts of the infection status.
However, there is currently a lack of genetically-encoded RNA detection
platforms that can interface RNA inputs to biomolecular outputs, precluding the
design of cellular devices that execute sentinel programs in response to
specific RNA signatures. To address this, biomolecular and synthetic biology
strategies to create plug-and-play RNA sense-and-respond platforms will be
explored. Devices will be created that detect different virus associated RNA
molecules, and, in response, activate diverse biomolecular programs to alert and
destroy viruses. This will find direct applications for sentinel cell design and
could be easily utilized for other applications in basic science, synthetic
biology, and metabolic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.