* 2128038
* Collaborative Research: Enabling Multi-Functional 3D Composite Responsive Separation (3D-CoReS) Membranes with Advanced Materials and Innovative Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Isabel Escobar, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 10/31/2024
* USD 232,157.00

The worldâ€™s drinking water is becoming increasingly unsafe through the growing
concentrations of current contaminants and introduction of new contaminants,
which kills or sickens millions of people per year. Membranes have played an
increasingly important role in water treatment, food packaging and
pharmaceutical industries. Current manufacturing practice leads to membranes
that tend to have a single function such as being restricted to the removal of
contaminants at the expense of performance. New advanced manufacturing
approaches are pursued under this grant which avoid the cumbersome multi-step
subtractive approaches and non-scalable trial-and-error approaches, both of
which are wasteful and result in significant losses in time, cost, materials,
and lead to the production of undesired waste products. Multi-layer membranes,
which contain several individual functional layers, formed in a single
manufacturing step pursued here could reduce cost and provide greater access to
these applications requiring these advanced membranes. This multidisciplinary
work provides an education and mentoring platform to provide students from a
broad range of communities with a wholistic view of how to address critical
problems impacting clean water and advance technology in a sustainable
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a hybrid
advanced manufacturing approach to fabricate multifunctional 3D polymeric
nanocomposite membranes. These 3D membranes, composed of two different materials
across web and a third material through the thickness, will enable temperature-
responsiveness and anti-microbial behaviors allowing for multifunctional
absorption and desorption of contaminants along with biofouling control. The
critical knowledge gap of this research addresses the lack of a technique to
continuously coat multiple liquids simultaneously from solution into 3D thin
films based on traditional continuous coating techniques amenable for roll-to-
roll. Here, temperature-responsive polymers and silver nanoparticles will be
mixed with polymers in bioderived solvents to produce solutions, which will be
cast using a hybrid continuous coating approach that allows one-step fabrication
of the membranes. This research will provide the framework for investigating the
feasibility of the multifunctional 3D polymeric nanocomposite membranes with the
potential for opening pathways for advanced continuous coating technologies that
can lead to more complex materials enable by the heterogeneity of the
structures, which otherwise would be difficult to fabricate. An understanding of
whether process-structure-property relationships of the materials developed
using processes will be elucidated to maintain key performance properties that
have been realized with the materials independently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.