* 2128247
* RAPID: The National Summer Undergraduate Research Project (NSURP), a Virtual Platform for Engaging Underrepresented Minorities in STEM
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Michael Johnson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 323,077.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused unprecedented disruption to the REU Sites
program. During summer 2021, very few REU programs will be able to offer the
typical in-person lab- or field-based REU research experience. This RAPID award
to the University of Arizona will help mitigate the impact of the pandemic by
offering a completely virtual REU program to undergraduates. Summer research is
vital to retention of students in STEM and an important activity for students
applying to graduate school. The National Summer Undergraduate Research Project
(NSURP) at the University of Arizona will engage approximately 40 undergraduates
in an REU program for 8 weeks during summer of 2021. NSURP is a virtual program
so students will conduct research remotely (i.e., not in a wet lab setting at an
institution). Students will be matched to one of many laboratories around the
country, based on their interest. There is no travel required to participate in
the program, and students will get the full suite of research training under the
mentorship of faculty and/or scientists who have volunteered to host an
undergraduate. REU participants are expected to work full time on a project they
will develop with their mentor. Students will learn how research is conducted,
gain professional skills, and have the opportunity to present the results of
their work at a national scientific conference. NSURP will recruit
underrepresented minorities in STEM, students attending Minority Serving
Institutions and community colleges, and students who have been accepted to an
REU but denied the program due to cancellation. The effectiveness of the program
will be assessed using the online SALG URSSA tool as well as an assessment to be
done by the University of Arizona College of Education. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSURP is focused on all fields of microbiology
(host-microbe interactions, environmental microbiology, physiological
mechanisms, symbiosis, signaling pathways, etc.) and computational immunology.
Student research projects encompass biological research from various departments
around the country. Participants will be required to attend weekly seminars,
professional development talks and ethics training, complete program assessments
in a timely manner, and attend all events deemed necessary by the laboratory in
which they are doing the work. Student selection for program participation will
be made by the NSURP board of directors and will be based on student career
goals and their ability to work remotely. Students, who must be a US citizen, US
national or permanent resident to be eligible, will be provided stipends. More
information, including a list and presentations of previous NSURP projects, can
be found at https://nsurp.org. Additional details can be obtained by contacting
the PI (Dr. Michael D. L. Johnson) or program administrators at
nsurporg@gmail.com. This project is supported by the Divisions of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Integrative and Organismal Systems (IOS),
Environmental Biology (DEB), and Biological Infrastructure (DBI), all within the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.