* 2128721
* SBIR Phase II:  A System for Enhancing Metacognitive and Problem-Solving Abilities in Engineers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Robyn Allen, Central Inventions, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,978.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves both reduced costs for technology
companies as well as increased access to cutting-edge engineering jobs for
people from all backgrounds. Commercializing this product will provide the
market with an innovative, automated solution that reduces the time hiring
managers spend on recruiting and growing the best candidates. Until now,
metacognitive skill development has been the purview of in-person mentors â€“ a
practice that provides fewer on-ramps into engineering careers for individuals
from backgrounds historically underrepresented in technology as they often lack
access to in-person engineer mentors. A scalable system which delivers
metacognitive benefits to users in an automated way may create greater access to
technology education by reducing the need for in-person mentorship. The product
will also enable job seekers to enhance their engineering potential by
strengthening the "hard to teach" practices which distinguish professional
engineers from aspiring ones. Overall, the product commercialized during Phase
II seeks to increase broader participation in engineering careers and a more
equitable set of hiring practices in technology
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project brings cutting-edge Cognitive Science to bear on the problems
of manual candidate screening and ongoing employee upskilling. For the first-
time, it marries an Intelligent Tutoring System (ITS) with an Applicant Tracking
System (ATS) and opens the door to build talent pipelines for individuals whose
metacognitive traits match closely with the needs of tech employers. The
proposed project combines key advances in the field of Cognitive Science with
best practices in software design in order to create novel user interactions
inside a Computer-Based Learning Environment (CBLE). Objectives include: 1)
collecting microdata (also called "trace data") from user interactions to make
automated inferences about the user's metacognitive traits and 2) creating
inputs designed to foster metacognitive growth. Correlating real-time trace data
with metacognitive ability is a new area of research enabled only recently by
the increased adoption of CBLEs. The proposed project contributes to the fields
of Cognitive Science and Human-Computer Interaction by validating novel methods
measuring metacognition against existing static look-back techniques. The
project also pioneers new modes of delivering personalized metacognitive growth
through CBLE interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.