* 2128281
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Quantifying the response of stream ecosystems to a punctuated cold-stress disturbance across a semi-arid to sub-humid gradient
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Christopher Patrick, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 04/30/2023
* USD 36,544.00

Climate change is expected to result in increased global mean temperatures that
will lead to movement of tropical and sub-tropical species toward the poles, a
process known as “tropicalization”. Changes in precipitation patterns are
predicted to be spatially variable, with some regions becoming drier and others
wetter. The ecology and health of stream ecosystems are particularly susceptible
to changes in rainfall and temperature. Simultaneously, the frequency and
intensity of extreme weather events are expected to increase, and it is unknown
how these extreme events will interact with gradual changes in temperature and
precipitation to affect stream ecosystems. This research evaluates how a recent
extreme event, the February 2021 “polar vortex” in Texas, interacts with
changing mean climate conditions to predict how climate change will impact the
structure and function of U.S. stream ecosystems in the coming decades. The
research leverages a steep, natural rainfall gradient that features an abrupt
shift in stream community composition and ecosystem functioning between semi-
arid and mesic ecosystems. Repeated field measurements are being made for one
year after the polar vortex and these data compared to prior data collected from
these streams over the last 4 years. This work greatly increases our
understanding of how climate change will affect sub-tropical stream ecosystems
and their biota. Training of undergraduates (including minority) and graduate
students along with community outreach via an established K–12 program
contribute to the project’s broader impacts for
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are to characterize the
direct and indirect impacts of an extreme cold event (ECE) on stream ecosystem
structure and function and to examine the role of organism traits and local
environmental features that drive these effects. Punctuated low temperatures
below an organism’s thermal limits can result in physiological, behavioral, and
fitness consequences. These events are particularly important in the context of
understanding tropicalization. Warm-adapted species are expanding poleward but
lack adaptations for cold conditions, and thus may be more vulnerable to ECEs,
driving mass mortality events. The impact of mass mortality events on ecosystem
functioning may last for months to years and result in population declines,
changes to community composition, and the contribution of dead individuals to
the organic matter pool. The following hypotheses are being tested: 1) mesic
streams will have greater thermal buffering capacity than semi-arid sites due to
their greater discharge per unit watershed and greater tree canopy that creates
a microclimate above the water surface; 2) taxa in semi-arid streams will have
greater cold tolerance because many of them have adaptations to cope with harsh
conditions; 3) taxa with neotropical ancestry will have lower cold tolerance due
to a lack of adaptions for cold stress; 4) fish and invertebrate mortality will
indirectly affect the abundance of algae and benthic organic matter, impacting
stream metabolism. Because ECEs may become more common in the future, studying
this historically rare event may help us understand how ECEs may interact with
“tropicalization”. Furthermore, the utilization of a steep rainfall gradient
provides an exceptional opportunity to study the interaction between extreme
disturbance and long-term climate conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.