* 2128705
* CAREER: Optogenetic Analysis of Neurovascular Coupling
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,08/31/2021
* Ramin Pashaie, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2021
* USD 123,291.00

PI: Pashaie, Ramin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: 1454300 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims at establishing a novel paradigm for astrocytes, which are
classically regarded as non-neuronal cells, forming only a support network for
neurons. However, recent studies have provided evidence that astrocytes are
involved in data processing in the cortex by regulating the neural response
magnitude and duration. Furthermore, they appear to have an intermediary role in
neurovascular coupling and the signaling pathways that mediate functional
hyperemia are regulated by astrocytes. The PI proposes to establish a new
platform technology to selectively manipulate neuronal/astrocytic activity and
simultaneously record cellular/hemodynamic signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
has established track records in mentoring students and participating in
outreach programs. The opportunities for training and teaching of undergraduate
and graduate as well as making impact on undergraduate summer research program
and K-12 outreach programs are excellent at the University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee. The applicant has provided detailed plans for the development
teaching materials and courses that he plans to develop as well as how he plans
to mentor and train undergraduate and graduate students. The proposed outreach
program is also well developed. The applicant provides clear plan for how he
plans to evaluate each component of the proposed teaching and outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will combine optogenetics for modulation of
cellular activity of neurons and astrocytes with spectral-domain coherence
tomography to monitor hemodynamic signals, and two-photon microscopy to observe
cellular activity. Since both cellular activity and hemodynamics will be
triggered by means of optogenetic modulation, their correlation permits
conclusions about the roles of both, astrocytes and neurons. The optogenetic and
microscopy experiments will be complemented by a novel electrophysiology
platform that the PI has recently developed for optogenetic electrocorticography
(ECoG) experiments. Electrophysiological recording of calcium waves will permit
a comparison of astrocyte activity and neuronal
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Biophotonics
program in the Engineering Directorate and the Neural Systems program in the BIO
Directorate.