* 2128534
* EAGER: Investigation of local strain and single photon emitters in two-dimensional materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Xi Wang, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,960.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;Single photon emitters (SPEs), which emit
light as single particles (photons), are important light sources for leading
quantum information technologies, such as computation, communication, and
cryptography. To integrate SPEs with miniaturized devices, many researchers
focus on solid-state systems because they can be fabricated and controlled
precisely using current nanofabrication techniques. In recent years, SPEs have
been reported in two-dimensional (2D) materials, which have only nanometer-scale
thicknesses. This greatly expands the possibility of scalable integration of
SPEs on a chip. However, the color (energy) of emitted photons is difficult to
control because the fundamental principles that govern single photon emission in
2D materials are not entirely understood, leading to SPE behavior that may
appear to be random. In this project, the research team develops a specially-
designed microscopic device patterned with sharp tips to quantitatively
determine how the strength and shape of strain, or mechanical deformation, in 2D
materials determines or alters the performance of SPEs. In addition, the
research team introduces middle-school students to micro-artificial structures,
like the one used in this project, by creating a series of short videos
explaining fundamental concepts and distributing the videos over a wide range of
social media platforms, allowing the research team to reach a large audience.
These educational resources introduce middle-school students to topics that are
interesting, do not require advanced mathematics to understand, and are
generally not included in a middle-school
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;While SPEs in layered hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) at
room temperature take advantage of high photon purity, bright emission, and
favorable quantum efficiencies, they exhibit extreme inhomogeneity, emitting
photons at random energies spanning a broad range. This limits the suitability
of SPEs for applications in quantum information science and technology, such as
on-chip integrated quantum photonic circuits. This project will use a specially-
designed multi-tip platform to investigate the SPEs with tunable local strain
and perform a comprehensive study of the relationship between local strain and
SPEs in hBN. The multi-tip platform provides the capability to control strain
through careful design of the tip geometry and distribution, opening up
opportunities in controllable strain engineering. The research team applies
uniaxial, biaxial, and triaxial tensile and/or compressive strain on and around
existing SPEs to quantitatively determine the strength and orientation
dependence and investigate the fundamental principles that give rise to a
variety of emission energies from SPEs. In addition to studying intrinsic SPEs,
high strain is intentionally induced to investigate the formation process of
SPEs. This project advances the understanding of the relationship between local
strain and SPEs in hBN. The multi-tip platform used in this project can be
directly extended to other 2D materials to investigate strain-induced light-
matter interactions in 2D materials, such as SPEs in transition metal
dichalcogenides and pseudo-magnetic fields in graphene, and explore their
transport, topological, and quantum behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by Electronic and Photonic Materials program in the Division
of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.