* 2128301
* Collaborative Research: Towards quantifying eruptive timing and volcanic accretion on the Southern East Pacific Rise
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Ross Parnell-Turner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 308,105.00

Collaborative Research: Eruptive timing and volcanic accretion on the Southern
East Pacific Rise&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seventy percent of Earth’s surface is
covered by ocean crust created by volcanoes at underwater mid-ocean ridges. It
is important to accurately describe the size, shape, and frequency of submarine
lava flows to understand how mid-ocean ridge volcanic systems work. A recent
National Academies report identifies description of eruptive sizes and
frequencies as one of the outstanding grand challenges in volcano science.
However, distinguishing and accurately dating individual submarine lava flows
remains challenging due to inadequate dating techniques, as well as considerable
technical challenges associated with making observations and collecting samples
from the seafloor. This project takes multiple approaches to measuring eruptive
timing on the Southern East Pacific Rise (a mid-ocean ridge in the south
Pacific). Data from self-driving underwater vehicles (AUV-autonomous underwater
vehicle) will be combined with submersible observations and sample collection.
Sample chemistry and magnetic signals help determine age and eruption frequency
of surface flows, while the AUV data provide high-resolution mapping of the sea
floor and additional information related to sub-surface lava flow distributions.
The results will be combined into a model that can be and applied to other mid-
ocean ridge settings. The proposed work will provide a comparison to the well-
studied 9°N section of the northern East Pacific Rise, expanding the small
number of intensively-studied ridge segments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The size,
shape, and eruptive frequency of submarine lava flows are important first-order
variables in our understanding of many mid-ocean ridge processes, including
volcanic construction; magma recharge, flux, and storage; and the stability of
hydrothermal systems and biological communities. A recent National Academies
report identifies the quantification of eruptive sizes and frequencies as
integral to one of the outstanding grand challenges in volcano science. However,
distinguishing and accurately dating individual submarine flows in the
geological record remains challenging due to inadequate radiometric techniques,
as well as the considerable technical challenges associated with making
observations and collecting samples from the seafloor. Further, for a process
that is episodic, there is no commonly-accepted statistical framework for
reporting or interpreting eruptive intervals. While considerable effort has gone
into documenting eruptive history at 9°N on EPR and at Axial seamount on the
Juan de Fuca Ridge, constraining a spatially and temporally variable global
system requires significantly more data, and perhaps new approaches. The
proposed work takes an integrated approach to quantifying eruptive timing on the
Southern East Pacific Rise by combining AUV (autonomous underwater vehicle)
mapping with HOV (human occupied vehicle) observations and sample collection.
Near-bottom sidescan and bathymetric data will guide sampling locations and
provide important interpretive context, as well as the possibility of
calculating flow volumes. Geochemical data will be combined with temporal
constraints provided by geomagnetic paleointensity to define eruptive clusters.
Near-bottom magnetic anomaly data will be used to link the surface paleomagnetic
data with a depth-integrated signal and provide important constraints on 3D
statistical models of flow distributions, which are also constrained by
estimates of layer 2A thickness from existing seismic reflection data. Combined,
these methods will enable identification of flow units, quantifying eruptive
frequency, and assessing accretionary processes. The resulting statistical model
can be tested against and applied to other mid-ocean ridge settings. Further,
the proposed work will provide a point of contrast to the well-studied 9°N
segment and expand the small number of intensively-studied ridge
segments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.