* 2128611
* Advancing Fractional Combinatorial Optimization: Computation and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2021
* Andres Gomez, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 122,773.00

Single- and multiple-ratio fractional combinatorial optimization problems
naturally arise in diverse application contexts when modeling trade-offs such as
maximizing return/investment, maximizing profit/time, minimizing cost/time or
minimizing wasted/used material. For example, risk-adverse decision-makers are
often interested in solutions that provide a good trade-off between the expected
return and risk, which can be modeled naturally as the ratio function. Also,
fractional objectives can be used for feature selection and clustering in data
mining as well as for solving isoperimetric problems on graphs that can be
applied for error-correcting codes and image segmentation. There are no adequate
solution approaches for these classes of optimization problems if they involve
integrality and/or combinatorial restrictions (constraints). Therefore, if
successful, the proposed research will substantially enhance the ability to
solve these hard classes of optimization problems and can lead to a more
widespread use of single- and multiple-ratio fractional measures in existing and
emerging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main goal is to
develop computational approaches with the solid underlying theoretical
foundation, that deliver provably good solutions and can be used to solve
realistically sized instances of single- and multiple-ratio fractional
combinatorial optimization problems. In order to do so, the investigators
propose to systematically exploit the combinatorial structure of the feasible
region and structural properties of the ratio functions to construct strong
convex relaxations of the fractional combinatorial optimization problems. The
investigators will also explore single- and multiple-ratio fractional
combinatorial optimization problems under parameter uncertainty. The proposed
research, unlike most of previous work in the related literature, does not
enforce restrictive simplifying assumptions on either the combinatorial
structure induced by the constraint set or the number of ratios. Furthermore,
the research does not rely on assuming that the functions in the numerators and
denominators of the ratios are affine. The proposed approaches draw ideas and
will contribute to the literature of mathematical optimization, particularly
conic, fractional and discrete optimization, combinatorics, and algebraic graph
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.