* 2128128
* HCC: Small: Code Stories: Linking Code Influences and Changes in Code Histories
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Caitlin Kelleher, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 495,026.00

Computer software underlies nearly every aspect of modern life. Like other forms
of infrastructure, it is critical that we maintain software to keep it
functioning reliably. However, maintenance is expensive: today, the process of
maintaining and updating a piece of software accounts for more than 50 percent
of the total cost of developing it. Much of the difficulty and cost associated
with maintaining software is due to the effort programmers exert to understand
the existing computer code. In particular, it can be hard to determine which
parts of a program are responsible for what behaviors, along with the reasons
for particular implementation details. However, clues to these problems were
present when the software was originally created: error messages, visited web
pages, editor traces, and internal documentation all tie together software,
goals, and reasons. The goal of this project is to develop ways to automatically
capture kinds of contextual information that would support future software
maintenance and to present this code history in ways that help future
programmers understand and maintain that code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize
this goal, this project takes a user-centered approach to first understanding
code histories and then developing ways to capture and present this information
for future users of a codebase. The project team will first conduct
observational studies to determine how programmers naturally perceive and
organize the history of the code they created. The results from these studies
will inform the design of prototype code histories (called Code Stories) that
will be further refined through user testing, enabling identification of the
properties of effective code histories. The observational studies will also
guide decisions about what kinds of code changes and contextual information
(e.g., information foraging activity and error messages) to capture. In
parallel, the team will develop heuristics for segmenting events and information
into semantically meaningful chunks. The team will evaluate the work in two
ways. The first evaluation will compare programmer efficiency when attempting to
modify an unfamiliar codebase using a well-constructed git history (the current
best practice that maintains history through keeping versions of a codebase)
versus Code Stories. The second evaluation will capture programmer-guided
versions of Code Stories through observations and interviews and compare the
hand-authored Code Story emerging from these studies with the automatic Code
Stories created by the tools developed. The results of this comparison will help
to identify priorities for future research in code histories, as well as provide
useful resources for future programmer education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.