* 2128702
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: On the Complexity of Semidefinite and Polynomial Optimization through the Lens of Real Algebraic Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Saugata Basu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2024
* USD 247,647.00

Semidefinite and polynomial optimization (SDO and PO) are topics of great
theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;practical interest, with numerous applications in
theoretical computer science, control theory,&lt;br/&gt;quantum information
sciences, and statistics. The steady advances in efficient interior-
point&lt;br/&gt;methods (IPMs) lends credence to the impactful role of SDO, as
an emerging computational&lt;br/&gt;tool, in PO and quantum computing. The
complexity of SDO and PO is well-known in the&lt;br/&gt;bit model of
computation: there is no polynomial-time algorithm yet to find an exact
optimal&lt;br/&gt;solution of these classes of optimization problems. However,
even for an approximate solution,&lt;br/&gt;there are pathological instances
that IPMs or relaxation hierarchies for PO fail to solve.&lt;br/&gt;In view of
this challenge, the need to investigate the complexity through a broader
spectrum&lt;br/&gt;of complexity measures is obvious. Such a novel approach
allows for a finer classification of&lt;br/&gt;instances with high complexity.
This project pursues the above goal by addressing several&lt;br/&gt;key
questions on the complexity of SDO and PO, through the lens of real algebraic
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will enhance understanding of
the complexity in SDO and PO&lt;br/&gt;and have the potential to impact other
disciplines, including quantum information sciences,&lt;br/&gt;where the
emerging area of quantum IPMs with their unique advantages offer
unprecedented&lt;br/&gt;intellectual challenges. Due to the multidisciplinary
nature of this project, the investigators will&lt;br/&gt;train graduate students
and organize meetings by inviting experts as well as young
researchers&lt;br/&gt;for fruitful interaction amongst the optimization and real
algebraic geometry communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the
project focuses on quantitative and algorithmic questions about the
complexity&lt;br/&gt;of SDO from the perspective of the central path. Since IPMs
operate in a neighborhood&lt;br/&gt;of the central path, their efficiency is
influenced by the analytic and algebro-geometric properties&lt;br/&gt;of the
central path. The investigators explore several complexity measures based on
the&lt;br/&gt;degree, worst-case convergence rate, and geometric curvature of
the central path for regular&lt;br/&gt;and near to ill-posed instances. By means
of these complexity measures, in particular, one&lt;br/&gt;can quantitatively
justify the complexity of IPMs on instances whose special structures
exhibit&lt;br/&gt;failure of the strict complementarity condition. The second
part of the project investigates the&lt;br/&gt;complexity of PO through error
bounds and the topology of the feasible set. Unlike IPMs,
the&lt;br/&gt;moment/sum of squares approach only deals with a sequence of
objective values (rather than&lt;br/&gt;solutions), which may not adequately
reflect the progress toward the optimal set. As a result,&lt;br/&gt;the current
complexity bounds from the moment/sum of squares approach are purely
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;with no reliance on the topology/geometry of the feasible
set. The investigators will explore&lt;br/&gt;topology based complexity measures
which allow for the inclusion of the Betti numbers of the&lt;br/&gt;feasible set
and thus enhance PO solvers with more precise complexity estimates. That
will&lt;br/&gt;rigorously explain why iterative algorithms are more likely to
stop at a local optima of a PO&lt;br/&gt;problem, as the number of connected
components or the holes in the feasible set increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.