* 2128073
* Collaborative Research: Edge CMT:  Polygenic traits of heat stress phenome in coral "dark genes" from genome to functional applications
* BIO,IOS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Debashish Bhattacharya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 11/30/2025
* USD 509,125.00

In this project, the researchers will use genomics, genetics, and cell biology
to understand the function of coral genes during heat stress. Thermal stress
often causes the “bleaching” (whitening) of corals that is harming reefs
worldwide and is a threat to marine biodiversity. Genes are the functional unit
of DNA and how the coral reacts to heat stress is called its phenotype. There
are many genes involved in achieving the heat response phenotype and they will
be studied in this project. This is important because the function of many of
these and other genes and how they influence the phenotype of corals are not
understood. In addition, many of the coral stress genes are unknown in other
organisms (i.e., they arose in corals), and therefore present the opportunity to
discover the function of novel genes. This research is important because it will
help in the understanding of how both known and novel genes function, which can
aid in the conservation of coral reefs- a resource that is important for
national security and economic growth. Lastly, this project will fund early
career scientists and lead to broader impacts through the training and education
of a diverse workforce in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this proposal is to determine the mechanistic drivers of the stress response in
multicellular organisms, with a focus on the ecologically important corals. To
achieve this goal, application of an end-to-end approach that extends from genes
to phenotypes, to cell biology, using multi-omics and network methods with both
holobiont and single cell data will be applied. This work will elucidate the
coral stress phenome in species with differing reproductive strategies and
geographical origins to determine the functions of both known and unknown (dark)
genes. Generating this knowledge base will transform coral biology and more
broadly, provide a research platform for testing hypotheses about the resilience
of other ecosystems, marine and terrestrial, which is particularly important
under accelerating climate change. This project aims to increase the
understanding and predictive capability of how key properties of living systems
emerge from the interaction of genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.