* 2128077
* SWIFT: Enabling Spectrum Coexistence of 5G mmWave and Passive Weather Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Narayan Mandayam, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

The demand for increasingly higher wireless data rates in 5G and Beyond 5G (B5G)
developments has led to the utilization of newer spectrum in the mmWave bands
that had not been previously allocated for commercial wireless applications.
Such new spectrum opportunities often come with speculation when it relates to
impacting collocated or adjacent spectrum utilized for other services.
Specifically, the 5G band allocated in the 26 GHz spectrum referred to as 3GPP
band n258 has generated anxiety and concern in the meteorological data
forecasting community including the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). This issue stems from 5G transmissions impacting the
observations of passive sensors on weather satellites used to detect the amount
of water vapor in the atmosphere, which in turn affects weather forecasting and
predictions. To this end, the proposed research project aims to tackle this
issue by characterizing the impact of 5G transmissions on weather data
measurements and prediction, and then design cross layer mitigation strategies
needed to enable coexistence between 5G services and weather prediction, as well
as improved weather prediction algorithms. Furthermore, undergraduate, graduate
and high school students including underrepresented minority groups will be
engaged and trained in the coexistence of 5G with passive sensing and weather
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lead to algorithm designs,
reference architectures, and testbed experiments that will provide pointers to
engineering methodology for the design of spectrally and system power-efficient
5G/B5G networks that can peacefully coexist with passive weather sensors. It
will also enable the development of improved weather forecasting algorithms that
are cognizant of the potential impact of unintended interference. The specific
research tasks entail: (i) designing improved models for characterizing the 5G
impact on radiance using both simulation and analysis based approaches taking
into account transmit power levels, specific sub-band occupancy, transmit
modulation schemes, nonlinearity of power amplifiers, and absorption and
transmission through layers of clouds and atmosphere; (ii) mapping the spatial
density of 5G transmitters, and the elevation and directionality of
transmissions to geospatial sensitivity to leakage; (iii) devising novel cross-
layer approaches for mitigating the 5G impact on 23.8 GHz using antennas/circuit
(filtenna) design and direct modulation based beam steering that is integrated
with cooperative MAC and networking strategies along with power control; (iv)
developing improved weather prediction algorithms that are designed to be robust
to 5G leakage; and (v) experimenting on the PAWR COSMOS testbed to study
adjacent channel leakage from 5G transmissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.