* 2128606
* RAPID: Initial Colonists of Freshly Emplaced Volcanic Rocks at High Latitude: A Case Study of the 2021 Volcanic Eruption on the Reykjanes Peninsula, Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2022
* Solange Duhamel, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Julie Pett-Ridge
* 03/31/2022
* USD 45,873.00

An essential task in geomicrobiology is to understand how newly formed
substrates become colonized by microbial communities, which may ultimately play
a role in rock weathering, soil formation and ecosystem development. Volcanic
eruptions offer numerous opportunities to increase our understanding of
terrestrial ecosystem formation. However, very few teams have been able to
collect samples and data at early stages of volcanic substrate formation. Most
studies have started their samplings years, often decades to hundreds of years
after the eruption (i.e., well after the establishment of microbial
communities), and only one study was able to gather data three months after the
eruption. Therefore, very little is known about the initial colonists of freshly
deposited volcanic rocks, particularly at high latitudes. On March 19th 2021,
the new volcanic eruption near Mount Fagradalsfjall, on the Reykjanes Peninsula
in Southwest Iceland, began extruding a fresh lava flow. Studying the initial
colonists of the freshly deposited volcanic rock from the onset of its formation
represents a unique opportunity to answer many questions about the microbial
succession and community establishment of new ecosystems. This project will
acquire samples and data for microbial, geochemical and physicochemical
characterization of the new ecosystem formation. Considering this rare chance
for an immediate sampling of a fresh lava flow, this work has the potential to
transform our understanding of microbial community succession from a sterile
environment to an established and resilient community. This project will also
train one graduate student in field sampling and laboratory analyses. Results
from this effort will be made publicly available shortly after sample and data
collection. The graduate student and the investigator will give public lectures
about the work. They will also coordinate with the U.S. Embassy in Iceland and
Fulbright â€“ Iceland Commission to promote the RAPID response by U.S. researchers
in Iceland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to answer fundamental
questions about the initial colonists of freshly deposited volcanic rocks:
1-What is the taxonomic diversity of the earliest colonists of volcanic rocks
and how does it change over time? 2-What are the potential sources of
colonizers? 3-What are the metabolic capabilities of these early colonists?
Being in Iceland before, during and at least 5 months after the start of the
Fagradalsfjall volcanic eruption, affords the investigator a rare opportunity to
collect pre-, and post-eruption samples and data to answer these questions. Two
hypotheses will be tested: (H1) early colonizers of the volcanic rock will be
present in low abundance, low taxonomic diversity and rely on photo- and/or
chemolithotrophic metabolism and (H2) the volcanic rock will harbor an
increasingly complex microbial community in terms of diversity and function over
time, including organoheterophs and photoautotrophs, after only a few months.
The project will acquire samples and data for microbial, geochemical and
physicochemical characterization of the new ecosystem formation. The new
discoveries resulting from this study would set the stage for further research
that will analyze the samples with sequencing and geochemical approaches and
extend the study over a longer period (years). The research will provide
urgently needed evidence to examine how newly formed volcanic substrates become
colonized by microbial communities, looking specifically at the taxonomic
identity and functional capabilities of early colonists but also at their
external sources. To examine the origin of early colonists they will also
collect samples from water, rock, soil and bioaerosols as part of the RAPID
response. In the follow up study, they will use next-generation sequencing-based
microbial source tracking to estimate the source of microbes found to occupy the
newly formed lava flows. The research products will be of interest to a number
of other fields outside the immediate field, specifically fields seeking a
mechanistic understanding of interactions between microbial populations and
their environment, and the emergent properties of the complex community. The new
culture isolates will also provide information on the roles of early colonizers
in elemental cycles, geobiology, and biochemistry. This project will support the
travel of a graduate student to perform field work in Iceland and to process
samples for return to his Institution. Results from this work will be a key
focus of his Ph.D. research. Results from this effort will be disseminated
through publications, public databases, and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.