* 2128028
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Evolutionary and Functional Trade-offs in Extreme Sensory Capabilities of Nocturnal Predatory Spiders
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Sandra Correa-Garhwal, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 540,146.00

If there is one thing everyone “knows” about spiders, it’s that they are deadly
hunters of insects, which they catch with webs spun of super-strong silk.
Studying spiders can provide numerous engineering insights by examining the
specialized sensory systems and ingenious uses of webs and silk they use for
detecting and capturing prey. This project focuses on net-casting deinopid
spiders that hunt by striking at moving insects that they ensnare in small
rectangular webs held with their legs. This study will examine the large eyes of
deinopid spiders, eyes that are used at night to hunt. The project is expected
to produce results with practical applications. For example, the biochemical and
physiological design features of their eyes are expected to reveal new insights
that could be applied for night motion-sensitive devices. In addition, the
remarkable physical properties of spider silk--namely, its tensile strength,
toughness, and flexibility--are currently being exploited by industry for
consumer, industrial, and military applications. This project will also have
educational impacts by providing research opportunities for under-represented
high school and undergraduate students and by developing an interactive
bilingual game in English and Spanish to help teach children mathematics through
modeling. These activities will broaden participation in science and help train
the next generation of the scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address complex questions requiring an integrative approach: How do
sensory systems become specialized and what are the mechanisms behind these
specializations? Net-casting spiders (Deinopidae) present an exciting model
given their highly specialized sensory systems used to capture prey in near-
total darkness. Net-casting spiders rely on enlarged eyes that are among the
most light-sensitive on Earth. Yet some select species have diminutive eyes but
forage under similar conditions. A recent discovery revealed that spiders use
acoustic information transmitted through silk to perceive their environment and
capture aerial prey. This suggests that trade-offs between sensory systems are a
driver of adaptive variation. Functional trade-offs are inherent to all sensory
systems, but the understanding of how these trade-offs manifest and evolve is
limited and has not been studied in detail in a comparative fashion across
multiple biological levels. Achieving this deep understanding of trade-offs
requires integrative approaches and a diverse team of investigators willing to
bridge the considerable gaps between their subdisciplines. This research will
forge connections among investigators with complementary expertise in disparate
biological fields. Together, they will identify the genetic, physiological,
morphological, and behavioral mechanisms underlying the extraordinary visual and
acoustic sensory adaptations within deinopids and elucidate how relative
investments evolve in different ecological conditions. Results from the
multidisciplinary empirical experiments will be integrated into an ecological
and evolutionary model to generate predictions about sensory evolution that will
be applicable to other biological systems. Cross-training of early career
investigators will also strengthen the pipeline for integrative biology for
generations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.