* 2128729
* Evolution and genetic basis of locomotor activity patterns among Lake Malawi cichlids: Exploring a novel mechanism of habitat partitioning
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Craig Albertson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 10/31/2024
* USD 985,559.00

This project investigates a new hypothesis to explain how a high diversity of
similar species can coexist in the same environment, that species partition
their habitat temporally via divergence in the circadian timing of activity, day
vs night. Animals exhibit a range of activity levels and patterns over the
course of a day, but how these behaviors are regulated at the genetic level
remains poorly understood. Further, closely related species can differ markedly
in both levels and patterns of activity, but how variation in these behaviors
may facilitate the co-existence of species within a single environment is
largely unknown. This project addresses these two knowledge gaps, using cichlid
fishes from Lake Malawi, Africa. This cichlid system exhibits unparalleled
diversity, with well over 500 species evolving within the last ~1-2 million
years. Moreover, Malawi cichlids co-exist in extremely high diversities, with
certain localities supporting over 40 species. How this occurs has long
fascinated biologists, with most studies focusing on how species partition
habitat spatially, for example across different depths. This research has the
potential to provide novel insights into how biodiversity is maintained in the
Lake Malawi cichlid system, and other groups characterized by high levels of
biodiversity, with implications for conservation strategies. More broadly, this
project will provide a better understanding of circadian biology, which may
provide insights into the linkage between disrupted circadian rhythms in humans
and disorders of the brain. Building on past activities, the investigators will
deliver summer workshops on evolution to underserved and underrepresented middle
school students through partnerships with existing programs in Massachusetts.
They will recruit underrepresented high school and undergraduate students into
their labs for supervised research. In addition, they will develop and deliver
course-based undergraduate research experience laboratories for undergraduates
at both institutions to expand access to research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The circadian timing of activity is critical
for organismal fitness, and species across the Animal Kingdom exhibit diversity
in the timing of activity that ranges from strongly diurnal to strongly
nocturnal. While the neural and molecular basis through which animals maintain a
24-hour circadian clock is well-studied, much less is known about how the timing
of activity evolves. Identifying the ecological and genetic factors associated
with variation in activity patterns would therefore address a critical gap in
our knowledge. This project will investigate these open questions by applying
high-throughput behavioral analyses in Lake Malawi cichlid fishes â€“ an iconic
and powerful model system for ecology and evolutionary research. Malawi cichlids
exhibit unparalleled diversity in an array of phenotypes, including behavioral
traits. Preliminary data associated with this proposal documented a surprisingly
high magnitude of variation in locomotor activity patterns among species,
offering a unique opportunity to investigate its evolution and genetic basis. To
this end, the investigators will undertake experiments to examine the evolution
of activity patterns in an explicit phylogenetic context, assess the degree to
which these patterns are modulated by environmental factors including social
interactions and food availability, and to characterize the genetic/genomic
architecture of locomotor activity. While each experiment will be informative on
its own, the combined results will provide key insights into the evolutionary
potential of circadian regulation of activity, significantly advancing the
field, and establishing a robust foundation for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.