* 2128140
* Optically-controlled neuromodulation with silicon carbide-based nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bozhi Tian, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2024
* USD 522,673.00

Extracellular electrical stimulation of neurons and heart cells, the standard
means by which to study excitability, forms the basis for many implantable
disease-treating devices including those for Parkinson's disease, depression,
epilepsy, and cardiac arrhythmias. While these neural modulation devices have
improved patients' quality of life, they are challenging to deploy in many
animal studies due to being bulky, invasive, complex and expensive, thus
limiting their use in basic neuroscience studies. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate flexible and cost-effective silicon carbide (SiC)-based
nanostructures that, when triggered by light, can modulate the behavior of
single neurons. These new SiC-based interfaces will enable wireless, non-
genetic, multiscale, precise modulation of neurons, overcoming many of the
limitations of current implantable electrodes. This project will provide
learning opportunities for students in a highly interdisciplinary area. The
investigator will build on existing model programs at the University of Chicago
to increase diversity in science and engineering by offering summer research
opportunities to high school and undergraduate students. An international summer
exchange program that allows undergraduate and graduate students to visit Israel
will be continued and a special training program for outstanding high school
students to compete in national competitions (e.g., Regeneron Science Talent)
will be expanded. The research and education results will be disseminated
broadly through peer-reviewed publications, seminars, conference presentations,
and websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optogenetics has emerged as the leading
modern approach for neuromodulation, but it is difficult to deploy in many
animal model systems. Recently developed semiconductor and metal-based
biomaterial interfaces have the potential to provide with relative ease the non-
genetic and multiscale neural activities in a very broad range of animal model
systems. However, the large-scale fabrication or synthesis methods for these
materials and devices are usually very complex and expensive. Additionally,
there is a lack of studies of both excitatory and inhibitory neuromodulation
from the same class of materials. This project addresses these two limitations
through use of silicon carbide (SiC) as a material to construct neural
interfaces for optically triggered non-genetic neuromodulation. The Workflow
Plan is presented as three consecutive steps: (1) innovation of synthetic
methods for the large-scale silicon carbide synthesis and device fabrication, to
(2) study both the excitatory and inhibitory responses using cultured neurons,
and finally to (3) deployment and proof-of-concept testing in a mouse model.
This project will bring together an efficient, multi-level, cross-disciplinary
approach to achieve the large-scale and stable photoelectrochemical devices for
random-access neuromodulation in the brain. The proposed study will also offer a
unique knowledge and skill set that can open new areas of endeavor in the
semiconductor or detector industry. The silicon carbide-based membranes studied
in this work can potentially yield highly efficient biomedical devices for
translational studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.