* 2128642
* EAGER: SaTC: Early-Stage Interdisciplinary Collaboration: Designing Trustworthy and Transparent Information Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Tanushree Mitra, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2023
* USD 264,077.00

Defined as openness to the information creation and reporting process,
transparency is a way for information institutions that have an online presence
to reconnect with citizens and establish their legitimacy. This research will
conduct a series of design investigations to illuminate the critical new
phenomenon of transparency to rebuild public trust in one such information
institution--journalistic organizations. Marrying mass communications research
with human-centered computing, this research will take a novel interdisciplinary
approach to answer the following questions. How can online information platforms
effectively embrace the ideal of transparency as a means to increase trust? How
can news organizations effectively demonstrate to the public the primary
features that make a story trustworthy and the core aspects that govern the
production and reporting of a news story?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research
will be conducted along three phases. The first involves understanding the
current practices of online news production and consumption with respect to
trustworthiness. Phase 1 will result in a rich description of what constitutes
trustworthy information online and inform the development of a brand new,
transformative class of transparency artifacts. In the second phase, this
project will appropriate theories from Communications research and combine with
data mining and natural language-based techniques from the Computing field, to
build transparency features highlighting key aspects of news reporting.
Specifically, it will explore two classes of transparency tools: disclosure and
participatory. Disclosure transparency will communicate the production, framing,
and journalistic standards around news reports. Participatory transparency will
aim at getting users involved in the news cycle through two channel-based
interactive features: commenting capability and hovering to see additional
information. Finally, phase 3 includes interface evaluations via experiments
followed by participatory design workshops with the two primary stakeholders of
an online news system--journalists and news readers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.