* 2128347
* Laboratory Studies of Vapor Grown Ice at Low and High Supersaturations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jerry Harrington, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 915,957.00

Clouds that consist of ice crystals, such as cirrus, have a significant impact
on weather and climate because of their role in interacting with incoming or
outgoing radiation. However, there is still a significant amount of uncertainty
about the processes that impact ice crystal growth from water vapor at very high
altitudes and cold temperatures. This project will conduct laboratory-based
measurements of ice crystal growth at temperatures of colder than -40 degrees to
reduce uncertainties and provide information that can be used in weather and
climate models. This award will also support multiple students and the creation
of software for classroom use, thereby training the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will continue their studies
of the growth of ice in laboratory chambers. The overarching goal of the work is
to use measurements to estimate characteristic supersaturations and effective
densities at low temperatures, and at low to high supersaturations. The
resulting growth data will reduce uncertainties in calculating vapor growth
rates at low temperatures and could be used to develop new parameterizations
suitable for microphysical models. Specifically, the research plan is to:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Measure the dimensional growth rates of ice crystals
grown from the tip of a single capillary at temperatures below -40°C and at a
range of supersaturations using a diffusion chamber constructed for capillary
studies. This would result in characteristic supersaturation and effective
density measurements for faceted growth under -40°C.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Explore high supersaturation growth through the use of a levitation diffusion
chamber and capillary diffusion chamber. This would result in a measure of
growth rates that result from branching and hollowing of ice as it
forms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Measure the rate of facet development on the
surface of frozen water droplets using a new growth
chamber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.