* 2128895
* FW-HTF-R/Collaborative Research: Human-Robot Sensory Transfer for Worker Productivity, Training, and Quality of Life in Remote Undersea Inspection and Construction Tasks
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Kent Crippen, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,473,425.00

This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF): Core Research
project will create a novel interface for remote operation of undersea robots
and customize it to the needs of offshore industries and workers. The novel
interface integrates robot sensor readings and high-speed predictive simulations
of hydrodynamic forces to create an immersive mixed reality (MR) display. In
addition to augmented video images of the robot's surroundings, the interface
converts measurements of water flow rates, hydrostatic pressure, ambient
temperature, and other variables into tactile sensations for the operator.
Likewise, the interface will render natural movements of the operator's body
into control commands to the robot. The goal is human-robot "sensory transfer,"
that is, seamless translation of perceptions and actions between the operator
and the robot. The goal of this project is to develop and match the capabilities
of the interface to industry and worker needs. One anticipated benefit is to
reduce the extensive training currently required for operators, thereby
increasing access to these jobs while reducing industry training expenses and
downtime due to personnel shortages. The project will study the most effective
way to improve worker performance, safety, and quality of life, and by requiring
a diverse set of subjects, will show how such human-robot interfaces can expand
economic opportunity to broad sections of society. The interface can also be
used in a purely virtual mode as a training tool. The project will examine the
use of this capability to recruit workers from adjacent fields, such as
construction. Offshore applications that would directly benefit from this
project include subsea infrastructure inspection, geological surveys, marine
habitat monitoring, pollution assessments, ship-hull inspections, unexploded
ordnance surveys, contraband detection, aquaculture monitoring, search and
rescue, and archaeological exploration and surveys. An increase in extreme
weather and rising sea levels will place increasing demands on offshore
operations to protect and repair coastal damage. Similarly offshore sustainable
energy infrastructure such as wind, wave, or tidal generators will increase the
demand for undersea inspection, construction, and
maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reconceptualize future
subsea industry by advancing knowledge of underwater Human-Robot Interaction
(HRI) in under-explored subsea workplaces, illuminating socioeconomic features
and adult-learning needs of workforce transformation to subsea industry, and
establishing academia-industry-government partnerships for improving
performance, safety, and societal outcomes of subsea works. Novel human-robot
sensory transfer methods are suggested for reliability against conditions unique
to subsea. These methods will support fast and accurate reconstruction of subsea
workplaces. MR will be used to generate human-perceivable simulation of remote
subsea workplaces in real time based on feedback from a novel robotic sensing
and data transmission system. Motion capture will be created for easier
navigation of remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). This research will establish
new knowledge on motivational and educational determinants of introducing easy-
to-use collaborative ROVs as part of a transformative workforce for future
subsea robot operations, through extensive participation from industrial
partners. The assessment will integrate techniques from psychometric and
behavioral sciences as well as engineering and human factors. The work will also
pioneer the development of a future subsea job framework for integration of ROVs
into a participatory delivery of core subsea services. The economic benefits of
robotic adoption will be estimated based on demand projection and elasticity
estimation. This research will transform the frontiers of human-technology
partnership in the context of the future subsea industry, reposition workforce
threatened by automation in other domains, enhance future workersâ€™ safety and
well-being, and improve subsea operation performance, thus enhancing the long-
term sustainable ocean exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.