* 2128948
* FW-HTF-P: Inspector Assistant Robot for Future Construction Progress Monitoring
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kaveh Akbari Hamed, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This convergent research employs the joint perspectives of construction
engineering, human factors psychology, and robot control and autonomy to advance
the fundamental understanding of future construction progress monitoring work.
Nearly $1.3 trillion worth of structures are constructed each year in the U.S.,
while more than 53% of typical construction projects are behind schedule, and
more than 66% suffer from cost overruns. Construction progress monitoring
incorporates a set of regular inspections of construction work to prevent
schedule delays and unpredicted costs or rework. But currently, construction
progress monitoring is a manual process with repetitive in-person visual
inspections of construction work that has resulted in inconsistent, time-
consuming, labor-intensive, and error-prone inspection. The main goal of this
research is to provide a deeper basic understanding of the human-technology
partnership in future progress monitoring work by enabling human inspectors to
use their assistant legged robots with high mobility and agility capabilities to
help them with performing progress monitoring tasks in dynamically changing job
sites. This project will create new knowledge of future work with human-robot
inspector teams that can also be applied to future inspection in other domains.
Findings from this research can transform future construction by creating new
career opportunities that will be inclusive of individuals with disabilities.
The project will also provide opportunities for education and outreach plans for
middle-school and high school students. Partnerships with industry stakeholders
will specifically guide discovering potential social and economic consequences
of the human-robot inspector teams in future construction
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to (i) develop autonomous and
resilient quadrupedal robots that can traverse dynamically changing and
unstructured construction environments for monitoring construction progress in
human-robot inspector team performance, (ii) develop a conceptual framework for
human-in-the-loop and human-robot teaming in future construction progress
monitoring leveraging aspects of psychology, human-centered design, and
usability engineering, and (iii) rethink the future of construction progress
monitoring work within a socio-technical evolution through fostering engagement
with industry stakeholders. This research creates new knowledge in (a) designing
intelligent control and motion planning algorithms that enable safe and agile
cooperative tasks of quadrupedal robots and human inspectors in unstructured
environments of construction sites, (b) identifying human-centered design
strategies in construction progress monitoring utilizing methodologies of human
factors psychology for effective human-robot inspector teaming, and (c)
understanding the fundamental transformation that the future of construction
progress monitoring will encounter in transitioning from manual processes to
human-robot inspector teaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.