* 2128166
* Transitions to Excellence: Structural Cell Biology of Kinesin Motor Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Claire Walczak, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 12/31/2024
* USD 748,343.00

Nearly all cells in our bodies contain miniaturized cellular highways, known as
the microtubule cytoskeleton, that are used as tracks for transport of material
inside cells. These structures also help drive cell movement and form the
machinery necessary to segregate the genetic material during cell division.
Unlike the rigid cement foundation of a roadway, cellular highways are unique in
that they are rigid enough to support movement of material that is a hundred
times its size, and yet they are dynamic and can be reorganized in a matter of
seconds. This project addresses how cellular motors both move on the cellular
highways and control their reorganization, which will provide fundamental new
insights into cytoskeletal regulation in cells. This project will also have
broader impacts through training and mentoring of both undergraduate students
and high-school students, including URM students from multiple IU sponsored
programs. The study of molecular motor proteins provides an ideal learning tool
for students to literally “see” science in action at the molecular scale in
addition to learning about the scientific process of data collection, analysis
and presentation. In addition, this project will develop a new career mentoring
program for undergraduate students in two IU sponsored research programs to help
students navigate career choices at an earlier stage of college and broaden
their participation in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular motor
proteins that walk along the microtubules are part of families of enzymes,
called kinesins, that share a conserved catalytic domain used to walk along the
microtubule and a non-catalytic tail domain that determines specificity of their
action in cells. This project seeks to elucidate the mechanisms that control the
regulation of tail binding specificity. While cell biological approaches can
uncover where a motor acts, and biochemical approaches can indicate which
proteins it binds to and how tightly, a detailed molecular understanding can
best be achieved through structural studies that will elucidate how different
motor and tail domains are organized along the microtubule lattice. Structural
understanding of the microtubule has been transformed by recent advances in the
field of cryo-electron microscopy. The project will utilize cryo-electron
microscopy to address how motor and non-motor tail domains of a single kinesin
motor interact with the microtubule and will test how a conserved regulator
modulates binding of multiple motor tail domains. In addition, this project will
provide collaborative training in cryo-electron microscopy for a senior level
cell biologist to expand their research program through the implementation of
this powerful technology. These studies will provide new insights into
understanding how microtubule structure impacts both dynamics and transport
properties of molecular motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.