* 2128587
* DMS-EPSRC Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics of Fluctuating Populations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Uwe Tauber, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

A fundamental scientific puzzle is understanding the origin of diversity and the
evolution of cooperation, which can be understood through understanding the
stability of populations composed of competing species. It directly addresses
deep societal concerns, such as the maintenance of endangered ecologies, the
effective prevention of the loss of biodiversity, and stemming the rise of
antimicrobial resistance. To this end, one must address the coupled eco-
evolutionary dynamics of fluctuating populations, namely the interdependence and
combined effects of (i) random internal variability in population numbers,
composition, and each species’ traits and (ii) sudden, gradual, or repetitive
external changes in environmental conditions on the evolution of an ecological
system. This transdisciplinary research is situated at the interface of biology,
mathematics, physics, statistics, and computer science and will combine a set of
advanced theoretical and mathematical tools from these fields that so far have
rarely been utilized together. It will be pursued in an international
collaboration, funded jointly through National Science Foundation – Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the U.K. Engineering and Physical Sciences Research
Council, and provide advanced training for a postdoctoral research fellow at the
University of Leeds and a graduate student at Virginia Tech. Conceptual and
technical advances in the basic understanding of complex interacting systems in
general, and specifically of spontaneous pattern formation under the combined
influence of intrinsic noise and environmental variability, are anticipated, and
will be disseminated to the scientific community at tailored workshops to be
organized alternatingly at Leeds, U.K. and Blacksburg,
Virginia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While population dynamics traditionally ignores
fluctuations and considers static and homogeneous environments, demographic
noise arising from randomly occurring birth or death events as well as external
environmental variations play a crucial role in understanding the eco-
evolutionary dynamics of a population in time. The interdependence of external
environmental variability and internal demographic noise is poorly understood to
date, but it is of eminent importance, for example in microbial communities,
which are often subject to sudden and extreme environmental changes. In
particular, modelling populations of varying size and composition subject to
changing external factors is crucial to gain a full understanding of the
evolution of microbial antibiotic resistance. Standard theoretical techniques,
like mean-field approximations or system-size expansions cannot be
straightforwardly used, and new mathematical approaches are needed. A suite of
novel theoretical methods, based on and combining evolutionary and nonlinear
dynamics, deterministic and stochastic partial differential equations, agent-
based computer simulations, and tools from non-equilibrium statistical physics
such as dynamical scaling theory, renormalization group approaches to critical
phenomena, and mathematical representations of stochastic kinetics in terms of
continuum field theories, will be developed. The goal is to design and
quantitatively characterize biologically relevant evolutionary models of
increasing levels of complexity, which incorporate both switching environmental
features and fully account for the underlying stochasticity. These theoretical
advances will be utilized to generate directly testable predictions for
laboratory experiments to further explore how demographic noise and
environmental variability conjointly influence the emergence of collective
features and affect species coexistence and their organization into spatial
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the MPS
Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program
and the LS-BioTech Venture Fund, and the Division of Materials Research (DMR)
through the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.