* 2128092
* Collaborative Research: Ecological legacy effects of megacarcasses in African savanna ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Joshua Schimel, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 09/30/2024
* USD 536,523.00

Large animals such as elephants and rhinoceros, called ‘megafauna’ for their
extreme size, have outsized impacts on the ecosystems they live in. They
engineer their environments by knocking down trees and grazing grasses to create
large lawns, helping to form habitats that facilitate other animals. But, there
is little research that addresses the impact that the carcasses of these
megafauna, or ‘megacarcasses’, have on ecosystems after they die. Their
carcasses represent huge sources of nutrients that have a long-lasting
ecological legacy on the areas of ecosystems where their carcasses occur. For
example, African elephants are the largest land animals, but almost nothing is
known about how the nutrients from their massive carcasses (up to 6,000 kg)
affect savanna ecosystems. This award asks the main question: How do elephant
megacarcasses affect the ecology of African savannas? The work will address how
these megacarcasses affect nutrient cycling in the soil by microbes, plant
primary production and species diversity, and herbivory by vertebrate
herbivores, such as zebra and giraffe, and invertebrate herbivores, such as
grasshoppers. This research will support the mentoring of 1 postdoctoral
scholar, graduate and undergraduate students in ecology as well as science
communication and outreach. The main broader impact will be the production of a
scientific documentary, The Legacy of Megaherbivores, which will ‘follow’ the
life and death of an elephant in the African savanna, that will put the life
cycle of these elephants into broader ecological context, understanding how they
impact ecosystems and the current implications for ecosystems facing their
disappearance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the overarching question, the
award will use elephant carcasses of different ages (up to 15+ years old) in
Kruger National Park (KNP), South Africa. Combining soil (physical, chemical and
biological properties), plant (productivity and diversity), and herbivore
(vertebrate and invertebrate) surveys at 50 megacarcass sites along with
greenhouse experiments, the award will assess how nutrient pulses from elephant
carcasses drive integrated responses of ecosystem processes. Importantly, the
elephant megacarcasses are distributed across gradients of rainfall (375-700 mm)
and soil fertility (less-fertile sandy, granitic soils vs. more-fertile clayey,
basaltic soils) in KNP. These gradients of rainfall and soil nutrients provide a
robust experimental framework for testing how the abiotic environment impacts
the ecosystem-level legacy effects of terrestrial megacarcasses. Finally, by
combining the data from the field on the effects of megacarcasses on ecosystem
processes with a database of elephant population across KNP, the researchers
will use ecological modeling to show how the distribution of megacarcasses
generates variability in ecosystem processes across the savanna landscape as
elephants naturally die over time. This study will represent the first
examination of the ecological legacies of megacarcasses on terrestrial
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.