* 2128546
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the contributions of nonlinearities in musculotendon properties to enabling locomotion in unpredictable environments.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Craig McGowan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 03/31/2025
* USD 333,961.00

For animals that locomote on uneven and diverse terrains, the ability to
negotiate obstacles that can impede their forward progression and can cause
instability is critical to survival. In many cases, the musculoskeletal system
handles these obstacles by itself, independent of control by the nervous system,
but the exact mechanisms by which this occurs are not thoroughly understood. The
overall objective of this proposal is to elucidate how specific features within
the musculoskeletal system achieve the appropriate locomotor behaviors without
needing reflex interventions from the nervous system. To achieve this objective,
the researchers will study bipedal hopping by kangaroo rats within the context
of abrupt changes in slope that can disrupt forward velocity and/or cause
unwanted rotational pitch of the body. Novel experiments using a specially
designed rotational treadmill will make it possible to expose kangaroo rats to
controlled perturbations that mimic ecologically relevant obstacles. The
conceptual framework of the studies is that the components of the
musculoskeletal system represent an embedded intelligence that can ease the
computational burden of centralized controllers for complex dynamic systems. We
advance this idea by investigating specific examples in which specialized
properties link functional demands, conditional properties, and system state.
Translation of the findings can solve long-standing challenges for robots moving
stably over variable terrains. Furthermore, the project will involve local high
school teachers, who will develop, test, implement, and assess teaching modules
based upon the ongoing research to encourage pre-college students to appreciate
how the study of basic biology and engineering applications are complementary.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to elucidate how
nonlinearities within the musculoskeletal system express contextually
appropriate system properties to achieve desired motor function without needing
neural feedback. The approach is to study bipedal hopping by kangaroo rats with
abrupt changes in slope that can disrupt forward velocity and/or cause unwanted
pitch. More specifically, the research will examine how the actions of ankle
extensors are coupled to the mechanics of the feet, and how this coupling is
modulated by the nonlinear features of tendon. This coupling is hypothesized to
provide the functional benefit of automatically making the foot compliant upon
landing to mediate perturbations and then stiff at takeoff to enable propulsion.
To test this hypothesis, the research team will use an integrated framework of
in vivo, in situ, and in silico methods to obtain behavioral data, test
mechanistic hypotheses, and manipulate component properties, respectively. A
novel custom-designed rotational treadmill will make it possible to have
controlled perturbations that mimic ecologically relevant obstacles. More
generally, nonlinearities expressed by a system’s components can expand a
system’s range of operating conditions and contexts. The findings will provide
guidance for the design of nonlinearities, namely, their type and
parameterization, so that the nonlinearities will be advantageous for achieving
function while interacting with unpredictable environments. By collaborating
with local high school teachers, the PIs will build a network of STEM teachers
who will develop, test, implement, and assess teaching modules based upon the
research. In addition, the project will provide interdisciplinary research
training and mentoring for two graduate students and one postdoctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.