* 2128224
* IntBIO: Collaborative Research: Integrating molecular, cellular, organismal and community scales to understand how plants structure pollinator-pathogen dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Shalene Jha, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2026
* USD 256,890.00

Pollinators are critical for plant reproduction and human food security, but
many pollinator species are declining due to stressors, including pathogens. The
recent discoveries that sunflower pollen dramatically reduces infection by a
common gut pathogen in bumble bees, and that flower species differ in how they
affect pathogen transmission raises two key questions that will be addressed by
this research: How do plant species affect disease dynamics in their
pollinators, and what are the mechanisms responsible for those effects? The
project work involves a new collaboration between a molecular biologist,
ecologists, and a mathematical modeler. The work will combine molecular and
ecological studies to understand how pollen shapes infection and to assess how
pathogens are transmitted at flowers. The project will also partner with land
managers creating new pollinator habitats to model and test how floral resources
affect pollinator health. The project will conduct extensive public outreach,
develop an after-school curriculum for middle-school students from an
underserved community, and train graduate students in inclusive teaching
practices. Taken together, this work will build bridges between disciplines to
understand how flowers affect pollinator health and will train a new diverse
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Food resources are key factors
mediating host-pathogen dynamics, but they may have opposing effects at
different biological levels of organization. For example, resource quality or
quantity could stimulate the host immune system and reduce infection at the
organismal level, yet increase host densities and contact rates at the community
level, exacerbating pathogen spread. This research will integrate experiments to
determine the impacts of resource quality and quantity on host-pathogen dynamics
at the molecular, cellular, organismal, species interactions, and community
levels using a highly tractable laboratory and field system of bees and a
trypanosomatid pathogen that is transmitted via shared floral resources. Using
25 plant species, studies will assess effects of pollen diets on pathogen
molecular and cellular processes in vitro, infection dynamics in vivo,
likelihood of transmission during foraging, and visitation networks and
pollinator population dynamics in the field. Plants to be targeted include the
species from the Asteraceae, one of the most ubiquitous vascular plant families,
because recent research shows that pollen from this family consistently reduces
infection in bumble bees. Data from all objectives will be integrated using
mathematical modeling that connects processes at multiple scales to predict how
plant community composition shapes pathogen infection in pollinators. The
project will provide equitable STEM pedagogy training for graduate students
while creating middle school science programming in under-served communities,
collaborating with a STEM educator focused on equitability to maximize
effectiveness. Engagement with multiple groups creating pollinator habitat will
provide an ideal platform for fostering communication between scientists and
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.