* 2128240
* Characterizing and controlling optical and vibrational dynamics of single-photon emitting defects in hexagonal boron nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Joshua Caldwell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Nontechnical Description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasensitive quantum sensors
and unbreakable quantum cryptography technologies use single photons (particles
of light) or pairs of photons to detect, encode, transmit and retrieve quantum
information. Hence materials in which single photons can be generated and
manipulated on demand are essential to deploying user-friendly quantum
technologies. This project focuses on finding, characterizing and manipulating
single-photon emitters in hexagonal boron nitride (hBN). Ensembles of single-
photon emitters are known to exist in hBN, and they are extremely bright and
stable at room temperature. Crystal vibrations will be manipulated in this
project to improve the color purity of the single-photon emitters. This take
advantage of the fact that crystal vibrations of hBN couple to the photon
emitters at room temperature just as light and sound are coupled through the
photoacoustic effect discovered by Alexander Graham Bell. Success in this
project will have a transformative impact on quantum-device technologies because
hBN emitters can be packaged in an on-chip format that is compatible with
microelectronics and fiber-optic communications. The project will train students
in quantum information sciences through a multi-disciplinary approach that
connects optics, materials and computational science. Established outreach
programs at Vanderbiltâ€™s Center for Science Outreach and Center for Teaching
will prepare the project team to visit middle- and high-school classes in
Nashville city schools and underserved neighboring counties, to inspire and
encourage future study and work in quantum science and technology. A diverse,
inclusive research team will be built in partnership with the decades-old
Bridge-to-Ph.D. program connecting students from Historically Black Fisk
University to Vanderbilt research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable quantum technologies based on light
require well-characterized, controllable solid-state, single-photon emitters
that can be manipulated and entangled on demand. Ensembles of crystal defects in
hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) host single-photon emitters with a constellation
of useful properties: ultra-high brightness, narrow linewidth, and
photostability at room temperature, and hyperbolic phonon polaritons with an
exceptionally large photon density of states in the mid-infrared are also
supported in hBN. However, the large spectral mismatch between quantum-emitter
frequencies (visible vs near-infrared) and hyperbolic-polariton and phonon
frequencies (mid-infrared) makes it difficult to exploit all of these desirable
properties simultaneously. This project will capitalize on the high phonon
density of states in hBN to control single-photon emission and increase spectral
purity by anti-Stokes pumping of phonon sidebands. Spectrally and temporally
resolved near-field spectroscopy and microscopy will be deployed to identify and
characterize individual single-photon emitters in mono- and few-layer hBN flakes
by photoluminescence, nano Fourier-transform infrared spectrometry and photon-
correlation studies; determine electronic properties of emitting states and the
vibrational interactions that couple to them using nano-optical scanning probe
microscopy in the mid-infrared; demonstrate active control of emitter lifetime
and frequency by locally varying the dielectric environment of the emitter by
pumping anti-Stokes photon modes; and explore the effects of phonon-emitter
coupling and local strain on spectral purity and photon entanglement between two
emitters on the same hBN flake. By characterizing individual single-quantum
emitters in hBN and demonstrating controlled entanglement, the project opens a
transformative path to planar, room-temperature devices for quantum
cryptography, computation and sensing in a form factor intrinsically adaptable
to on-chip geometries and optical-fiber coupling. These experiments will resolve
long-standing uncertainties about the physical properties of the defect-based
single-photon emitters in hBN, enabling a deeper understanding of the physical
mechanisms underlying emission and entanglement. Controlling photon purity
through the anti-Stokes mechanism and controlled strain gradients in single
flakes of hBN may also enhance the stability of photon entanglement by
separating the strain mechanism and electron-phonon coupling from the electronic
process of single-quantum emission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.