* 2128821
* New class of DNA-templated near-infrared voltage-reporter for deep-brain imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Parag Chitnis, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2024
* USD 498,166.00

Transmission of voltage spikes plays a major role in cell-to-cell communication
in the brain. These communications determine the neural underpinnings of
behavior, memory, sensory input, and motor function as well as play a role in
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease. While
tremendous progress has been made in optical imaging of voltage activity in
rodents to better understand cellular signaling in the brain, these techniques
are limited to microscopic fields of view, and often necessitate invasive
methods to gain access to the region of interest deep in the brain. Since near-
infrared (NIR) light penetrates much deeper into biological tissue than visible
light, imaging methods that use NIR light offer opportunities to noninvasively
image deeper structures in the brain. This project will develop novel DNA-based
nanoparticles that can be precisely combined with dyes that change their color
spectrum in the NIR range in response to changes in the voltage of neuronal cell
membranes. These nanoparticle probes will be used to image voltage spikes in a
living brain-on-chip model. The tools developed can facilitate future clinically
relevant studies that use small-animal models to examine the role of functional
connectivity and neurovascular coupling in neurogenerative diseases. The
research will be integrated with the educational mission of the Bioengineering
department and the Center for Adaptive Systems of Brain-body Interactions
(CASBBI) at George Mason University through curriculum offerings in the
Neurotechnology and Computational Neuroscience concentration and by supporting
training of graduate students participating in the CASBBI NSF Research
Traineeship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoacoustic imaging (PAI) relies on
wavelength-specific absorption of light by reporter molecules and subsequent
thermoelastic generation of ultrasound pulses that are not as susceptible to
scattering in tissue as light. Although PAI is a well-established technique for
imaging hemodynamics in rodent brains, a lack of NIR photoacoustic voltage
reporters hinders its utility for directly mapping neuronal signaling. The
proposed work uses DNA nanotechnology to produce probes that comprise of
targeted DNA NPs with tethered ICG dye, which is an FDA-approved voltage-sensing
dye. These DNA-integrated voltage indicating nanoparticle (DIVIN) probes offer
several advantages: 1) NIR excitation: NIR light penetrates deeper in the brain
than visible light; 2) Precision nano-engineering: pre-determined organization
of dye molecules for high local concentration and photostability; and 3) Cell-
specific labeling: DNA NPs can be conjugated with targeting moieties to enable
cell-specific targeting of DIVIN-probes, which are small
enough.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.