* 2128479
* Enhancing Teacher and Student Understanding of Engineering in K-5 Bilingual Programs
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Idalis Villanueva, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Joan Walker
* 05/31/2023
* USD 313,342.00

Engineering is part of everyone's local community and daily activities yet
opportunities to learn about engineering are often absent from elementary school
classrooms. Further, little is known about how teachers' and students'
conceptions of engineering relate to aspects of their local community such as
language and culture. Knowing more about this is important because students'
perceptions of mismatch between their personal culture and the engineering field
contributes to the continued underrepresentation of minorities in the
profession. This mixed-method exploratory study will examine how bilingual
teachers working in elementary schools in Massachusetts and Puerto Rico
understand the role and skills of engineers in society. In turn, it will examine
how teachers adapt existing engineering lessons so that those activities and
concepts are more culturally and linguistically accessible to their students.
This project is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12), which
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the
aims of the DRK-12 program, this project will advance understanding of how
engineering education materials can be adapted to the characteristics of
teachers, students, and the communities that they reside in. Further, its focus
on bilingual classrooms will bring new perspectives to characterizations of the
engineering field and its role in different cultures and societies. Over a
three-year period, the team will investigate these issues by collecting data
from 24 teachers (12 from each location). Data will be collected via surveys,
interviews, discussion of instructional examples, videos of teachers' classroom
instruction and analysis of artifacts such as teachers' lesson plans. Teachers
will collaborate and function as a professional co-learning community called
instructional rounds by participating and providing feedback synchronously in
face-to-face settings and via the use of digital apps. Project findings can lead
to teaching guidelines, practices, and briefs that inform efforts to
successfully integrate bilingual engineering curriculum at the elementary
grades. This work also has the potential to create professional development
models of success for K-5 teachers in bilingual programs and enhance engineering
teaching strategies and methods at these early grade
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.