* 2128164
* EDGE CMT: Origin and diversification of butterfly color patterns
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Robert Reed, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,240,000.00

When we look across the diversity of life, we see many complex traits that are
unique to certain groups of organisms. Feathers in birds, hair in mammals, and
flowers in angiosperms, for example. It is a major question in biology how these
kinds of novel traits first appear. What is the genetic basis of newness? Recent
work across many species has shown that novel traits such as these are largely
generated by old genes that have been repurposed for new roles. Novelty appears
to emerge through a reshuffling of older genetic building blocks, which are
proposed to be ancient subnetworks of interacting genes. But where do these gene
networks come from in the first place? And how are they rewired to generate
complex new traits? With this funding, Reed and colleagues are beginning to
address these questions by looking at the origin of color in butterflies. They
are characterizing the gene networks that underlie color pigmentation in
butterflies, and they are determining how specific genetic changes caused these
networks to be repurposed from ancestral roles in processes such as neural
development, to make butterfly wing patterns. This work serves as a case study
to help biologists understand the developmental genetic mechanisms that underlie
the genesis and diversification of complex biological traits. The project also
includes training in biology research skills of graduate and undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds, the development and dissemination of
instructional videos for genomic methods, and the establishment of a web-based
resource for functional genomics in butterflies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A core
concept in modern biology is that novel morphological traits originate from gene
regulatory networks that predate the traits themselves. Surprisingly, however,
little is known about the specific genetic mechanisms that underlie the origin
and repurposing of such gene networks. With this funding, Reed and colleagues
develop the regulatory network encompassing the butterfly color pattern gene
optix into a model for exploring the regulatory architecture of trait
diversification. optix is a homeobox transcription factor that plays a deeply
ancestral role in neural and retinal development in both invertebrates and
vertebrates. In butterflies, however, this gene underwent a radical co-option
event where it gained a novel function as a master regulator of wing
pigmentation, including playing key roles in adaptation and mimicry. Thus, the
researchers have a situation in Lepidoptera where they can pinpoint the
phylogenetic timing of a major optix co-option and repurposing event, where this
gene appeared as a de novo regulator of color patterns. Reed and colleagues are
leveraging this opportunity to take a multi-species comparative approach to
characterize the history of the optix regulatory network as it gained its novel
adaptive function in color pattern regulation. Using optix as the focal point,
they are characterizing the cis-, upstream, and downstream regulatory dynamics
of regulatory co-option, and construct a comprehensive case study of how a new
gene regulatory network can emerge from the genome to generate new morphological
features â€“ in this case, color itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.