* 2128945
* Gate-tunable spin devices based on Spin-orbitronic Engineering in Two-Dimensional Metal Monochalcogenides.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Marc Bockrath, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 405,000.00

Electrons have an intrinsic spin, making them behave like tiny bar magnets.
Spintronics, the control and manipulation of electron spin in a material, has
led to multibillion dollar applications such as magnetic hard drives and
magnetic random access memory. In many materials, electronsâ€™ spin and spatial
motion are linked, and such spin-orbit coupling has led to a variety of
spintronic and quantum information applications. Though conventionally the spin-
orbit coupling strength is fixed for each material, it is highly tunable in two-
dimensional materials that are only a few atomic layers in thickness. This
research program takes advantage of this tunable spin-orbit coupling to create
two-dimensional material spin devices, including tunable transistors that
convert spin currents to charge currents, and transistors enabling long-distance
spin transport. This research will be integrated with education and training of
graduate and undergraduate students for next generation of STEM task force. In
addition, attention will be placed in recruiting, training, and mentoring
students from under-represented groups by leveraging existing university
programs, including REU, High School Tutoring and Mentoring Program in the
Department of Physics, Minority Masters to PhD Bridge, and POLARIS programs, for
preparing careers in academia, government and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional materials offer new platforms for
spin-orbitronic phenomena, devices, and applications with unprecedented
tunability. This research program develops electrically controlled and tunable
spin-orbitronic applications, using high mobility few-layer InSe that hosts
large tunable spin-orbit coupling. Specifically, the thrusts include (1).
demonstrating tunable spin-charge interconversion via spin Hall and Edelstein
effects and their Onsager reciprocals, and with reversible spin-polarization;
(2). realizing a spin helix state for long-ranged spin transport; and (3).
exploring spin and charge transport in the presence of periodic 2D spin-orbit
lattices that could produce topologically non-trivial magnetic textures. These
projects fundamentally advance spin-orbitronic engineering in van der Waals
heterostructures, which can be utilized towards spintronic and topological
devices that are tunable in operando.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.