* 2128416
* FW-HTF-P Understanding Gig Work and its Effects on Wellbeing over the Life Course in the United States: A Machine Learning Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Joelle Abramowitz, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project promotes the progress of science by providing a better
understanding of the nature of gig work generally and electronic-platform-
mediated gig work, in particular, and how this work affects the wellbeing of
workers. The gig economy is of particular interest as new technologies
facilitate such work more efficiently than ever before and are likely to only
increase in the future. Moreover, understanding such work arrangements is
crucial for fully informing policies regulating electronically-mediated gig
work. However, such work arrangements are particularly hard to measure, and in
turn, study, as they may not be primary employment, may not be captured in tax
data or administrative records, and may not be accurately reported in standard
survey questions on work. This project will overcome such deficiencies by
employing a convergence of economics- and information-science-based approaches
to create a new data source to study gig work arrangements and develop a plan
for sustained future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use hand
coding in conjunction with machine learning methods to leverage existing, but
not published, survey data on narrative responses on industry and occupation, as
well as employer names, in the 1996-2021 Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).
Such an effort will enable the production of a longitudinal dataset extending
back over 25 years and use the dataset to begin to examine how the nature of gig
work has changed with the introduction of electronic platforms and how those
changes have affected individuals' wellbeing. The resulting dataset will be made
available publicly and in a secure virtual restricted data enclave. The effort
will inform the evaluation of the new gig work questions included in the 2021
PSID and aid in the development of new survey questions in ongoing data
collection, on the PSID and beyond, to better understand the changing nature of
work. The resulting dataset will be made available publicly and in a secure
virtual restricted data enclave. It will be used to initiate and plan continuing
research investigating the effects of electronically-mediated gig work on
wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.