* 2128822
* Community Facility Support:  Northeast National Ion Microprobe Facility (NENIMF): 2021-2024
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Brian Monteleone, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,085,414.00

Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) is a powerful micro-analytical technique
for determining the elemental and isotopic compositions of solid materials that
has broad applications to earth, ocean, and planetary sciences. This grant
supports the continued operation of the Northeast National Ion Microprobe
Facility (NENIMF) as a National SIMS Facility serving the geoscience community.
The principal strengths of SIMS relative to other micro-analytical techniques
are its high spatial resolution and the capability for high-precision
measurements of both concentration and isotopic composition of light elements
such as hydrogen, lithium, boron, carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen. The analytical
capabilities and expertise of the NENIMF are focused in two areas: determination
of magmatic volatiles in silicate glasses and analysis of biogenic carbonates as
records of climate change and its impacts on marine organisms, making the NENIMF
a unique interdisciplinary resource for the geosciences community to investigate
such societally relevant issues as volcanic hazards and climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NENIMF is equipped with two Cameca SIMS
instruments: an IMS 1280 and an IMS 3f. The IMS 1280 is a double focusing mass
spectrometer with a large radius magnetic sector (585 mm), and ion optics
optimized to attain a mass resolving power of 6,000 without significant loss of
secondary ion intensity. The IMS 3f is a double focusing mass spectrometer with
a small radius magnetic sector that has been used for a wide spectrum of
geochemical studies. The combination of these two instruments and the technical
and scientific expertise of the NENIMF provides the geoscience community with a
unique resource, that has minimal overlap with the other National SIMS
Facilities. In addition to our areas of specialization, NENIMF users have taken
advantage of the Cameca IMS 1280 to work on a range of topics that include B
isotopes in MORB glasses and subduction zone minerals, Zr in rutile
geospeedometry, Ti diffusion in quartz, and U-Th-Pb dating of monazite and
zircon. New analytical protocols developed at the NENIMF over the past few years
include measuring H2O concentration and D/H in dacite and rhyolite glasses,
analysis of hydrogen and halogens in nominally anhydrous minerals, analysis of
bromine and nitrogen in volcanic glasses, and analysis of trace metals in
sulfide minerals from hydrothermal vents. Support for the NENIMF meets the NSF
Broader Impacts criteria in several different ways. Discovery and understanding
are advanced while promoting teaching, training, and learning and participation
of underrepresented groups is broadened through the involvement of
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs. WHOIâ€™s Undergraduate Summer
Student Fellows, Postdoctoral Scholars, and WHOI/MIT Joint Program graduate
students are specifically targeted for involvement in research projects with
NENIMF personnel and WHOI faculty in which they are intimately involved with
SIMS techniques. Involvement of young scientists in SIMS-based research is
encouraged through workshops and short-courses. Infrastructure for research and
education are enhanced through making both our existing analytical platforms,
and those to be developed by the NENIMF personnel during the funding period,
available to scientists and students from diverse disciplines. Research results
are disseminated broadly to enhance scientific and technological understanding
through an average of 14 publications per year that result from use of the
facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.