* 2128391
* Travel Grant for North American Power Symposium (NAPS) 2021 Attendees; The 53rd  NAPS will be held at Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, Texas, on November, 14-16, 2021
* ENG,ECCS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Katherine Davis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 10/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This travel grant will be used for offsetting the cost of attendees
participating at the 53rd North American Power Symposium (NAPS) 2021. NAPS is a
student-centric conference bringing together students, faculty, researchers, and
industry in the power and energy systems area since its inception in 1969. The
purpose of this symposium is to provide a forum for students, faculty, and
industrial representatives to discuss research ideas for next-generation power
grid technology, and present their research outcomes. The 53rd NAPS will be held
at Texas A&amp;M University, College Station, Texas, on November, 14-16, 2021.
The travel funding for NAPS will support students and early career faculty.
Accepted paper and paper presentation will be a pre-requisite to be considered
for the travel award. The expected number of awardees is at least 32 to be
reimbursed for their travel expenses. Students will compete for Best Paper Award
and for a Best Participant Award. In addition to the technical discussions, they
will have further social interactions with other attendees. The awardees may
also attend the pre-conference tour visiting the Washington on the Brazos, and
the post-conference tour at the Smart Grids Control Room Lab located at the
Center for Infrastructure Renewal (CIR) at RELLIS campus of Texas A&amp;M
University System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The travel funding for NAPS 2021 will
enhance the awareness and technical preparedness of students in the area of
smart grids. The power engineering community will benefit from this support by
receiving an opportunity for presenting and discussing high-quality technical
papers and stimulating cutting-edge interactions with industry representatives.
Students and early career faculty from minority groups will also be encouraged
to apply for this travel grant to be able to participate in this
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.