* 2128187
* CNS Core: Small: Secured Spectrum Allocation and Patrolling in Shared Spectrum Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Himanshu Gupta, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 414,943.00

The RF spectrum is a natural resource in great demand and a tremendous economic
driver. Shared spectrum systems, which facilitate spectrum allocation to
unlicensed users without harming the licensed users, offer great promise in
optimizing spectrum utility. However, spectrum management in such systems is
challenging mainly due to the lack of knowledge of signal propagation
characteristics in the geographic areas. Thus, spectrum allocation in such
systems is either done very conservatively or is based on imperfect models.
Efficient spectrum utilization also depends on the ability to guard against
unauthorized usage attacks; however, the current techniques are limited. The
goal of this project is to develop effective spectrum management techniques by
leveraging a large number of spectrum sensors in a crowdsensed architecture. In
general, improved spectrum efficiency could impact many diverse fields such as
IoT, education, cyber-physical systems security, healthcare, media and
entertainment, which have tremendous future spectrum needs and innovation is
perhaps halted due to lack of enough bandwidth. Thus, improved spectrum
utilization via efficient allocation and patrolling is bound to yield
significant economic benefits. This project is expected to provide technology
inputs for industry and inform regulators about best practices and
tradeoffs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop efficient and secured
techniques for spectrum allocation and patrolling, for a shared spectrum system,
by leveraging a large number of crowdsourced spectrum sensors. The projectâ€™s
focus will be on using deep-learning techniques to obviate the need to assume a
propagation model. The project has the following research themes: 1. Spectrum
Allocation. The project will develop efficient supervised learning techniques to
learn the spectrum allocation function, in general settings. 2. Privacy
Preserving Spectrum Management Protocols. To maximize participation in a
crowdsourced sensing model, it is imperative to preserve privacy of the entities
involved in the spectrum management. Thus, the project will develop efficient
cryptographic protocols that provide privacy to all system entities. 3. Spectrum
Patrolling. Preventing unauthorized access of the shared spectrum is key to
improved spectrum utilization. Thus, the project will develop efficient
techniques to protect the spectrum from unauthorized access, by developing
effective deep learning approaches to localize intruders. 4. Evaluation. The
project will evaluate the overall system, over three simulation platforms
including: (i) small indoor and outdoor testbeds, and (ii) a simulation platform
that will use channel-state data gathered by drones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.