* 2128304
* EDGE CMT: Evolutionary developmental systems genetics of obligate sterility in ants
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Timothy Linksvayer, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,100,000.00

A major goal of Biology is to understand the links between genomes and
development and how evolution has tinkered with these mechanisms to produce the
diversity of life. Ants provide powerful study systems for exploring these and
related topics because they show striking diversity within and between species.
A defining feature of ant societies is the presence of a reproductive caste
system where some individuals called queens specialize on reproduction and other
individuals called workers specialize on other tasks. In most species, workers
possess reduced reproductive organs and are capable of reproduction under
certain circumstances (e.g., queen death), but in other species, workers
completely lack reproductive organs. Such obligate worker sterility has evolved
at least 14 times across ants, yet little is known about the molecular
mechanisms regulating the expression of this obligate sterility or whether the
mechanisms are the same across each of the independent origins of sterility. The
overall goal of this research is to elucidate the mechanisms underlying the
expression and evolution of obligate sterility in ants and to further validate
the effects of genes influencing the development of sterility in fruit flies.
Our research may provide novel insight into conserved genetic pathways
regulating animal reproduction and reproductive health. Further broader impacts
of the research will be training students and researchers in approaches to study
the genetic basis and evolution of development, working to improve public
understanding of evolution and development, and working to increase student
participation in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major goal of Biology is to
understand the mechanisms linking genomes to phenotypes and how evolution
generates and tinkers with these regulatory mechanisms to produce the diversity
of life. One striking phenotype is the presence of an obligately sterile worker
caste in social insects, which has evolved at least 14 times in ants, yet little
is known about the underlying regulatory networks and whether this convergent
phenotypic evolution involves convergent or parallel molecular evolution. The
overall goal of this research is to use an integrative approach to elucidate the
gene regulatory networks underlying the expression and evolution of obligate
sterility in ants. Ants provide a rare opportunity to study how infertility and
sterility evolved within the context of their societies, connecting individual
germline loss to colony-level gain of a sterile worker caste. The germ-soma
distinction within organisms is fundamental to multicellular life, and germline
sequestration is a fundamentally important step in animal development. This
research may contribute to understanding general principles and molecular
pathways associated with animal development and the origin of cell types.
Moreover, the research may provide novel candidate genes and pathways regulating
a range of complex phenotypes associated with reproduction, reproductive health,
to be further studied in model organisms. Further broader impacts of the grant
include training students and postdoctoral researchers in approaches to study
the genetic basis and evolution of development, working to improve public
understanding of evolution and development, and working to increase student
participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.