* 2128419
* CCF: Small: Real-Number Function Encoding Driven Error Resilient Signal Processing and Control: Application to Nonlinear Systems from Adaptive Filters to DNNs
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Abhijit Chatterjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Technology scaling, device integration and high circuit speeds have increased
the risk of errors in digital processors running computing and control
applications. Such errors can jeopardize the operational safety of autonomous
systems employing embedded processors in the field, causing severe loss of
performance, accidents, or damage to life and property. To put this in
perspective, applications such as self-driving cars and drones demand tera-ops
of computation throughput and yet must perform with exacting levels of
reliability and safety. The latter reliability and safety demands must be met
with minimal degrees of hardware and software redundancy without negatively
impacting dependability, power consumption, payload, form factor and cost
considerations that are critical for commercial success. To alleviate relevant
safety threats, this project aims to deploy low-cost and efficient methods for
detecting and mitigating the effects of monitored errors in real time and in the
field as effectively and rapidly as possible. This will enable a paradigm shift
in the way failure-tolerance technologies are applied to autonomous systems
while maintaining their reliability, affordability and cost. The project
integrates research with education involving development of educational
infrastructure for teaching and laboratory work, incorporation of diversity in
student participation, exchanges with industry, technology transfer and
engagement with undergraduate and high-school students, all with the goal of
producing highly qualified trained engineers for the workplace of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, implementing failure tolerance for nonlinear
signal-processing and control algorithms is dependent on some form of
computation duplication. The algorithm-based fault-tolerance techniques of the
past were designed mostly for linear computations and are not directly
applicable to error control in nonlinear computations of modern autonomous
systems. To resolve this, the project is built around the concept of algorithmic
checks that encode nonlinear computations with linearized or nonlinear checking
mechanisms. The checks are created using analytical methods for weakly nonlinear
systems or by machine-learning algorithms for generic nonlinear systems and
enable real-time error detection in switched capacitor circuits, nonlinear
digital filters, adaptive state-estimation filters, nonlinear control algorithms
and deep neural networks. Error correction is performed via state restoration in
which the system state after error detection is restored to a prior fault-free
system state or by using probabilistic error-compensation techniques. The core
techniques can be applied to different aspects of the core computations
performed in embedded computing infrastructure for autonomous systems, namely
perception, intelligence, decision-making and control to make them error-
resilient and trustworthy. The underlying science is enabling the design of
entirely new classes of self-checking reliable autonomous systems that are
beyond the scope of the current state of the art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.