* 2128398
* FW-HTF-R:Collaborative Research: Partnering Workers with Interactive Robot Assistants to Usher Transformation in Future Construction Work
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Olusola Adesope, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tara Behrend
* 12/31/2024
* USD 210,000.00

Construction is a $10 trillion industry that employs about 180 million workers
worldwide. However, the future of construction work is at crossroads. First,
productivity in construction work has been stagnant relative to other industries
(e.g., manufacturing), and the industry has historically been slow to adopt
innovations that affect efficiency. Second, it has been difficult to offset the
aging and retiring workforce with younger and more diverse workers, causing the
workforce supply to fall short of rising demand. This is mainly because
construction work tends to be physically strenuous leading to occupational
hazards that often force workers to retire early. Robotization has been
suggested as a potential solution to these problems. However, the unstructured
nature of construction work presents several technical, social and economic
impediments that hinder the direct adoption and integration of such innovations
by the construction industry. For construction workers, robotic technology can
only be transformative if it allows them to channel their passion for the work
while avoiding the chronic pain and health outcomes associated with its physical
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates if construction work can
be conceived as a human-robot partnership, where human workers play the critical
role of planning the work, and training and supervising robotic assistants to
adapt to presented workspace conditions and perform useful work. The project
team is integrating advances in interactive task learning, mixed reality, and
reinforcement learning to enable construction workers to naturally collaborate
with robot assistants through direct physical interaction and virtual
supervision and training. For such a symbiotic human-robot partnership to
benefit construction workers and result in widespread deployment, workers need
to be equipped with new skills. The project team is exploring new educational
and professional development programs to support worker aspirations for
upskilling and lifelong learning, and to open avenues for people of diverse
abilities to be productive members of the construction workforce. Tight-knit
partnerships with industry collaborators will inform the project activities and
provide access to construction work sites and training facilities for testing
and evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.