* 2128685
* Workshop on Devices-to-Systems for In-Memory Computing, being held Virtual at the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, May 11-12, 2021.
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Dmitri Strukov, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2022
* USD 25,236.00

In-memory computing architectures are envisioned to be enablers for implementing
data-driven algorithms using Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence for
applications, such as environment monitoring, healthcare, internet of things,
mobile devices, communications, drones, and robots having tremendous societal
impacts. Currently, a major question lies in understanding relative trade-offs
between various available devices, identifying the most promising semiconductor
device options, and research directions for developing novel devices for optimum
functionality in-memory computing. This NSF workshop is being organized to
explore novel devices and processes, enabling circuits and systems, integration
and manufacturing, and semiconductor workforce development to establish US long-
term leadership. The significance of this workshop includes identifying future
nanoscale devices that will offer high-performance, low-cost, engineered and
scalable functionality for performing in-memory computing operations at ultra-
low power. The workshop will feature a dedicated session and panel discussions
on education and workforce development that will include identification of
challenges in semiconductor workforce development and future needs,
interdisciplinary curriculum development in Electrical Engineering and Computer
Science, efficient use of opensource platforms for in-memory devices and
supporting technologies, equipment needs, and training of future scientists in
these areas. The findings from this workshop will be summarized in a report and
posted on workshop website for dissemination to the public at large.
Additionally, the findings will be published as a peer-reviewed paper in an open
access journal for broader dissemination to the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical significance of this workshop is to provide
a platform for discussions on identifying the next generation of nanoscale
devices to enable in-memory computing. The overall objective is to explore and
identify the scientific issues and technological challenges associated with the
underpinnings of in-memory computing. The workshop will invite leading
researchers to discuss challenges associated with the currently available
devices such as Static Random Access Memory (SRAM) devices, Dynamic Random
Access Memory (DRAM) devices, Flash Memory devices, Magnetic Random Access
Memory (MRAM) devices, Spin Torque Transfer Random Access Memory (STTRAM)
devices, Resistive Random Access Memory (RRAM) devices, Phase Change Memory
(PCM) devices, Ferroelectrics-based devices, and other memristive devices to
discuss most potential candidates for in-memory computing. Thereafter, the
workshop will host panel discussions to identify promising device technologies
and other aspects of in-memory computing such as compatibility with
Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS) front end of line (FEOL), back
end of line (BEOL), circuits and systems integration, and challenges with
semiconductor manufacturing and packaging. The speakers and panelists will be
selected from academia, semiconductor industry, federal research laboratories,
and small and large business companies. The workshop will be organized on
virtual platform and will consist of four technical sessions, one session on
education and workforce development, and an open discussion on various other
aspects such as role of open access platforms for semiconductor devices and
manufacturing, and technology translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.