* 2129926
* EAR-Climate: Continental-Scale Determinants of Stream Solute Spatial and Temporal Patterns
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* James Jawitz, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 12/31/2025
* USD 428,312.00

This project seeks answers to foundational questions about links between
landscapes and rivers, with broad societal implications for how water quality is
measured and managed, and thus is relevant to environmental stewardship and
restoration. Statistical models will be developed to predict spatial and
temporal patterns in water quality using continental-scale data across the
eastern United States. Strong existing partnerships with management agencies
will be leveraged to disseminate findings, synthesized as principles for
effective and efficient design of water quality monitoring programs. The
approaches will be iteratively developed in collaboration with global partners,
with the exchange facilitated by research workshops. Students engaged in this
work will be trained in science communication for general audiences. Finally,
efforts will be made to recruit and retain student and post-doc participants
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stream solute signals encode
information about upstream sources, landscape filtering, and network
transformations, yet a comprehensive predictive understanding remains elusive.
This work seeks to understand the origins of spatial vs temporal variability in
water quality patterns, answering the following specific questions: What is the
relative importance of stream solute spatial vs. temporal variability? What are
the drivers of stream solute spatial and temporal variability? The primary focus
is on three contrasting solute groups (geogenic, biogenic, anthropogenic) with
varying links to geographical, anthropogenic, hydrological, and climatological
drivers. A series of predictions about controls on patterns of space-time
variation will be evaluated, using a continental-scale data inventory across the
eastern United States, spanning large gradients in latitude and hydroclimate
zones, lithology, wetland and forest cover, and anthropogenic land use
intensity. The project seeks to explain the substantial spatial variation in
mean concentrations observed for all three solute groups, based on the coupled
solute-specific influences of ecoregion, network position, and solute source
area. Mean concentrations are expected to vary with aggregated landscape
properties, such as wetland coverage or agricultural land use intensity, and
mean climate conditions, such as aridity and temperature. It is hypothesized
that temporal variability around the mean can be understood and explained in
terms of key drivers such as flow variation, seasonality, and network position,
albeit with solute-specific sensitivities. This spatial vs. temporal variance
framework provides a novel template for summarizing, understanding, and
predicting variation in water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.