* 2129237
* Dimensions US–China: Collaborative Research: Consequences of diversity in Asian and American oak syngameons for functional variation, adaptation and symbiont biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 163,147.00

The world’s approximately 425 oak species maintain species identity even while
exchanging genes with their close relatives through hybridization. This history
of evolution and genetic exchange has shaped the biodiversity of northern
hemisphere ecosystems. Oaks are ecologically diverse, with related species often
growing in close proximity but specializing on areas of the forest landscape
that differ in soil texture and moisture level or in the frequency of natural
fires. Gene exchange can move such ecological specializations between oak
species, broadening their ranges and ability to respond to climate change. The
impacts of these genetic exchanges may extend beyond the oaks themselves. Oaks
host an estimated 1000 gall wasp species worldwide and highly diverse
communities of fungi associated with their roots (as mycorrhizae) and inside
their leaves (as endophytes). Using paired field surveys and common garden
experiments the PIs will evaluate the effects of hybridization and introgression
on the genetic, phylogenetic, and functional diversity of focal oak species and
their symbionts in the US and China. This work will also provide inquiry-based
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate education; critical natural history training
to the public through a community-science initiative in oak phenology; and
publications that will bring research to public
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two interdisciplinary teams of researchers, one
based in the US and one in China, will investigate how genomic, functional, and
phylogenetic diversity of oak trees shape the mycorrhizal fungi, endophytic
fungi, and gall wasp and other insect communities that associate with them.
Research will focus on two related groups of interbreeding species: bur oak
(Quercus macrocarpa) and relatives in the US and bao li (Quercus serrata) and
relatives in China. The project has three objectives, each conducted in parallel
in China and the U.S. In Objective 1 the teams will perform range-wide
phylogenomic surveys of natural populations to reconstruct genomic mosaics,
characterize geographic patterns of leaf functional traits, and characterize
functional and phylogenetic diversity of associated mycorrhizal fungi, leaf
endophytic fungi, and gall wasps. In Objective 2 common gardens will be planted
across climatic gradients to evaluate the effects of genetic variation and
population differentiation on oak functional and spectral traits and relative
fitness in different climates, and how these influence the phylogenetic and
functional diversity of oak-associated fungal and insect communities. In
Objective 3 the teams will use a second set of common garden experiments to
evaluate how plant community and phylogenetic diversity affects focal oak
species genetic, phylogenetic, and functional diversity. The project will
provide an integrative perspective on how oak diversity within and among species
impacts the broad diversity of oak-dominated ecosystems across the northern
hemisphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.