* 2129166
* Towards an Improved Understanding of Plastic Pollutant Generation and Minimization Processes for Cured-in-Place-Pipe Manufacture
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Jeffrey Youngblood, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 330,000.00

Water infrastructure is critical to the safety and economic health of
communities. The restoration and maintenance of water supply and wastewater
infrastructure are ongoing challenges for the Nation. Cured-in-place pipe (CIPP)
technology is a popular method for repairing buried sewer pipes. This is due in
large part to economic considerations, as it can be 60-80% less costly than
other repair alternatives. Unfortunately, the process of emplacement and curing
of new plastic inside the damaged pipe can release hazardous materials into the
air. These releases have resulted in exposures, illnesses, and at least one
fatality of a worker where chemical exposure was a significant contributing
factor. The overall goal of this research is to reduce chemical volatilization
from CIPP by understanding mechanisms of chemical volatilization. This goal will
be achieved through specific research objectives designed to: i) determine the
factors that control chemical emission under various curing techniques, ii)
examine how injecting steam to create the CIPP impacts the distribution of
emitted chemicals, and iii) estimate the toxicity reductions that could result
from alterations in the process. Successful completion of this research will
clarify how manufacturing processes influence the emission of chemicals from
CIPP. This information can be used by regulators, public health professionals,
and other stakeholders to develop policies and guidelines to minimize pollutant
release and protect public health. This will be facilitated through direct
engagement of stakeholders to disseminate the project findings and accelerate
industry adoption. Further benefits to society result from a training module to
assist user groups in making decisions regarding the use of CIPP for wastewater
pipe upgrades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sewer pipes are being repaired using CIPP
technology to create a new plastic liner inside existing damaged pipes in situ.
Dozens of chemical exposure incidents have been documented from CIPP
utilization. Gaseous releases from CIPP are a complex mixture of volatile and
semi-volatile organic compounds that are known to pose significant risks to
human and ecological health. However, the underlying mechanisms and ways to
reduce such emissions has been relatively understudied. The overall aim of this
research is to elucidate mechanisms of CIPP emissions towards the goal of
reducing pollution and protecting health. Specific objectives designed to
achieve this goal are to: i) identify factors that control chemical emission
distribution and magnitude for various CIPP formulations using various curing
techniques, ii) explore how injected steam impacts the magnitude and
distribution of emitted chemicals, and iii) study air exposure and associated
toxicity reductions resulting from emission reduction control measures.
Successful completion of this research will produce urgently needed data to
prevent emissions and protect human health. Results have potential to transform
the CIPP industry and broader plastic composites sector by providing fundamental
knowledge on the roles resin, initiators, and steam curing have on pollutant
emissions. This research directly addresses multiple National Academy of
Science, Engineering, and Medicine grand challenges focused on restoring
infrastructure, sustainably supplying water, building healthy cities, and
reducing pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.