* 2129463
* Collaborative Research: Deformation-Dependent Adhesion of Stretched Compliant Networked Polymer Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Katharine Jensen, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 412,607.00

This grant will focus on developing a fundamental understanding of how changing
the shape of soft, adhesive materials -- for example, through stretching or
compression -- modifies their adhesive properties. Modern theories of adhesion
were originally developed to describe contact with relatively stiff materials
like rubber, but much softer sticky materials are ubiquitous in biology,
medicine, engineering, and everyday consumer products. Over the past decade,
soft solid surface mechanics has emerged as an exciting new field of study,
driven largely by the surprising discovery that classic theories fail to
describe the contact behavior of compliant materials and that soft materials
adhere very differently than their stiffer counterparts. Recent experiments,
theory, and simulations have revealed a rich array of new physics and suggest a
powerful new design space for engineering applications. The fundamental
discoveries and materials developed through this research project will enable
the development of new strain-controlled, responsive adhesives and will also
involve student researchers at various stages of their educational careers from
undergraduates to postdoctoral scholars. An “Adhesion Engineering Summer Camp”
will be established to bring Williams College students to visit Purdue
University each summer of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The surface
properties of compliant polymers have been shown to change as a function of bulk
deformation in previously-unanticipated ways. While recent debates over the
nature of strain-dependent surface stress in soft solids have motivated numerous
experimental and theoretical studies, much less work has focused on strain-
dependent adhesion. By performing measurements that directly investigate the
normal adhesive response of compliant network polymer systems as a function of
both quasi-static and dynamic deformation using integrated mechanical testing
and direct imaging, this project will establish a fundamental understanding of
how the adhesion of soft materials is modified by deformation across a broad
range of length scales, time scales, and material properties. The interplay
between strain, adhesion energy, network architecture, and material relaxation
mechanisms will be investigated through the experimental, numerical, and
theoretical work in this collaborative grant. The specific research objectives
of the project will be to (i) quantify quasistatic adhesion to stretched,
compliant network polymer systems across length scales and (ii) characterize the
adhesive response of compliant networked polymer systems during dynamic
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.