* 2129038
* FW-HTF-P: Combining Human and Machine Intelligence to Improve Equity and Fairness in the Work of Municipal, Public Sector Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* John Zimmerman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Government agencies and the public sector have increasingly turned to data-
driven and Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based techniques to enhance the quality
of human decision-making and service provision. This shift toward an AI-driven
approach holds promise in its ability to offer much-needed support to
understaffed departments and increasing the speed with which community members’
concerns are met. However, an over-emphasis on efficiency and effectiveness,
along with most AI-based systems’ lack of transparency into how a given
recommendation is made, have made it difficult for public sector workers to make
fair, equitable, efficient decisions. This can result in lack of accountability
to constituents and cause harm to minoritized communities, as demonstrated by
cases such as racial bias in predictive policing systems. This project will use
a service design-inspired approach to investigate how public sector data and
algorithmic infrastructures are formed, factors that can lead to disparate
municipal service provision, and how these infrastructures might be redesigned
to address the inequities they sometimes reinforce. This planning grant will
give the project team additional insight into the problem while helping the team
build community partnerships and expand its disciplinary expertise, in order to
develop a larger, long-term research agenda. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
involves four major activities, which will be conducted in the context of
business owners’ interaction with public sector permit, license, and inspection
departments that use or plan to use data-innovation and AI-enhanced decision-
making tools. The first activity involves characterizing the current state of
data collected and analyzed using a data audit methodology, with the goal of
identifying needed changes to disaggregate business owners by qualities related
to equity and fairness and to support business process mining. The second and
third activities are to understand the priorities and experiences of public
sector workers who make decisions about permits, licenses, and inspections, and
the experience and challenges faced by local, small, women- and minority-owned
businesses that need these services in order to launch their ventures. Those
activities will be based on interviews with members of the respective
populations, culminating in a fourth activity in which these stakeholder groups
will come together with the research team in co-design workshops to help define
and balance the key objectives held by all stakeholders, along with ideas for
how systems can be shaped to achieve those objectives in AI-based systems that
support public sector decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.