* 2129320
* Conference proposal: Advances in High-Order Methods for Computational Fluid Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Chunlei Liang, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2023
* USD 8,100.00

The primary goal of the 2021 International Symposium on High-Order Methods for
Computational Fluid Dynamics (ISHOMCFD-2021) is to enable discussions among the
international community of computational mechanics about pacing items of high-
order methods for computational fluid dynamics. High-order methods in
computational fluid dynamics still face algorithmic and numerical challenges on
various levels that prevent their widespread use. The focus of this symposium is
on theoretical advances in numerical methods aimed at overcoming these
challenges, as well as application demonstrations that stress the limits of high
order and identify new challenges. The symposium is organized as a sub-field of
the 16th U.S. National Congress (USNCCM16) to be held July 25-29, 2021 in
Chicago, CA. The NSF support will cover the conference registration cost for 15
students and 4 postdoc participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
international symposium will have strong technological and educational impacts.
The symposium will promote scientific discussions among two different scientific
communities (engineering CFD and computational mathematics) and potentially
create new ideas and new collaborative opportunities. Moreover, the promise of
quantum computing will be discussed in this symposium. The NSF funding will
promote fruitful discussions among young research students/postdocs and invited
senior speakers. We also plan to use the NSF funding to select three outstanding
student presenters, and to inspire young researchers of high-order methods for
becoming future leaders of computational fluid dynamics and solving real-world
problems. In 2015, the PI co-organized a similar symposium and featured 22
outstanding speakers from USA, UK, Japan, China, France, Italy, Germany, and
Spain. The 2021 conference is expected to host at least 24 speakers for the
ISHOMCFD-2021. In addition, selected presentations will be included in a special
issue of Computers &amp; Fluids, an Elsevier journal following the rigorous
review process of this journal for all invited manuscripts related to the
ISHOMCFD-2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.