* 2129206
* Understanding and Evaluating Practices for Integrating Commuter Students in Science, Technology, and Mathematics through Mentoring, Undergraduate Research, and Social Supports
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Michael Watters, Valparaiso University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Valparaiso University, a private four-year undergraduate institution.
Over six years, thirty high-achieving, low-income scholars will be awarded
scholarships for up to four years. They will be working towards baccalaureate
degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics,
Meteorology, Data Science and Statistics. Low-income students, particularly
those who are commuting to college, often face challenges that impede their
ability to participate in the various academic and co-curricular activities that
are available on a residential college campus. This project plans to address
those challenges through establishing and evaluating practices to integrate
commuting students. This project will begin with a multi-faceted, targeted
recruitment strategy designed to reach low-income students to encourage
application. It will continue with mentoring, undergraduate research, and social
support of science, technology, or mathematics (STM) students as they work
towards their baccalaureate degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specifically, this program
focuses on commuter students by improving recruitment, retention, and mentoring
strategies, thus preparing a diverse cohort for STM careers. This project has
two objectives: 1) Broaden participation in STM by improving recruitment
strategies for low-income students, and 2) Identify how retention strategies,
both academic and social, change students’ self-efficacy and STM identity. In
partnership with the Admission and Marketing Offices, this project expands
recruitment practices to reach low-income commuter students through geo-targeted
multimedia advertisement and informational activities. This project supports
students’ retention and career development by actively integrating commuter
students into the wider campus and scholarly community. The projects’ scholars
have enhanced academic opportunities including: a multi-year research
experience, participation in scientific conferences, presenting at departmental
colloquia, faculty mentoring, career networking, skill-building, and cohort-
building. Social activities include annual retreats, monthly meet-ups, and field
trips. The impact of this project will be measured by tracking the effectiveness
of recruitment efforts, monitoring student success metrics (GPA, retention and
success in the student’s chosen STM major) and surveying both scholars and other
STM students, comparing their attitudes and perceptions of their undergraduate
experience. The results of project will also be assessed relative to baseline
data. Faculty will share the design and results of the program with others
through published articles and conference presentations. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.