* 2129895
* Collaborative Research: Workshop to Develop a Roadmap for Greater Public Use of Privacy-Sensitive Government Data
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Christopher Clifton, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 04/30/2022
* USD 31,713.00

Recent events have shown the value of better data sharing; the rapidity of
change in COVID-19 and the difficulty of coordinating response is a clear
example. At the same time, public concern over privacy is increasing, making it
more difficult to collect reliable data. Improved use of government data by a
wide range of users has potential to improve research as well as day-to-day
operations at a variety of levels, from local to national and global. Government
data can also foster innovation, providing opportunities for small companies
based on large-scale data analysis that are increasingly reserved for large
organizations capable of gathering their own data (often in ways that raise
privacy concerns). We are running a 2-day workshop to identify challenges and
explore mechanisms (technical, legal, and procedural) to enable greater use of
privacy-sensitive data held by government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Privacy
technology has experienced great advances over the past decade. Breakthroughs
such as fully homomorphic encryption, differential privacy, and advances in
secure multiparty computation have great promise to enable broader public use of
data, while maintaining individual privacy. While there have been some
successes, there are many applications where there is a significant gap between
what technology offers, data needs of users, and policies and procedures to
ensure privacy. This includes best practices as well as research and policy
challenges that limit effective use of data. This workshop explores these
concerns, highlighting new research challenges based on actual user needs for
government data. This covers research in underlying technologies that address
real-world challenges, as well as research in policy to enable use of technology
in ways that provide appropriate levels of protection for privacy-sensitive
data. The outcome will be a report identifying unmet needs of data users, issues
limiting broader use of government data, and technologies and policies that show
promise of bridging these gaps. This will serve as a roadmap for research
investment to address these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.