* 2129615
* NSF/FDA SIR: Designing for Degradation: A framework for Predicting in vivo Degradation and Mechanical Property Changes in Degradable Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Matthew Becker, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The commercialization of new medicines and medical devices often involves the
use of degradable polymers. Over the last 50 years, a tremendous volume of
physical property, processing and safety data has been built up globally about a
very small library of degradable materials. Entire industries in medical
devices, biomedical implants and drug delivery have been built and sustained on
these data sets. However, there are emerging applications and routes of
investigation in which the known library of materials will not work. The
inability to design for degradation in polymeric devices and drug delivery
remains one of the most significant barriers to industrial innovation in this
area. As a result of this barrier, pre-clinical testing and development efforts
remain empirical (trial and error) which is slow, expensive, and frequently
pushes companies to utilize materials that have been used in other devices that
have gained regulatory approval to lessen risk. The goal of this one-year FDA
scholar in residence project is to initiate a framework for correlating in vitro
to in vivo, i.e., in the lab to in the body, degradation behavior based on
studies in a series of fully resorbable degradable polymer materials. A
benchmarked and validated framework that would create an in vitro in vivo
correlation (IVIVC) in new and emerging libraries of materials would be an
invaluable tool to all stakeholders in academia, industry and regulatory
agencies seeking to accelerate produced development timelines, increase safety
and reduce regulatory risk. The project will also establish a robust
collaboration between the FDA and the Investigator’s lab and provide a unique
training experience for a graduate student who will in turn use experiences
gained at the FDA to mentor high school, undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on developing
correlations of water transport, degradation properties and time dependent
changes in mechanical properties in amino acid-based poly(ester urea)s. Many
properties of polymers affect how fast it degrades. The challenge for developing
IVIV correlations is that in vitro tests, designed to develop semi-empirical
models, do not accurately predict degradation rates that occur in vivo. This is
primarily due to complicated dynamic processes that cannot be easily captured
within static models. The in vitro and in vivo data collected in this proposal
will provide the initial data sets needed to establish this framework and aid
the FDA in advancing regulatory science that will be needed to ensure the safe
use of hydrolytically degradable polymer in future generations of implants.
Materials designed to create a range of water transport and mechanical
properties will be subjected in vitro to accelerated and physiological
degradation conditions and the molecular mass, molecular mass distribution,
mechanical and physical properties will be tracked over time and benchmarked
against in vivo subcutaneous implants in an animal model. The proposed research
will impact the biomaterials community by helping to establish a framework for
building IVIVC for degradation and the associated changes in the mechanical
properties of amino acid-based poly(ester urea)s. This work will be done in
collaboration with staff at CDRH/FDA, who have extensive regulatory science
experience in chemistry and processing of polymer-based medical devices and
combination products. The data generated will help the FDA generate fundamental
and regulatory science knowledge for evaluating medical products fabricated
using new degradable polymers and processing
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.