* 2129225
* I-Corps:  Development of Bent DNA Molecules as Amplifying Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Yong Wang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of sensors to investigate DNA interactions with ions and small
organic molecules, and the screening of DNA-targeting molecules as potential
drugs. DNA is one of the most essential elements of life. The interactions of
DNA with inorganic salts and small organic molecules are important for
understanding various fundamental cellular processes in living systems, for
deciphering the mechanisms of diseases and cancers related to DNA damage and
repair, and for discovering, designing, and developing inhibitors and drugs to
treat various diseases and cancers. The proposed sensor technology is designed
to amplify, detect, and quantify the interactions of various molecules (e.g.,
metal ions, small organic molecules, and DNA-targeting drugs) with DNA. Although
various techniques have been developed for investigating the interactions
between DNA and other molecules, the current techniques suffer from various
drawbacks, such as requiring expensive, sophisticated, and complex equipment, or
lacking sensitivity. The development of this technology may benefit and has
application in several market areas including life science research tools,
analytical lab services, and the pharmaceutical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of nano-amplifiers/sensors based on bent DNA molecules for amplifying,
detecting, and quantifying DNA interactions with other molecules. Current
methods to measure and quantify DNA interactions have drawbacks and there is a
need for easier, more sensitive, and more economic technologies. The proposed
technology makes use of bent DNA molecules in the shape of archery bows that are
under mechanical stress and more sensitive to the presence of ions, small
organic molecules, and DNA-targeting drug molecules. The proposed design is
based on self-assembled bent DNA amplifiers. Recent results have demonstrated
that bent DNA amplifiers are able to amplify and detect the interactions between
DNA and 14 different inorganic salts and small organic molecules, including one
anti-cancer drug. This technology may enable life science research activities
that were previously not possible or easy to carry out. The potential
applications may include developing an assay for amplifying and detecting DNA
interactions with various molecules and ions, enabling quantitative
understanding of the mechanisms of DNA interactions with these molecules,
detecting the accumulation of heavy ions in cells and tissues, and screening
DNA-targeting molecules as potential drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.