* 2129899
* Biology Education and Research Skills (BEARS) Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2027
* Kathryn Englehart, Kennebec Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 03/31/2027
* USD 563,823.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Kennebec Valley Community College (KVCC). This public institution serves
approximately 2500 students and is one of seven community colleges which
operates under the Maine Community College System Board of Trustees. Over its
5-year duration, this project will fund one-year scholarships, renewable for one
year, to thirty-four (34) unique full-time high-achieving low-income students
who are pursuing an Associate in Science degree in Biological Science at KVCC.
The project team will adapt and implement a variety of evidenced-based and
innovative curricular and co-curricular strategies to support S-STEM Scholars
through three cohorts of 10,12, and 12 students, respectively. Support
strategies will include cohort building, providing each scholar with a dedicated
faculty mentor, integrating recitation components into introductory-level
biology and chemistry courses, providing research opportunities and industry
experiences in biology, integrating laboratory skills and research micro-
credentials into the biology curriculum, and providing stipend support for
summer practicums. The project will leverage existing relationships at regional
high schools to identify qualified students for whom S-STEM scholarships could
make a significant difference in their ability to enroll in and complete a two-
year degree in Biology. Project investigators will disseminate outcomes and
findings related to project challenges and successes, especially to other
community colleges striving to support low-income STEM students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the project will
pursue several goals. First is to adapt, implement, and analyze evidence-based
and innovative curricular and co-curricular activities to support, retain, and
graduate with an associate in science degree the project's Biological Science
scholars. Second is to enhance the regional STEM workforce by providing special
career preparation experiences and academic support for students to prepare them
to contribute through employment or pursuit of four-year degrees and beyond.
Third is to contribute to the knowledge base by implementing, testing, and
investigating through mixed-methods project evaluation strategies for
systematically supporting student academic and workforce pathways in STEM. And
fourth is to disseminate outcomes and findings related to the supports,
activities, and combinations of these opportunities that promote student success
to other institutions, especially other community colleges, working to support
low-income STEM students. The directions of investigation, which will include
closed cohort methodologies to analyze participant and comparison group
outcomes, will address gaps in the literature and supplement the knowledge base
on impactful, practical, and sustainable strategies unique to low-income,
academically talented community college students, especially in low-population
settings. Designed to address project goals, project evaluation is equipped to
employ qualitative and quantitative methods to provide insights into how the
project's practices affect the academic success and employment of the S-STEM
Scholars and to identify the effective activities and combinations of activities
for replication, especially in similar settings. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.