* 2129417
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE BigData 2021)
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Xingquan Zhu, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 25,000.00

In recent years, Big Data has become a ubiquitous term. Big Data is transforming
science, engineering, medicine, healthcare, finance, business, and ultimately
society itself. The IEEE Big Data has established itself as the top tier
research conference in Big Data. The 2021 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (IEEE Big Data 2021) will continue the success of the previous IEEE Big
Data conferences and provides a leading forum for disseminating the latest
research and education in Artificial Intelligence and Big Data research,
development, and applications. This work will support student attendees at the
2021 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE
BigData-2021).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific program of IEEE Big Data 2021
will cover synergistic themes on Big Data Science and Foundations, Big Data
Learning and Analytics, Big Data Infrastructure, Big Data Management, Big Data
Search and Mining, Big Data Security &amp; Privacy, Ethics, Privacy and Trust in
Big Data Systems, and Big Data Applications. The IEEE Big Data 2021 promises to
have great scientific quality and broad impact, with world-renowned scientists
as keynote speakers and invited speakers, contributed talks at a highly
competitive acceptance rate (the IEEE Big Data regular paper acceptance rate is
always less than 20% since its inception), special issue publications in top
scientific journals such as IEEE Transactions on Big Data as well as the board
participation of the research community serving on the Program Committee and the
organizing committees for workshops, tutorials and posters. As an effort to
engage young researchers, the NSF student travel award will stimulate research
discussion for students in underrepresented groups. It will also enhance the
workforce training for students in the artificial intelligence and data science
fields&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.