* 2129490
* Collaborative Research: Bromoform production and ROS response to stress in seaweeds
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Vinayak Agarwal, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 748,357.00

This project will study how seaweeds sense and respond to stress at the
molecular level. The collaborative team will use the seaweed Asparagopsis
taxiformis as a model system to study how the transcription of genes and
biochemical activities of enzymes in seaweeds respond to stress by the synthesis
of the ozone-damaging pollutant bromoform. Tools for the genetic manipulation of
seaweed have not yet been developed and this research will provide insight into
pathways of gene regulation in this globally important group of marine
organisms. Increasing ocean temperatures due to global warming may increase
bromoform production in seaweeds and a better understanding of the molecular
mechanisms of its production could have environmental and bioeconomy impacts.
During the course of this work, a cohort of graduate students, postdoctoral
scientists, and research scientists will receive interdisciplinary training in
genomics, enzymological biochemistry, and computational and organismal biology.
In addition, hands-on experimental instruction in chemical and biological
sciences will be provided to Pacific Islander undergraduate students, who are
one of the most underserved communities in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project undertakes a biochemical
characterization of enzymes involved in furnishing reactive oxygen species such
as hydrogen peroxide in seaweeds, enzymes that furnish thiotemplated polyketone
hydrocarbon substrates, and halogenating enzymes that use hydrogen peroxide and
polyketone hydrocarbon substrates to synthesize bromoform. Using a combination
of targeted gene transcriptional profiling and untargeted transcriptome
sequencing, a molecular-level response to biotic and abiotic stress of genes
encoding these bromoform producing enzymes will be queried in the model marine
macroalgae Asparagopsis taxiformis. Efforts will be extended to discover
bromoform biosynthetic genes in enzymes in other seaweeds such the giant kelp
Macrocystis. Taken together, this study will provide new molecular insights into
the natural production of the ozone-depleting pollutant bromoform and how the
production of bromoform is modulated by seaweeds in response to
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.