* 2129885
* Fostering Biology Major Success and Transfer in an Urban Community College in the Silicon Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2028
* Darcy Ernst, Evergreen Valley College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2028
* USD 749,844.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
technicians, engineers, and mathematicians by supporting high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Evergreen Valley College
(EVC). EVC is a community college in San Jose, California, which serves
approximately 10,000 students. A particular impetus of the project will be to
increase access to, and participation in, the biological sciences workforce with
a particular focus on needs of low-income students. Community college students
are a potential source of biology majors and future biologists, yet they often
face financial and family demands that compete with their educational goals.
This is particularly true for EVC students who live in the Silicon Valley, an
expensive region in the country. Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund forty-five (45) 2-year scholarships to help the Scholars work less and
focus on their academic progress. Through a cohort model, targeted mentorship,
internships, and enrollment in a first-year biology-focused seminar, these
biology scholars will be supported in their pathway towards completion of an
Associates with Transfer degree, which will guarantee their admission to a
California public four-year university, the next step on their way to a
biological science career. This project at EVC includes partnerships with local
four-year institutions, biotech companies, and Iowa State University (ISU). ISU
which will serve as the institution leading project research and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM Associates degree completion
and transfer of low-income, high-achieving community college students with
demonstrated financial need, the project will pursue an underlying project goal
of advancing students' STEM content knowledge and pathway navigation from
community college to baccalaureate completion in biology. The project will
pursue this goal through a systematic study of biology students and their
coursework in the community college context. In particular, the underlying goal
will be achieved through mixed-methods evaluation and accompanying feedback of
the efficacy of students’ evolving science identity development, achievement,
motivation, and campus engagement. Investigators will draw upon three
complementary perspectives on learning and development in undergraduate science;
namely, Perez’s extension of the Expectancy Value framework for STEM majors,
Calderon’s science identity framework, and Stanton-Salazar’s agents of
socialization. Project findings will contribute to the theoretical understanding
of how motivation and science identity evolves over the community college
experience. At the same time, directions of investigation will address gaps in
the literature and provide practical insight into how community colleges should
organize programming in order to foster relationships that promote academic
success and transfer. Project investigators will disseminate outcomes and
findings related to project challenges and successes, especially to other
community colleges in a similar setting. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.