* 2129202
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2021 ACM International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (ACM MobiSys)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2021,10/31/2022
* Wenjun Hu, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2022
* USD 5,000.00

Association for Computing Machinery’s (ACM) International Conference on Mobile
Systems, Applications, and Services (ACM MobiSys) is the premiere academic
conference for presenting innovative and significant research of mobile systems,
applications and services. The research topics of MobiSys span multiple
disciplines, including wireless networks and communication, mobile sensing and
crowdsourcing applications, wearable computing, vehicular and robotic wireless
systems, operating systems, distributed algorithms, data management, energy
management, sensors, security and privacy. ACM MobiSys brings together academic,
industry, and government professionals to a single-track, highly selective
forum, and thus provides an ideal venue for ones pursuing technological advances
of mobile systems, applications and services. The goal of this student travel
support is to promote research engagement of students, especially ones who are
not well-funded, under-represented, or otherwise not likely to be able to attend
high-profile conferences on mobile systems. The grant will highly encourage such
students to become motivated to pursue latest research directions in the related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is to support approximately 50-100
student participants at recognized US institutions of higher education. They
will be selected by the student travel grants committee to maximize their
potential benefits from MobiSys, while prioritizing their under-funded or under-
represented circumstances. Students’ testimonials will be collect to asses and
summarize impact on them from attending this conference. The student
participants will have opportunities to exchange innovative ideas in a vibrant
field, which will significantly impact their future research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.