* 2129963
* NSF-BSF: Deciphering Molecule-Carbon Nanotube Interactions for Environmental Remediation Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Lawrence Baker, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2024
* USD 546,937.00

NSF-BSF: Deciphering Molecule-Carbon Nanotube Interactions for Environmental
Remediation Reactions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical reactions are
emerging means to the efficient removal of environmentally concerning chemical
species under mild reaction conditions, without the need for harsh chemical
reactants, and powered by renewable energy sources. Nanostructured catalyst
materials, especially those featuring multiple components with strong
interactions, have greatly advanced the performance of many electrochemical
reactions. However, the form and nature of these interactions and how they
regulate the catalytic properties of the material remain elusive and is
hampering both mechanistic understanding and performance optimization. In this
project, in collaboration with researchers at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Dr. Hailiang Wang of Yale University and Dr. Robert Baker of the Ohio
State University will combine materials synthesis, reaction studies, and
spectroscopy techniques to perform detailed analysis of the nanoscale and
molecular interactions between cobalt phthalocyanine, a metal coordination
compound, and carbon nanotubes. Knowledge obtained from this research will be
applied to reactions in carbon dioxide utilization and water purification. This
project will also provide educational opportunities in environmental chemistry
and engineering via outreach activities, classroom teaching, and research
training to a diverse body of students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Hailiang Wang of Yale University and Dr. Robert Baker of the Ohio State
University, in collaboration with researchers at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, will analyze the nanoscale and molecular interactions between cobalt
phthalocyanine and carbon nanotube and the ways by which these interactions can
be utilized to optimize the electrocatalytic performance of the hybrid material
for environmental applications. It is hypothesized those static interactions,
i.e. electron relocation, controls the material’s thermodynamic behavior in the
catalytic reaction, whereas dynamic interactions, i.e. the electron transfer
rate, influences the catalytic kinetics. The team will leverage expertise in
materials synthesis and reaction studies, high-spatial-resolution spectroscopy,
and time-resolved spectroscopy to test the hypothesis. Static and dynamic
interactions as functions of the material’s structural parameters, including the
loading, dispersion, geometry, and linkage of cobalt phthalocyanine on carbon
nanotube surface, will be analyzed. Fundamental structure-reactivity
correlations will be established. Obtained mechanistic understanding will be
utilized to further improve the environmental remediation reactions of carbon
dioxide conversion to methanol and nitrate reduction by tailoring the nanoscale
and molecular interactions. This project will also provide educational
opportunities in environmental chemistry and engineering via outreach
activities, classroom teaching, and research training to a diverse body of
students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;This research is jointly funded by NSF and
The US-Israel Binational Science foundation through the special submission
opportunity NSF 20-094.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.