* 2129183
* RUI: Next Generation Rare Earth Based Light-Emitters for Solid-State Display &amp; Quantum Information Technology Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brandon Mitchell, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,624.00

The realization of a "smart society" will require advancements in display and
quantum computation technologies. Examples of such technologies include
microscale color-tunable pixels and the fabrication of systems whose quantum
states can be precisely controlled, both of which can be addressed by "trapping"
rare earth (RE) elements in a semiconducting host. RE elements can be placed
into various environments and retain most of their original atom-like
properties, including emission wavelengths and spin states. Generally, RE ions
are incorporated in passive, insulating materials. In this project, a team of
researchers will study the properties of RE-doped semiconductors fabricated into
structures such as diodes, microcavities, and microdisks. The team will explore
new ways to manipulate the RE ions by utilizing the strong interaction between
the RE ions and other defects within the semiconductor hosts. Overall, this
project will serve as the basis for a new generation of RE-doped semiconductor
devices that harness quantum mechanical effects to achieve new functionalities
such as the control of spins and the manipulation of light emission for quantum
information processing and solid-state displays. Through a collaboration between
a predominantly undergraduate institution and two research universities in the
greater Philadelphia area, this project will also train several undergraduate
and graduate students from underrepresented groups for future employment in the
quantum information and display industries.&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description.&lt;br/&gt;Single electrically controlled color-tunable LEDs have
been previously demonstrated in Eu-doped GaN, which is based on manipulating the
state from which the Eu3+ ions emit. However, several details of the defect-
specific energy-transfer pathways are still not fully understood. A deeper
understanding of this process is crucial for optimizing such LEDs and for
realizing controlled atomic emission in other RE-doped systems. The team will
also explore whether spin information can be transferred from injected carriers
to the RE ions and vice-versa in novel optoelectronic devices. Measurements of
optical transition linewidths, radiative lifetimes, and spin coherence times
will establish the baseline potential of RE-doped semiconductors for quantum
information protocols. With their high efficiency and narrow emission linewidth,
Eu-doped GaN and Er-doped GaAs are promising candidates as single quantum
emitters. We aim to detect and address individual RE dopants by controlled
dilute doping and enhancing the RE ions' radiative rates using photonic
structures. Overall, the development of LEDs with full color-tunability will
allow for the realization of single-contact RGB micro-LEDs, which will improve
the performance of solid-state lighting technology and enable GaN-based active
pixel displays. For quantum computation applications, the combination of robust
quantum states based on RE ions with the maturity of GaN and GaAs synthesis and
nanofabrication technology can enable the rapid development of scalable quantum
optoelectronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.