* 2129400
* Collaborative Research: Probing Cavitation Inception in Dielectric Liquids with Sub-Nanosecond Precision
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Mikhail Shneider, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 271,015.00

Cavitation is the formation of bubbles (or cavities) in liquids due to decreased
pressure. Accurate determination of the critical conditions of cavitation is of
fundamental interests to many technological fields such as fluid machinery
design and targeted drug delivery. So far, the experimental results of
cavitation threshold pressures have not been consistent. One prominent factor is
that the existing techniques cannot reliably capture the very early stage of
cavitation inception. Recent works have shown that nanoscale cavities can form
in dielectric liquids due to negative pressure generated by nanosecond-pulsed
electric fields. Since this process can be synchronized and controlled
electrically (which is not the case for existing methods), it hints at a novel
technique to “pinpoint” cavitation inception with sub-nanosecond precision in
time and therefore enable a more accurate determination of cavitation
thresholds. This research project will explore the potential of the proposed
method and use it to measure the cavitation thresholds of water and other
liquids, which would be very valuable for the validation of cavitation theories
and models. This interdisciplinary research will have substantial educational
outputs, with an emphasis on innovative approaches to STEM enrichment for
underrepresented minority students. The PIs will develop and deliver new
learning modules on topics related to the research, such as electrical
discharges and fluid mechanics in everyday life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to experimentally characterize the initial stages
of electrostrictive cavitation in simple dielectric liquids as well as liquids
with dispersed particles and theoretically elucidate underlying physical
processes at the sub-ns timescale. As relevant theoretical analyses have been
limited to oversimplified scenarios and experimental evidence is rare and far
from systematic, the approach to accomplish the objective is through synergistic
use of diagnostic measurements at different developmental stages and numerical
modeling of the actual experimental scenarios. The research plan has two
specific aims: (1) detection of cavitation initiation in liquids under ultra-
short pulsed electric fields; and (2) examination of the effects of the
dispersed phase in liquids on cavitation. Optical diagnostics including
Schlieren/shadowgraph, Rayleigh scattering, and speckle imaging, combined with
electrical and material characterization measurements, will be used to probe
early-stage cavitation in various dielectric liquids, with and without dispersed
particles, under different electrode geometries. For simple liquids such as
water, the experimental data will be compared with the results from systematic
numerical simulations to determine the critical conditions of cavitation
initiation. For two-phase dispersions, the correlations between the experimental
conditions and optical diagnostic results will be established, which will
provide the information for the analysis and modeling of electrostrictive
cavitation near dispersed particles, and by doing so, deepen the understanding
of the physical processes involved. The expected outcomes of the research will
include the determination of critical parameters for cavitation initiation in
various liquids and a delineation of the physical picture of the subsequent
developments of cavitation and the effects of the dispersed phase. This project
will bridge the knowledge gap of cavitation initiation at sub-nanosecond
timescale and be instrumental in advancing the technologies related to
cavitation as well as nanosecond/sub-nanosecond plasma discharge in
liquids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.