* 2129734
* SBIR Phase II:  High thermal conductivity continuous fiber reinforced 3D printing materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Matthew Smith, TCPoly
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 982,483.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to enable advanced 3D printing materials to
solve challenges in emerging electronic devices, transportation technologies,
heating and cooling system for buildings, and in thermal management in
manufacturing processes. Overheating is a major challenge as electrical devices
continue to grow more compact and energy dense. Heat exchangers manufactured
through traditional methods are often expensive and energy intensive to
fabricate and suffer from corrosion, limited performance, and high maintenance
costs. Traditional mold tools machined from metals are often expensive, require
long lead times, and have limited design freedom. To address these challenges,
this project will develop a platform of novel high thermal conductivity
composite materials that can be used to 3D print parts that enhance electronics
cooling and performance while also reducing the product weight and cost, can
improve heat exchanger performance while also reducing corrosion, fouling and
associated maintenance, and can also be used to 3D print low cost and high-
performance molds with low-cost capital and short lead times. The project will
result in an advanced materials platform for engineers to create parts with
metal-like thermal conductivity, but with the speed, low cost, and ultimate
design freedom of printing plastics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develops 3D printable, plastic
composite materials with 500x higher thermal conductivity than standard
plastics. The unique materials incorporate continuous wires and fibers in 3D
printing filaments to achieve thermal conductivity values not possible in
traditionally manufactured composite parts. The polymer composite shell and
wire/fiber core can be tailored to offer high strength, high temperature
stability, and even joule heating. These materials are printed directly on
commercially available and low-cost Independent Dual Extrusion (IDEX) 3D
printers using a modified hardware and software platform. Printing and filament
production will be accomplished through the following five objectives: 1)
finalize filament formulations for the desired material properties, 2) establish
a pilot scale filament manufacturing line to demonstrate production scalability,
3) complete minor 3D printer hardware modifications to accommodate filament
printing, 4) develop software to print and optimize parts for desired
properties, and 5) print application examples and validate product performance
with commercially relevant demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.