* 2129685
* The Polar Geospatial Center: Community and Facility Support
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Claire Porter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Cooperative Agreement
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2024
* USD 5,762,898.00

The Polar Geospatial Center (PGC) is a polar science and logistics support
organization at the University of Minnesota. By distributing and using high-
resolution optical imagery made available by the National Geospatial-
Intelligence Agency to U.S. Government-funded researchers, PGC is able to solve
various geospatial problems for scientists to study both the Arctic and
Antarctic with mapping and remote sensing projects. This helps to support the
National Science Foundation's mission to understand the Earth and its global and
regional system by facilitating innovative new techniques and products - such as
Digital Elevation Models for both polar regions, mapping seasonal changes of sea
ice coverage and dynamics of continental ice sheets (e.g., ice loss due to
global climate change and quantification of meltwater on the ice sheet surface
in Greenland and Antarctica), preparing detailed topography maps for polar
atmospheric and ocean studies, glaciology, geology, geophysics, and permafrost
changes, identifying actual coastlines masked by ice or meltwater and impacts of
extreme weather events, watching polar flora seasonal changes and climate-driven
ecosystem shifts, and even counting vertebrate (e.g., polar bears, penguins,
etc.) populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PGC facilitates scientists' access
to geospatial resources and respective domain knowledge by providing the
following products and services to the NSF polar community: (1) Access to
billions of square kilometers of repeat-coverage commercial satellite imagery
licensed from multiple companies by U.S. Government agencies for the Antarctic
and Arctic; (2) The PGC's specific institutional knowledge to solve a broad
range of geospatial, high-performance computing, and artificial intelligence
problems; and (3) Geospatial educational courses and online materials to
translate the PGC’s expertise and experience to the NSF polar science community
and encourage diverse graduate and undergraduate students to participate in the
polar remote sensing and geospatial science. PGC educates the next generation of
scientists with the use and manipulation of geospatial products through online
educational materials, accessible documentation, and student employment and
mentorship. PGC will work to broaden participation in polar (and) geospatial
science through partnership with minority-serving institutions. PGC is also a
source of public geospatial data that empowers researchers, educators, and
others from outside the NSF polar community to investigate the limits of the
current understanding of Earth surface processes. PGC’s partnership with
industry (Google, ESRI) and other government agencies (NASA, NGA) further
enhance availability and accessibility of geospatial data via these partners’
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.