* 2129229
* Ignition and Flame Speed Characteristics of H2/Air/Exhaust Gas Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Elisa Toulson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Growing concerns over global warming have led to an increased focus on carbon-
free power cycles. Hydrogen is a promising alternative to conventional ground-
based power gas turbine fuels, such as natural gas, due to its high calorific
value and it is also carbon neutral and can be generated from renewable energy
sources. Therefore, the gas turbine industry has committed to achieve a carbon
neutral energy system using 100% hydrogen firing by 2030. However, hydrogen is
very reactive relative to natural gas resulting in high flame speeds which can
lead to an increased risk of the flame moving upstream and causing
instabilities, such as flashback, within the burner. Consequently, it is
important to understand the flame reactivity, flame stability, and combustion
stability of hydrogen flames. The overall goal of this project is to advance the
understanding of hydrogen combustion and flame characteristics in order to
achieve safe, stable, carbon free, and efficient combustion. Successful
completion of the project will benefit society by increasing our understanding
of dilute hydrogen combustion in gas turbine combustors and other hydrogen
combustion applications, such as internal combustion engines, and their
potential for integration into our energy infrastructure. The project will
further benefit society by introducing the next generation of engineers to
engineering research concepts in the areas of energy and combustion through
Michigan State University (MSU)’s K-12 outreach programs, including MSU Girl’s
STEM Day and MSU engineering summer camps for under-represented groups in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major initiatives are underway in
the United States to improve combustion efficiency and reduce emissions. These
initiatives are primarily focused on the energy and transportation sectors, and
often seek to replace conventional fuels with alternative carbon neutral or
carbon free fuels. Current research is focused on advanced gas turbine
combustors and engines that operate highly diluted on hydrogen/air/exhaust gas
mixtures as this provides a means to reduce oxide of nitrogen and carbon
monoxide emissions while maintaining fuel efficiency. This project will
investigate the ignition and combustion chemical kinetics of
hydrogen/air/exhaust gas mixtures in a rapid compression machine. In addition,
laminar flame speeds and Markstein lengths of the mixtures will be measured in a
constant volume combustion vessel. The autoignition and laminar flame speed
experiments will enable an increased understanding of hydrogen/air/exhaust gas
combustion that will contribute to safe, carbon free, and efficient hydrogen
fuel operation for a cleaner environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.