* 2129912
* Access to Innovative Education: Providing Learning Opportunities and Scholarships for Neurodivergent Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Michelle Wallace, Landmark College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,199,832.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists
and computer scientists by supporting the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Landmark
College. This institution is one of just two colleges in the U.S. that focuses
exclusively on serving students who have a learning difference, including
learning disabilities such as dyslexia, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), and/or autism, collectively referred to as neurodiverse (ND) students.
Over its six-year duration, this project will provide scholarships to 36
undergraduate students who are pursuing either an associate’s or a bachelor’s
degree in life sciences and/or computer science. First-year students will
receive up to four years of scholarship support, and transfer and associate
degree students will receive up to two years of scholarship support. The project
aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with
effective supporting activities, including mentoring, undergraduate research
experiences, internships, career preparation, and participation in robust cohort
activities. With the help of mentors and cohort activities, the scholars will
outline their career goals and steps toward achieving those goals. Scholars will
be drawn from the Landmark College student body, which consists of 100% ND
students, so this project has the potential to diversify participation in STEM
fields and to learn how mentoring and individual development plans support
retention and graduation of this student population. The project focuses on how
effective mentoring leads to better outcomes for ND students in STEM fields and
how to form a stronger STEM identity leading to positive experiences in
internships and undergraduate research. The project proposes concrete strategies
for increasing the number of ND students who are STEM-ready for the
opportunities in today’s workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the project is to increase diversity and degree completion of ND undergraduates
in STEM fields. This project builds on Landmark College’s current institutional
student supports. Psychosocial, non-cognitive factors, such as academic
perseverance, social skills, learning strategies, and academic mindsets, have
generally been demonstrated to influence student persistence in STEM. However,
little is known about how these factors affect neurodiverse students at
bachelor’s and associate degree-granting liberal arts colleges. This project
will investigate the effects of psychosocial factors on ND student persistence
in STEM and, more specifically, will explore how cohort support components
support autistic students. This project investigates the possibility that the
peer support class promotes increased student responsibility and cohort
cohesion. This project will also investigate the possibility that the scholars
develop a healthy disability identity and an identity in a STEM field of study
while persevering in their major because of participating in the mentoring
activities of the project. This project has the potential to advance
understanding of psychosocial factors on ND student persistence in STEM and
early career access. This project will be evaluated via a mixed method approach
using information from the cohort activities and mentoring activities. Results
will be made available on the Landmark College website, as well as through
regional and national conferences and publications. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.