* 2129817
* StiMote: An Ultrasmall, Modular Neurophotonic Stimulator
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* James Weiland, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2023
* USD 649,130.00

Vision loss remains a significant societal problem, decreasing independence and
quality of life for millions world-wide. Though electrical stimulation of visual
pathway neurons creates the sensation of light in people with severe blindness,
inadequate brain machine interface (BMI) technology represents a barrier to
clinical implementation of this potentially impactful technology. Current
systems use large bundles of wires connecting the visual cortex (the part of the
brain that processes visual information) to the skull, which leads to movement,
scarring, and eventual device failure. This research project will create and
test StiMote, a modular brain stimulator that uses light (rather than wires) to
power and program individual modules and electrical stimulation to activate
nerves in the brain to recreate sensory perception or modulate brain activity.
StiMote is only 0.3 mm on a side and is being designed for sight restoration to
help people with severe visual impairment participate more fully in society. The
StiMote architecture can also be used to treat other medical conditions,
including diseases affecting the brain or nervous system. To promote diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI) in research and society, the investigators will
reach but to campus groups including the local chapters of Society of Women
Engineers, the National Society of Black Engineers, and the Society of Hispanic
Professional Engineers to make them aware of the project and involve them in
research through internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on
solving significant technical challenges that will enable impactful parallel
brain interfaces through the development of StiMote. StiMote is designed to
overcome three limitations in current approaches for Visual Cortex Prostheses
(VCPs): (1) Surface stimulation that is low resolution, (2) Penetrating
electrode arrays that can meet requirements for density and channel count, but
will evoke significant foreign body reaction and require stiff multi-wire
tethers to large percutaneous connectors and (3) Modular stimulators with
inductive power/data schemes that do not meet the density needed to restore high
acuity vision due to inductive coil size requirements. The initial estimates
suggest that StiMote can improve the spatial resolution of stimulation by more
than 60X compared to VCPs currently in clinical trials. Eight micron carbon
fiber electrodes will be combined with electrodeposited platinum iridium to
create a highly efficient neural interface. Carbon fibers are minimally scarring
in long term implants, resulting in a large number of healthy neurons within 20
microns of the electrode. This close proximity improves the efficiency of
stimulation. Electrodeposited platinum iridium minimizes electrode polarization
during stimulation, through efficient charge transfer. The investigators will
develop new photovoltaic and ultra-low power circuit chips to form a wireless
stimulation mote with the lowest power consumption to date. The project will
integrate technical advances into StiMote and demonstrate the safety and
efficacy of StiMote for vision restoration in an animal model of
blindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.