* 2129600
* EAGER: Testing for genes associated with migratory behavior in a peripatetic species
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kristina Ramstad, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,926.00

Significant ecological changes are expected over the next century, including
substantial increases in sea level, annual precipitation, daily temperature,
spread of invasive species, and urbanization. To survive these changes, species
will be required to either adapt to new conditions or move (disperse) to
suitable habitats. Many species are unable to disperse due to geographic,
physiological or social constraints, while other species disperse broadly and
often. Peripatetic species are migrant in that they are based in various
locations for relatively short periods of time. It is frequently assumed that
these highly mobile species will weather large-scale habitat disturbance via
dispersal. This assumption, however, has rarely been tested and there is little
known of the genetic basis of migration in peripatetic species, which is key to
determining the likelihood of dispersal and colonization of new habitats. This
research will shed light on the evolutionary responses of a peripatetic species
to the drastic environmental changes expected over the next century. At the same
time, it will improve our understanding of evolution and behavior of wading
birds generally and provide the information needed to properly focus
conservation management efforts. This project also will support the development
of a bioinformatics course and the training of a postdoctoral
fellow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses the threatened American wood stork
(Mycteria americana) as a model species to study the evolution of migratory
behavior in peripatetic species. A complete and annotated reference genome will
be built for wood storks. Whole genome resequencing and genome-wide association
analysis will be used to test for genes under positive selection between
resident and migrant storks nesting throughout the US southeast and Cuba. The
project will test if variation at migration candidate genes is correlated with
recent colonization of stork nesting sites and allow for surveys of variation at
these genes in wading birds broadly. The study will reveal the evolutionary
origins and genetic architecture of migratory phenotypes in wood storks with
broad implications for the evolution of behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.