* 2129576
* Explaining the Surprising Simplicity of Continental Evapotranspiration
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2024
* Kaighin McColl, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2024
* USD 310,789.00

Most of the water that falls to the ground as rain returns to the atmosphere
through surface evaporation and through transpiration, the process through which
plants take up water in their roots and release it from their leaves. Accurate
estimates of evapotranspiration (ET), the sum of evaporation and transpiration,
are thus essential for understanding all things related to the water cycle,
including water resources, surface climate, the carbon cycle, and the health of
crops and ecosystems. ET can be measured directly, but such measurements require
sophisticated equipment which is only available at a few sites. Alternative
methods exist to estimate ET from standard weather observations but such methods
generally need additional information, such as soil moisture and vegetation
height, which is less commonly available. They may also involve calibrations
which are not based on first principles and can be strongly site
specific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award develops and tests a
new ET estimation method based on surface air temperature and moisture, which
are available across the full global network of surface weather stations, along
with satellite observations of surface net radiation. The new method also
eliminates the need for site-specific calibration. The premise of the method is
that the land surface and the air above it are in a state of surface flux
equilibrium (SFE), meaning that the surface air temperature and humidity have
adjusted to the heat and moisture given off by the land, so that observations of
air temperature and humidity can be used to infer ET.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier work has demonstrated that the method works, but
more work is needed to understand the properties of the method and the limits of
its applicability. In particular, the project seeks to understand why the SFE
method works as well as it does, despite its simplicity, over inland continental
areas. On the other hand, the method typically underestimates ET over oceans
(where ET is just evaporation) and overestimates it near coastlines, and the
project also addresses these issues. The work is conducted using a high-
resolution atmospheric model, the System for Atmospheric Modeling (SAM), by
comparing ET derived from SFE with the actual ET from the model
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the societal
value of SFE-derived ET estimates. If successful, the new method will vastly
expand the availability of ET estimates around the globe, thereby providing a
valuable resource for addressing societally important problems related to the
water cycle. In addition the Principal Investigator of the project conducts
public outreach through the Harvard natural history museum, and the project
provide support and training to a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.