* 2129252
* Hydraulic Permeability of Temperate Ice
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Neal Iverson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 02/29/2024
* USD 241,139.00

Water regulates the fast flow of marine-terminating glaciers and ice streams
that affect sea-level rise. Specifically, the flow of glacial ice at depth in
the margins of fast-flowing ice, where the ice is near its pressure melting
point, depends on the fraction of liquid water stored in the network of veins at
ice-grain boundaries. It is therefore critical to understand the permeability of
these systems. The goal of this project is to better understand controls on ice
permeability through tests on laboratory ice and glacier ice. Experiments with
laboratory ice will inform on how grain size and water content affect
permeability, while experiments with glacier ice will examine how deformation of
the ice affects permeability. Results of these experiments will provide a better
understanding of permeability of ice near its pressure melting point as a
function of grain size, water content, and deformation. The experiments are not
intended to simulate interstitial water flow in a glacier. This project includes
graduate and undergraduate participation and seeks to include a participant from
the PolarTREC program to engage students in K-12
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure for the first time
the permeability of temperate ice as a function of its grain size, water
content, and foliation. The team will use a falling-head permeameter designed
and tested for this application. A disk of ice, 140 mm in diameter and up to 70
mm thick, is kept under pressure and at the pressure-melting temperature while
chilled water transiently flows through the disk under a head that is allowed to
decrease with time. The rate of head decrease provides the permeability value.
Different water contents will be achieved by varying the salinity of the ice and
will be measured with a calorimetric method used successfully in prior ice-
deformation experiments. Chilled water introduced to ice disks will contain
fluorescein dye to allow flow networks to be studied in thin-sections after
experiments. Experiments with glacier ice, collected from shallow cores at
Athabasca Glacier, Alberta, will evaluate the effect of ice foliation style and
orientation on permeability. These measurements may also point to differences
between permeability of lab-made and glacier ice that are unrelated to
structural anisotropy. Results of these experiments will provide the first test
of permeability models based on Poiseuille flow of water though idealized vein
networks. These untested models are the primary basis for estimating ice
permeability in glacier flow models. New empirically-grounded permeability
models resulting from this project will allow the water content of temperate
portions of ice-stream shear margins to be estimated, thereby improving models
of ice softening by water and associated ice-flow kinematics in shear
margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.