* 2129803
* Organ formation without cellular boundaries: development of the single-celled giant alga Caulerpa
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Elliot Meyerowitz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,190,000.00

The project seeks to understand the genome and development of an unusual and
little-studied plant, the green alga Caulerpa prolifera. Most plants and animals
are composed of very large numbers of small cells, each serving a specific
function in the organism as a whole. Caulerpa is as large as ordinary plants,
and has the equivalents of leaves, stems and roots – but it is, exceptionally,
one giant cell that can be up to a meter across. The single algal cell
partitions into organs, rather than, as in other plants, the organs forming from
the division and differentiation of many cells. To understand how organs develop
without cell division and cellular specialization, experiments are planned to
characterize the expression of genes in different organs when mature and as they
develop, and to study the structure of the functionally different parts of this
giant cell using electron microscopy. Additional experiments are planned to
localize different gene transcripts to different locations within the cell; and
to develop methods for introducing new genetic material to the alga to test
mechanisms of gene expression control. The planned work will fill in knowledge
of a little-known part of the ocean ecosystem, and will also inform about the
growth and development, and potentially control, of Caulerpa, some species of
which are invasive pests. Algae are also sustainable sources of industrial
products. The knowledge gained has the potential to lead to novel products from
a currently unused source. Undergraduate and graduate students, along with
postdoctoral reasearchers, will be trained in state-of-the-art genomics methods
while learning to address questions that span disciplines of development, cell
biology and genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chlorophyte alga Caulerpa
prolifera poses a challenge to the cell theory, which considers organisms with
differentiated parts to be social organizations of specialized cells. Caulerpa
has fronds, stolons and rhizoids as differentiated organs, but consists of a
single, giant, multinucleate cell. Preliminary work shows it to have a 35Mb
genome containing around 11,000 genes. The goal of the proposed work is to learn
how organs differentiate without cell division or cellular differentiation.
There are five specific sets of experiments, whose aims are: complete the
analysis of the genome with determination of long contigs; test differential RNA
expression and differential presence of proteins in mature and developing
organs; develop methods for in situ hybridization and FISH-seq for RNA
localization in early developing organs; describe the internal structure and
development of the different parts of the giant cell using serial block-face
scanning electron microscopy; and attempt genetic transformation of the alga by
biolistic delivery of fluorescent reporter constructs composed of promoter, gene
and 3’ untranslated regions derived from endogenous
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.