* 2129983
* Collaborative Research: Promoting Lithium Sulfides Redox Cycle via Atomically Dispersed Active Sites for Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Zhaoyang Fan, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,777.00

Batteries play a key role in information technology, energy storage, and
reduction in carbon emissions. The lithium-sulfur battery uses earth-abundant
sulfur as the cathode material and delivers more energy than the current
batteries, thus it is considered as one of the next-generation technologies.
However, its chemistry of converting between sulfur and lithium sulfides is a
very complex process and has fundamental problems that result in low capacity
and short battery lifetime, such as the dissolution of intermediate products and
their shuttling between the two electrodes. Recent evidence has shown the
critical role of single-atom catalysts in promoting this conversion process and
subsequently boosting the battery performance, but the fundamental understanding
of the active catalytic sites and the reaction mechanism remains very elusive.
This hinders the development of a catalyst-functionalized cathode structure with
much improved performance. The current project will fill this knowledge gap,
thus accelerating the development of a practical lithium-sulfur battery
technology to serve the national interest in the key energy storage
applications. The project will also result in societal boarder impacts. The
knowledge gained on single-atom catalysts can be applied to other
electrochemical systems. Graduate and undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented groups, will be trained in the fields of advanced material
science and battery technology. The research outcomes will be incorporated into
the elective courses. The research teams will reach out to the local
communities, recruiting high school students to conduct research and delivering
public lectures on the new battery technology to local public libraries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative fundamental research project will
attain theoretical understanding and experimental validation of the structure-
property correlation of atomically dispersed catalysts in promoting lithium
sulfides redox cycle, and to transform these understandings into an optimized
sulfur cathode design. The project hypothesizes that the electronic structure of
the single-atom catalyst, which is determined by both the metal center and its
local coordination, can be tuned for binding polysulfides and activating the
Li-S and S-S bonds with an optimized strength, thus significantly improving the
landscape of sulfides conversion while preventing polysulfides shuttling. To
this end, combining theoretical calculations and modeling with in-situ/ex-situ
experimental studies, this project will establish the structure-property
correlation of single-atom catalysts in chemisorbing polysulfides and activating
the Li-S and S-S bonds for conversion, and probe and visualize the evolution of
the electrode morphology and its chemical distribution during cycling. The
studies will thus provide insights on the choice of the metal center, its local
coordination, and the electrolyte in the proximity, and reveal their impacts on
the lithium sulfides redox cycle. These understandings of single-atom catalyst
functions on sulfides binding and conversion, both thermodynamically and
kinetically, assisted by advanced characterization tools, will then be leveraged
to design advanced sulfur cathode structures, functionalized with single-atom
catalysts, for demonstration of battery cells with much-improved
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.