* 2129177
* EAGER: Supporting and Learning From Principal Investigators “Making the Leap to Large”
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Joel Cutcher-Gershenfeld, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 03/31/2022
* USD 165,518.00

This project is to document the views of a unique set of researches all of whom
aspire to lead large-scale science and engineering research projects through
stakeholder mapping survey methods. It will also develop exploratory methodology
to deliver serial virtual workshop sessions at scale that prepare researchers to
conceptualize, plan, and execute high impact large projects. To accommodate the
virtual format, the project serialized delivery over 7 weeks and revised the
pedagogy so that each session could be an integrated package of pre-recorded
video, live keynote speakers, formal presentation, short exercises completed in
small break-out groups, and interactive surveys for participant feedback. This
proposal will allow for engaging professionals who can seamlessly deliver these
materials in real time to over 1,000 simultaneous participants and identify
which elements are most effective. Stakeholder mapping surveys will be used both
to provide reflective input to the participants and to advance the science of
science and engineering and better understand the interests and capabilities of
researchers who aspire to lead large-scale science and engineering
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will improve investigator
understanding and capability for advancing the scientific, economic, workforce,
and innovation impacts of their research. It will expand national capacity to
lead large-scale science and engineering research projects. It will also support
long-term hosting of the workshop series for on-going community
reuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.