* 2129008
* FW-HTF-R: Human-Machine Teaming for Effective Data Work at Scale: Upskilling Defense Lawyers Working with Police and Court Process Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Joseph Hellerstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will build tools to help defense attorneys do their work -- in
particular, to help them use and understand the large quantities of data that
they are now asked to handle. As more and more data about policing, courts, and
individual cases becomes available, attorneys are finding that the evidence they
need to advocate for their clients is locked in vast piles of messy, incomplete
data. With the relevant information scattered across scans of hundreds of pages
of paper forms or hours of audio and video, defenders do not have the
programming and data analysis skills they need to extract key information from
the public and private data at their disposal. This leaves defense attorneys at
a disadvantage, particularly public defenders who have limited access to staff
with data analysis expertise and who face high caseloads that leave them limited
time to learn data analysis. To help address this gap, the project team will
partner with legal associations and defense attorneys to develop data analysis
methods and tools that do much of the work of collecting, organizing, and
suggesting analyses of these messy police and court process data. Doing this
will reduce the burden for defense attorneys, increase the value of data, and
ultimately lead to fairer, better outcomes in criminal justice
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's data platform will leverage three
key underlying techniques the project team will advance: (i) familiar no-code
and low-code modalities like natural language search boxes and spreadsheet
interfaces; (ii) program synthesis and machine learning to transform "fuzzy"
queries in no-code interfaces into a space of possible interpretations
(including improving predictions by generalizing from prior tool usage data);
and (iii) interactive ambiguity resolution widgets that present visual
representations of output data, allowing users to steer the tool towards their
target programs or analyses by disambiguating between alternatives generated in
(ii). In developing this platform, the team will contribute advances in program
synthesis and ML-aided program generation, including novel algorithms for
synthesis; develop novel mechanisms and algorithms for learning from users'
prior activity in the context of data work tools; and invent new program
recommendation algorithms, especially for recommending plausible tweaks to
existing data analysis programs. These techniques will be incorporated into a
larger user-centered design process toward building tools and interfaces that
meet public defenders’ needs and take into account the legal context and
constraints in which they work. The tools will be iteratively developed and
evaluated among an increasingly large set of users, starting with individual
defenders and public defenders’ offices, with the goal of producing off-the-
shelf solutions that can be adopted by a range of legal entities and
organizations. Together, the work will contribute to knowledge of how to build
no-code and low-code tools to democratize data access more
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.