* 2129787
* EVO-LTER: Building collaborations to investigate the effects of urbanization on eco-evolutionary dynamics across the LTER network
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Amy Savage, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,969.00

Living organisms are strongly shaped by both ecological and evolutionary forces.
Because ecological and evolutionary processes are constantly interacting, it can
be difficult to fully understand their effects on the biology of organisms. Eco-
evolutionary dynamics theory provides a powerful framework for understanding
interactions between ecology and evolution on contemporary time scales. The
Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) network, which was launched in 1980 and has
over two dozen geographic research sites, has rich historical and contemporary
data for many species across a diversity of biomes. Importantly, many LTER sites
are embedded in urbanizing landscapes, where eco-evolutionary dynamics may be
particularly strong.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;There is a need to bring together
scholars with research expertise in urban eco-evolutionary dynamics and LTER
researchers to (i) integrate LTER approaches and the eco-evolutionary dynamics
framework in an explicitly urban context, and (ii) train future LTER eco-
evolutionary dynamics researchers in an integrative science approach. The
intention of this project is to develop research initiatives that promote
inclusion and equity while advancing the science of ecology and evolutionary
biology. Two workshops will be hosted to meet these goals. Anticipated outcomes
include the preparation of several manuscripts that summarize data synthesis
activities and outline the future of eco-evolutionary research at LTER sites.
Another outcome is the formation of new hypotheses about the effects of
urbanization on eco-evolutionary dynamics across the LTER network to stimulate
plans for future collaborative and transformative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.