* 2129602
* I-Corps: Self-Heating, Electrically Conductive Concrete Heated Pavement System for Sustainable Winter Maintenance Operation
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2021,09/30/2022
* Halil Ceylan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sustainable heated pavement technology to melt ice and snow on
paved surfaces during the winter season. Aviation and transportation agencies
allocate significant time and resources each year to remove ice and snow from
their paved surfaces to achieve a safe, accessible, and operational
transportation network. Transportation networks experience a significant
reduction in mobilization capacity due to speed reduction, delays, and in some
cases complete shutdown of parts of the network due to snow and ice storms each
winter. The current practice for winter maintenance operation includes using
snowplows and deicing chemicals, which is time-consuming, labor-intensive, and
environmentally unfriendly. Implementation of the proposed technology may
improve public safety, limit the use of salt and deicing chemicals, reduce
delays and cancelations in the transportation system (airports, highways, etc.),
reduce the slip and fall potential and the associated settlements. In addition,
the proposed technology may ease the commute of individuals with disabilities in
the winter season and better meet the Americans with Disabilities Act standards.
The technology is designed to be operated remotely via the internet, which
further opens opportunities worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of an electrically conductive concrete (ECON) heated
pavement system as an alternative to conventional snow and ice removal. The
proposed technology utilizes the inherent electrical resistance of concrete to
electricity flow to generate heat, maintain the pavement surface above freezing
temperatures, and thus prevent snow and ice accumulation on the surface. The
electricity is applied using stainless steel rebars embedded in the ECON. A
fully automated control system operates the system. The testing and performance
monitoring of this technology is in progress at two full-scale demonstration
projects at Des Moines International Airport and the Iowa Department of
Transportation headquarters. The proposed technology may provide a smart,
environmentally friendly alternative to plowing and deicing operations and may
effectively mitigate snow and ice formation on paved surfaces while enhancing
the sustainability and resiliency of the infrastructure network in the winter
season.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.