* 2129659
* CNS Core: Small: Reconfigurable Intrabody Network for Therapeutics (RIBNeT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Chronic diseases are on a rapid rise throughout the world due to the growing
aging population and increasing air, water, and food pollution in developing
countries. Recently, emerging implantable and wearable medical devices have led
to new insights in continuous monitoring and automated diagnosis for chronic
diseases. To effectively manage chronic diseases through medical devices, this
research project explores the design of robust and reconfigurable intrabody
therapeutic networks that harvest their own energy. We henceforth call it
Reconfigurable Intrabody Network for Therapeutics or RIBNeT. Since the medical
needs dictate the location and functions of nodes, the RIBNeT coordinates the
operation of two types of nodes in physically separate portions of the body -
the intrabody (energy) harvesting nodes and the intrabody therapeutic nodes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual merit of the proposal is in exploring
a radically different landscape of energy transfer and data communication for
RIBNeT from the perspective of building and operating small therapeutic networks
as dictated by medical needs. Based on the magnetic induction communications
(MIC) technology that works well for the intrabody environment, the energy
harvesting and transfer throughout the body are modeled and tested. A single on-
body node (OBN) is augmented for energy availability inside the body to enable
sustained long-term operation of RIBNeTs. The project also explores the
challenges posed by OBN to the RIBNeT and devise ways of addressing them. In
particular, it designs lightweight mechanisms to monitor and collaboratively
optimize the energy delivery via internal harvesting and OBN, and explores ways
of making the operation robust in the face of OBN removals. In order to minimize
energy use, RIBNeT maximizes opportunities for the nodes to sleep and minimizes
need for inter-node coordination, while still allowing for emergency
transmissions and mitigation of interference between various transmissions. In
order to handle combined energy transfer and communications, the project
explores the design of multi-segment antennas and a thin film-based MEMS energy
harvester integrated into antennas. We build circuit boards for integrated
energy transfer and communications and test them using ex vivo animal tissue and
human subjects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project is expected to pave
the way for the commercial development of highly capable reconfigurable
intrabody networks for therapeutics (RIBNeT). This project will also integrate
the scientific findings and discoveries in education for students across
disciplines (Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, and
Biology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.