* 2129137
* FW-HTF-P: Workers and Technology Together (WATT)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Nhut Ho, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 06/30/2023
* USD 149,532.00

In this planning grant, the WATT project research team will explore the
potential for autonomy technologies to improve the efficiency, productivity,
safety, and security of the organic waste processing industry. Methane released
from organic waste (e.g., food scraps) accounts for a significant percentage of
greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere that contribute to the warming of
the planet, and by extension, climate change. The current methods of sorting and
processing organic waste are inefficient, hazardous, and undertaken primarily by
low-wage temporary workers who lack job security, living wages and benefits. The
research undertaken by the WATT project research team will lay the foundation
for future social and technological innovations within the organic waste
processing industry that will increase operational efficiency, create job
stability, skills training, and upward mobility for workers, create
opportunities for human-machine teaming, and ultimately reduce the impact of
this industry on climate change while uplifting
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WATT research team, through a
transdisciplinary approach consisting of real-time, on-site observations, focus
groups, surveys, and interviews with waste industry stakeholders (line workers,
business owners, safety inspectors/enforcers), will identify socio-technological
innovations that will address the challenges with separation, conversion to
energy, legal frameworks, adaptation of best practices, and climate change
analyses in the context of organic waste processing. The research team consists
of faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, and subject matter experts
representing a diverse cross-section of academic disciplines (e.g., waste
management, manufacturing and mechanical engineering, computer science,
business, law, anthropology, and art and design), an integral and critical piece
of the projectâ€™s approach, that will reveal holistic, transdisciplinary
approaches for improving an industry critical to the responsible functioning of
a 21st century society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.