* 2129710
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Material Reflections of the Emergence of Social Inequality
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 30,296.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the role
of specialized knowledge in constituting sociopolitical power in non-Western
contexts. Understanding sociopolitical organization is a cornerstone of the
social sciences, but this scholarship is often based upon categorical types
derived from Western contexts. Are such categories universally applicable in
understanding sociopolitical development in other social and historical
contexts? Some researchers advocate for more culturally-situated models of
sociopolitical development to understand the global diversity of political
strategies. While the accumulation of material wealth is often treated as a
proxy for social inequality, Indigenous scholars argue that this overshadows a
far more salient foundation of power and social inequality: knowledge. Drawing
from core concepts of Indigenous philosophy, this study asks: In what ways does
specialized knowledge circulate in emergent power structures? Is the control of
knowledge employed to create and legitimize new social inequalities? The deep-
time perspective of archaeology offers important ways of examining changes in
sociopolitical organization from the ground up, without prioritizing pre-
determined typological schemas. This study contextualizes multiple sources of
archaeological and ethnographic data to produce new culturally-situated models
for interpreting sociological change. By relying on the non-destructive
reanalysis of existing museum collections for primary data collection, this
study will add value to existing collections while minimizing the impact on the
in situ archaeological record. This research promotes collaboration between
archaeologists, conservation scientists, museum professionals, and descendant
communities to produce innovative interpretations of sociopolitical
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project utilizes an archaeological example to
examine paint technology to understand the development and eventual dissolution
of a traditional large scale social complex. In this instance, paint is a
specialized technology produced following strict adherence to protocol governed
by ritual sodalities, making it an ideal material to study relationships between
knowledge and power. The project employs social network analysis to evaluate the
homogeneity or heterogeneity of knowledge networks based on shared recipes in
paint and painted material culture. Paint recipes are defined based on both
technological similarities identified through polarized light microscopy, X-ray
fluorescence, and Raman and Fourier Transform Infrared spectroscopy. The
researchers employ these data to examine how the transformation of political
power corresponded with changes in the centralization and dispersal of knowledge
through time. This study represents the first standardized treatment of paint as
such a technology and works to produce a robust database for future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.