* 2129126
* FW-HTF-P: Transforming 911 dispatchers into Next-Generation 911 analysts: Sustainable innovation for training, workflow, and technology resources for NG911 emergency communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Rob Grace, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,973.00

Implementation of the Emergency-Services IP Network and Next-Generation 911
(NG911) infrastructure in the United States allows citizens to contact 911
dispatchers in Public-Safety Answering Points (PSAPs) using voice, text, and
streaming video. Furthermore, PSAPs will be able to receive automated alerts and
situational awareness information from IoT sensors in buildings, vehicles, and
wearable devices. However, this flood of data now goes to a workforce of 911
dispatchers trained as telephone and radio operators, not data analysts. While
national policy goals for accessible, efficient, and resilient 911 service
motivate the ongoing implementation of NG911 infrastructure and services, the
operational challenge of processing the volume, velocity and variety of data
communicated to PSAPs by citizens, sensors, and connected devices has yet to be
solved. In response, this project aims to help 5000+ U.S. PSAPs retrain a
workforce of 911 dispatchers as NG911 analysts capable of making sense of
multichannel, multimodal information. This project aligns with the objectives of
the Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier program by creating
government-industry-academic partnerships that can develop future workers and
technologies capable of improving the accessibility, efficiency, and resilience
of 911 service during future emergencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
is facilitating participatory design workshops with early-adopter PSAPs to co-
design scenario-based training simulations that allow cross-functional teams
including 911 dispatchers and NG911 analysts to develop expertise in
distributed, multimodal sensemaking. Informed by integrated theories of
sensemaking, the workshops are helping researchers and practitioners understand
the domain-specific competencies NG911 analysts will require to notice cues in
multimodal information and heed/encode external representations that support the
work of 911 dispatchers and first responders. The project team is using this
knowledge to develop scenario-based training resources that extend sensemaking
approaches to worker training developed in cognitive science and naturalistic
decision-making. Additionally, the project team is facilitating workshops with
government and industry stakeholders to co-design joint-action plans for
sustaining practitioner-led innovation in the design of technologies supporting
distributed, multimodal sensemaking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.