* 2129235
* Dimensions US-China: Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Impact of Eutrophication on the World's Grassland Soil Microbial Biodiversity and Functioning
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Jizhong Zhou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,026,980.00

Human activities are increasing the amount of biologically limiting nutrients,
such nitrogen (N) and phosphorus (P), flowing into ecosystems on every
continent, and this increased nutrient supply is causing dramatic impacts such
as biodiversity loss. Microbes comprise most of the biodiversity on earth, and
the diversity of microbes in the soil is a critical link in maintaining the
health of our ecosystems. However, we have little understanding of how
alteration of global nutrient supplies are affecting soil microbial diversity.
The proposed work will quantify how increased nutrient supplies affect soil
microbial diversity and how these changes affect the functioning of grassland
ecosystems around the world. The research will leverage a worldwide network of
scientists, the Nutrient Network (NutNet), who are replicationg an identical
nutrient-addition experiment at more than 100 grassland sites across 26
countries. Using this global research platform, this project will explore
different ‘diversities’ of the soil microbes by counting their idenities
(taxonomic diversity, TD), their evolutionary relationships (phylogenetic
diversity, PD), the genes encoded in their DNA (genetic diversity, GD), and what
they are doing (functional diversity, FD). The scientists on this research team
will not only determine how these different dimensions of diversity respond to
the nutrient change but also why they are changing. Are microbial communities
changing because some microbes can grow better (abiotic filtering), compete or
cooperate with other microbes or plants (biotic interactions), or are good or
bad at migration (dispersal), or appear by chance (drift)? This project will
develop new mathematical models to predict how nutrients change the diversity of
soil microbes and their functions in different regions in the future. Broader
impacts of this project include (i) increased public engagement and literacy in
STEM via K12 education that will reach over 4,000 K-12 students including from
under-served schools using NutNet plots set up for education at Cedar Creek and
activities at Oklahoma; (ii) enhanced research infrastructure of the global
NutNet collaboration, which benefits the greater research community via
published data, provision of samples, and space for additional projects; and
(iii) advanced training in international cross-disciplinary collaboration for
project post-docs and students, that will generate a more competitive workforce
to engage in systems-level problem solving for agriculture, environment, ecology
and climate research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use high throughput
metagenomics technologies and integrative mathematical and statistical modeling
to analyze soil grassland microbial diversity responses to experimental
eutrophication along global gradients in climate, plant diversity, and edaphic
conditions. The research will test theory-based predictions about the responses
of soil microbes to nutrient supply across scales of space and time, generating
novel insights into: (i) global patterns of soil microbial biodiversity (TD, PD,
GD, FD) along broad gradients of climate, plant diversity, and edaphic
conditions; (ii) the context-dependence and interactive effects of N and P
supply on grassland soil microbial communities, nutrients, and soil C storage;
(iii) the importance of plant, microbe and soil elemental stoichiometry for
controlling the responses of microbial biodiversity and functioning to nutrient
supply, as well as the role of plant-microbe interactions in mediating plant
responses to nutrient addition; (iv) the relative importance of stochastic
(e.g., dispersal) and deterministic (e.g., abiotic filtering, biotic
interactions) processes controlling responses by each of the dimensions of
microbial biodiversity to nutrient addition across global environmental and
geographic gradients; (v) the importance of biodiversity and community assembly
in controlling soil microbial ecosystem functioning, and the influence of
environmental factors (e.g., soil, plant, climate, geography); (vi) potential
“biomarkers” (key taxa or genes) of grassland soil functions; (vii) novel
metagenomics-enabled ecosystem models for global simulation of grassland soil C
dynamics; and (viii) model-inferred impacts of nutrient addition on soil C
dynamics across biogeographic gradients in climate, plants and edaphic
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.