* 2129383
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Abandonment and rebound: Societal views on landscape- and land-use change and their impacts on water and soils (ABRESO)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* William McDowell, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 334,008.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop a global transdisciplinary
platform for understanding the impacts of land abandonment on sustainability of
soil and water resources. Land abandonment and subsequent land use or land cover
change can have profound implications for water resources, as the changing
fabric of the Critical Zone dictates changes in infiltration, runoff, and the
delivery of sediment and nitrogen to groundwater and surface waters. The project
team will describe social and natural forcing functions that drive land
abandonment and subsequent land use change; and quantify impacts on water
quality due to this abandonment. The team will also identify gaps in
understanding of the impacts and those perceived by stakeholders so that land
use change can be better understood and modeled. The team will use this
information to develop a modeling framework to assess sustainability of various
land use and land abandonment scenarios in the context of the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.