* 2129369
* NSF/FDA SIR: 3D Human Stem Cell Cardiac Model for Cardiac Electrophysiology Medical Device Safety Assessment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* John Fisher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

Heart Failure (HF) is the leading cause of death worldwide. Recently, a new
medical device therapy called Cardiac Contractility Modulation (CCM) has been
approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to be used in eligible HF
patients. CCM devices are implantable electrical pulse generators that deliver
stimulations to the heart to increase the strength of the heart contraction
during HF. The true benefit of these devices has not been reached due to a lack
of predictive human-based preclinical test methods. The goal of this one-year
NSF/FDA Scholar-in-Residence program is to develop a 3D Printed Human Heart
Model to predict the effects of cardiac electrophysiology medical devices (e.g.,
CCM) at the bench. This model has a potential to reduce the burden on animal
testing and clinical trials for cardiacmedical device development and may inform
FDA regulatory review process and ultimately accelerate heart failure patients
access to innovative, safe and effective devices. This study will partner
faculty and students at the University of Maryland and regulatory scientists at
the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) at the
FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to develop a robust
high-throughput 3D printed (3DP) engineered heart tissue (EHT) model composed of
human induced pluripotent stem cell derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC CMs) and to
apply this model to preclinical assessment of human cardiac electrophysiology
medical devices in vitro. Specifically, we will leverage our previous experience
and development of a cell adhesion centrifugation (CAC) assay to investigate its
utility for generating EHTs in a quantity sufficient to support high-throughput
regulatory studies. This model will be used to elucidate the acute effects of
Cardiac Contractility Modulation (CCM) therapy medical devices on human cardiac
function in vitro. As such we will investigate the functional consequences of
clinical CCM stimulation parameters on 3DP EHTs and quantify the response for
all three cardiac excitation-contraction coupling readouts (i.e.,
electrophysiology, calcium handling, and contraction) in a high-throughput
manner. The work described in this project will address current regulatory
knowledge gaps and demonstrate the utility of hiPSC-CM 3DP EHT constructs to
assess safety and effectiveness of cardiac electrophysiology medical devices in
vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.