* 2129966
* Winning Approaches for Talented Transfers in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Mary Preuss, Webster University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,191,833.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income transfer students with demonstrated
financial need at Webster University. Over its five-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 32 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in chemistry and biology. The project focuses on the
recruitment of transfer students from local and regional community colleges,
with each scholar receiving 2-2.5 years of funding. This project will expand
upon targeted academic and student support systems that have proven effective in
decreasing time to graduation and in building collaborations with industry
partners. The program will examine the effectiveness and impact of all
activities offered, including the incorporation of a research component into
scholarship recipients’ first semester. Best practices and lessons learned from
this project will be documented and shared with other institutions interested in
attracting and successfully graduating students transferring from community
colleges and majoring in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project has three main
objectives: to recruit and enroll academically talented, low-income community
college students into biology and chemistry bachelor’s degree programs; to
retain at least 90% of the students through targeted support practices; and to
prepare our scholars for relevant industry employment or graduate level study.
By implementing a research experience as part of a learning community in their
first semester, the effectiveness on retention not only at Webster, but in
research-oriented careers will be examined. The evaluation and knowledge-
generation plan has been designed to gather both quantitative and qualitative
annual data on the scholars’ program experience and post-graduation plans. Data
will be used to understand the extent to which the overall articulated program
goals and outcomes are met and what areas can be strengthened. The outcomes and
evidence generated from the project will be presented at teaching and learning
conferences and in academic journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.