* 2129730
* 16th US National Congress on Computational Mechanics (USNCCM XVI); Virtual; July 25-29, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2022
* Arif Masud, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

This grant provides registration support for graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars to participate in the 16th US National Congress on Computational
Mechanics (USNCCM16) that will be held virtually from July 25 to 29, 2021.
USNCCM has been the premier event of the U.S. Association for Computational
Mechanics (USACM) since 1991. The biennial event attracts a wide international
and US audience covering broad aspects of computational sciences, including
topics of fluid mechanics and solid mechanics, mathematics, biology,
manufacturing, materials science, nanotechnology, high-performance computing,
and data sciences. The conference will be attended by researchers and
professionals from industry, governmental laboratories, and academia. Through
this grant, the students and post-doctoral researchers will be exposed to the
state-of-the-art developments in computational sciences and mechanics. They will
also be given opportunities to present their research, attend career events, as
well as conduct networking for professional prospects. There will be a special
networking event for women researchers in computational mechanics. The
organizing committee will make a concerted effort to encourage students and
postdocs from underrepresented groups to participate in the overall
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At USNCCM XVI, the focus will be on the
development and applications of novel, state-of-the-art computational models and
numerical methods in a wide variety of scientific and engineering fields.
Constitutive behavior, multiphysics phenomena, algorithmic advances, multiscale
and data-driven methods, and uncertainty quantification will be covered at
substantial length through a wide-ranging program. All talks, including plenary
and semi-plenary sessions, will be live streamed. Students and post-doctoral
researchers will participate through presentations in technical and special
poster sessions. A panel discussion is planned with experts from industry,
academia, and government labs to provide future directions and career advice.
The Female Researchers Group (FRG) of USACM will also organize a minisymposium
for the women researchers on the role and contributions of women in sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.