* 2129444
* Functional logic of neural circuits: diamonds in the rough
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Eduardo Izquierdo, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,500.00

One of the pressing challenges to understand large and complex nervous systems
is to map how and for what purpose neurons communicate at the lowest level. One-
way researchers have made great progress is by recording enormous amounts of
information about the neuronal connections, circuits, neural activity, behavior
and even genomic structure of smaller nervous systems of some model systems,
such as the nematode, fruit fly, or zebrafish. However, all this detailed
information has not yet led to satisfying and deeper insight into important
questions relevant to understanding the human brain. For example, how do
circuits of neurons process, encode, store, and retrieve information? To address
such questions, it is important to develop conceptual and theoretical frameworks
of the functional logic of brain circuits that go beyond the current
computational models. This award will bring together neuroscience pioneers from
different fields, including experimental, computational, and theoretical
disciplines to define the most important topics and questions to address this
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The organizers will produce and lead a workshop
on the Functional Logic of Neural Circuits. The workshop will take place in two
phases, a virtual meeting followed by an in-person meeting four months later, in
Puerto Rico. In the first phase, the participants will bring up questions and
map out the gap among the diverse fields intersecting these disciplines. They
will collect ideas from diverse researchers, gauge interest, and solicit
feedback and collective input from forward thinkers in these areas to lay ground
for the second phase. In a second phase, participants will identify concrete
research directions and opportunities that, if pursued, can initiate new
conceptual developments that will lead to new breakthroughs in our understanding
of the functional logic of neural circuits. The specific topic of the workshop,
namely the functional logic of neural circuits offers an opportunity to impact
not just our understanding of nervous systems, large or small, but also inform
the development of artificial systems with the robustness and flexibility of
living organisms. Finally, this workshop aims to not only bring together
scientists to identify difficult problems at interdisciplinary interfaces, but
to also train a young and diverse generation of diverse scientists to
collaborate at the frontiers of neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.