* 2129570
* Workshop on innovation in hot water system design to meet simultaneous water quality, public health, and conservation objectives
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Katherine Alfredo, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 118,769.00

Hot water systems include water heaters, pipes, and connected fixtures to supply
hot water within buildings. These systems require a complex interplay of
performance requirements and risk trade-offs, while supplying hot water of
appropriate temperature, pressure, chemical, and microbiological water quality
to protect human health. Improper operation of hot water systems can lead to the
growth of plumbing pathogens like Legionella pneumophila, production of
disinfection byproducts and other toxic compounds, inefficient energy
consumption, and water wastage. Proper management of hot water systems thus
requires a cross disciplinary approach to avoid such adverse outcomes. This
grant will support costs for a hybrid workshop consisting of virtual meetings
and a two-day in-person workshop focused on innovations in hot water system
design. The goal of the workshop is to develop a common level of knowledge
across disciplines related to water quality, public health, building science,
and energy. The in-person workshop will advance interdisciplinary hot water
system convergence research focused on water quality, energy efficiency, and
protection of human health through the control of Legionella and other
pathogens. Expected outputs are a project report, peer reviewed manuscripts, and
facilitation of interdisciplinary research collaborations for potential future
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This grant will support costs for a blended
virtual/in-person workshop focused on innovation in hot water system design to
meet simultaneous water quality, public health, and conservation objectives. The
overall goal of the workshop is to identify the science to assess the hypothesis
that hot water systems can be reengineered as beneficial and distributed
treatment applications that significantly control and improve downpipe chemical
and microbial water quality while still maintaining thermal efficiency through
their design life. The specific goals of this workshop designed to achieve this
goal include a focus on i) facilitating interdisciplinary knowledge exchange
related to the fundamental processes involved in hot water systems and their
impact on residential public health; ii) reimagining hot water systems as a
series of treatments and practices that reduce the contaminants rather a system
that exerts a contamination surcharge; and iii) catalyzing networking between
groups of interdisciplinary researchers for future research collaborations
related to hot water system improvements and innovation. Dissemination of
results from this project will be achieved through a project report, peer
reviewed manuscripts, and compilation of a bibliography of area-specific and hot
water system specific literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.