* 2129974
* Excelerate: Inspiring Excellence and Accelerating Achievement Through a STEM Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* John Poelma, Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,850.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Mississippi Gulf Coast Community College. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships for 115 full-time students pursuing associate
degrees in biological science, physical science, mathematics/statistics,
computer and information science, engineering, and emerging technology fields.
First-year students will receive up to two years of scholarship support. The
project’s goal is to increase student persistence and completion in STEM fields
by providing scholarships coupled with effective support activities including
mentoring, learning communities, advising, an early alert system, ePortfolios,
and a Summer Bridge Program. This project will improve STEM education and offer
additional opportunities to pursue STEM courses of study to groups of students
whose participation in STEM lags below their proportion in the overall
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. This project will investigate how students
benefit from co-curricular strategies such as cohorts and faculty mentoring when
they are combined with other strategies like peer mentoring, summer bridge
programs, co-curricular supports, and early alert systems. This project has the
potential to advance the understanding of how these interventions contribute to
the persistence and completion rates for a diverse group of students in STEM
disciplines. Quantitative and qualitative measures will be used to determine
project outcomes and the extent to which they are effective and replicable. End
of semester surveys, and student progress reports will form the basis of a
formative evaluation effort. Results of this project will be made available
through a public webpage, presentations at regional conferences, and
publications in peer-reviewed journals. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.