* 2129189
* RESEARCH-PGR/NSF-BSF: Identification and Functional Dissection of Shared Cis-Regulatory Elements Controlling Quantitative Trait Variation Across Angiosperms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Madelaine Bartlett, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,046,050.00

Crop plants provide food, feed for livestock, and other essential materials.
Breeders are continuously improving our crops; however, there is an urgent need
to accelerate crop improvement in the face of climate change and limited
resources. Natural genetic variation in the form of DNA mutations is widespread
in crops, and is the starting material for their improvement, but such variation
is often not useful or is unpredictable in its effect on plant growth. Genes
that control important yield traits are expressed at specific levels, locations
and times during plant growth, and tuning these expression programs may enhance
crop productivity. Gene expression is controlled by regions of DNA surrounding
genes known as cis-regulatory elements. Despite their fundamental biological
significance, the identification of such elements and their use in agriculture
has been challenging. This research project, a collaborative effort between
scientists at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, the University of Massachusetts-
Amherst, and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, will predict regulatory
elements using a newly developed computational algorithm, Conservatory, combined
with existing genome sequences from many plant families. These elements will
then be modified using CRISPR genome editing tools. These new variants will be
tested for changes in phenotype that lead to improvements in yield and other
important agronomic traits. The project will train young scientists at various
levels, as well as promote outreach and education in plant genomics in
partnership with Genspace, a Community Biology lab in Brooklyn, NY. The project
will develop a new curriculum for high school students from under-resourced
Title I schools and demographic groups historically excluded from the life
sciences to explore applications of CRISPR in agriculture, including hands-on
labs in plant transformation and CRISPR editing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the hypothesis that genes with conserved functions are
regulated by deeply conserved cis-regulatory elements (CREs) across angiosperms,
and that characterizing these CREs will provide a new level of understanding in
linking genotype to phenotype. The project will exploit the recent explosion in
high-quality sequenced genomes to identify conserved regulatory elements across
angiosperm diversity using the Conservatory algorithm. The functions of the
elements identified by Conservatory will be tested by precise genome editing,
with a focus on developmental regulators and architectural traits. Functional
dissections will be performed in two species in each of three diverse plant
families, spanning eudicots and monocots, which will allow the assessment of CRE
functional evolution over shallow and deep timescales. The catalog of conserved
regulatory elements identified, and the editing strategies developed to test
their functions, will reveal fundamental principles governing gene expression
control and will accelerate innovative approaches to fine-tune crop productivity
traits. Critically, the tools, techniques and fundamental principles emerging
from this multi-disciplinary project will comprise a valuable community
resource, enabling the engineering of diverse systems and phenotypes, such as
biotic and abiotic stress tolerance, nutritional quality, and symbiosis. All
project outcomes will be widely accessible through long-term public data and
genetic repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.