* 2129606
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Fracture Response and Transport Behavior in Additively Manufactured, Layered Concrete Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* William Weiss, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 324,996.00

This research focuses on the development of a new generation of 3D-printed
cementitious materials with enhanced performance. Layered, 3D-printed concrete
components are being developed in infrastructure and housing construction.
However, broad adoption of these components by the construction industry is
impeded by less-than-satisfactory mechanical properties and durability. As such,
there is an urgency to better understand and improve performance of 3D-printed
concrete materials. This research will gain fundamental understanding of the
internal arrangements of 3D-printed concrete at the micron scale and explore
layer deposition to tailor the internal structure of these novel materials and
enhance mechanical and fracture properties, as well as the long-term durability
and safety. This research will push forward the boundaries of knowledge, leading
to transformative engineering solutions, broad implications, and recommendations
transferable to large-scale applications where concrete is used, such as homes,
buildings, roads, and bridges. Findings from this research has the potential to
improve conventional concrete infrastructures, such as advancing curing and
slip-form construction. The educational and outreach activities will provide
opportunities for students (including graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students) to learn about new directions and career prospects in civil
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will achieve a foundational
understanding of the physics of 3D-printed concrete in several temporal and
spatial scales. Material characterization will be conducted during extrusion,
3D-printing, and hardening stages using neutron radiography, micro-computed
tomography, X-ray diffraction, and elemental mapping of interfacial zones and
filaments. The research will answer fundamental questions about the mechanisms
involved in the extrusion process, such as the formation of a so-called
“lubrication layer”. The research will examine the hypothesized ways in which
this water-rich layer can de-homogenize and control the spatial water
distribution within the tube/barrel prior to deposition, after deposition
(during the knitting/bonding), and the spatial morphology and connectivity of
the pore network and hydrated compounds surrounding the interfaces. The
knowledge will then be used to inform designs of the internal architecture of
the material with the goal of tailoring fracture response and transport
behavior. By engineering the weak attributes of the interfaces with internal
helical architectures, this research will enhance mixed-mode fracture toughness
in 3D-printed cementitious materials based on linear elastic fracture mechanics
principles. By engineering intentional flaws and tailoring the morphology of the
pore network, the fluid-transport behavior in these materials will be
controlled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.