* 2129569
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel, Non-Manual Solution for Mitigating Endoscope Looping in Riskier Colonoscopies
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* James Hathorn, COLOWRAP, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,801.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a functional prototype for
a novel abdominal compression device that prevents endoscope looping during
colonoscopy, a common complication that causes pain, procedure failure, and
increased risk of bowel perforation. Looping is typically countered with manual
application of external pressure to the abdomen by nurses, which is
inconsistently effective and can lead to staff injury. This project proposes a
novel compression device that provides a safe and effective alternative to
manual abdominal pressure to improve colonoscopy outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
address the technical challenges associated with engineering a colonoscopy
compression device addressing the deficiencies of existing devices in patients
with low body mass index (BMI) and low abdominal tissue volume. This project
will accomplish this by first characterizing the differences in pressure applied
by existing colonoscopy compression devices in high versus low BMI patients
using pressure mapping. The results of this study will be utilized to design an
adjustable and re-usable insert system that can be used during colonoscopy to
apply different amounts of focused pressure. A prototype device will be produced
and tested for localized pressure within a pressure range optimize to prevent
looping in a low-BMI patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.