* 2129594
* Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project Phase-5 Weather Research and Forecasting (CMIP5-WRF) Simulations Quantifying Anthropogenic Forcing and Saharan Long-range Dust Transport
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Gregory Jenkins, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2025
* USD 725,958.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Satellite images sometimes show a
great brown plume of airborne dust covering the Atlantic ocean from West Africa
to the Caribbean. The dust plume, lofted from the Sahara desert and blown
downwind for thousands of miles, is extensive and thick enough to affect world
climate through its radiative effects, and enough dust crosses the Atlantic to
affect air quality in the Carribean and the southeast US. More locally, the dust
is a public health challenge throughout North and West Africa, linked to asthma,
bronchitis, acute respiratory infections, and other conditions. The substantial
impacts of Saharan dust motivate research on the likely changes in dust emission
and transport due to global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
considers likely changes in Saharan dust emission and transport over the 21st
century using computer simulations from a regional model, the Weather Research
and Forecasting (WRF) model with the dust module from the Goddard Chemistry
Aerosol Radiation and Transport (GOCART) model. WRF is integrated over West
Africa and the downwind Atlantic using boundary conditions from global
reanalysis products and global model simulations of future climate change.
Global model simulations are taken from the archive of the Coupled Model
Intercomparison Project version 5 (CMIP5) and use three different estimates of
likely future emissions of greenhouse gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
focuses on changes in atmospheric circulation and their likely effects on the
lofting and transport of Saharan dust. Motivation for the work comes from the
association between Saharan dust and the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), a
large-scale oscillation in sea level pressure between the Icelandic Low and the
Azores High that causes changes in the strength of the surface winds over the
Atlantic north of the equator. A further consideration is the extent to which
intensification of the Saharan Heat Low in a warming climate could cause
strengthening of surface winds which could in turn stir up more dust from the
desert. Warming-induced changes in the intertropical convergence zone (ITCZ) are
also examined as a potential influence on Saharan dust transport across the
Sahel and into the Guinea region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The health impacts of
Saharan dust make the project societally relevant as well as scientifically
interesting. One consideration here is that West Africa is currently home to
roughly 350 million people and the population is expected to more than double by
2050. Another is that changes in the dust content of air over the Atlantic has
implications for both US air quality and the formation of landfalling
hurricanes. In addition, the project would provide support and training to a
postdoctoral fellow and a graduate student, as well as an undergraduate student
working on an hourly basis. Project participants participate in the campus
EnvironMentors program, developing a project for a high school student to work
on during the academic school year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.