* 2129550
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an industrial flow meter for low-volume dispensing
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2021,01/31/2023
* Yuyang Fan, TENDO TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will create a new
way to deliver certain fluids, such as intravenous drugs. Small dose dispensing
($35.63 billion annual global market) is a vital activity across many different
industries including pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and consumer products
(e.g. flavors &amp; fragrances). Firms in these sectors are creating highly
valuable concentrated liquids and need to deliver extremely small volumes in an
efficient, accurate, and precise manner to minimize lost materials and ensure
the safety of their customers and integrity of their product. Current dispensing
technologies create a bottleneck in the manufacturing process by inhibiting
parallel dispensing, or are too costly to justify the value they provide. This
project advances a sterilizable, highly accurate, and resource-efficient
solution to deliver small amounts of many types of fluids with up to 20-fold
increase in throughput, 75% footprint reduction, and 95% reduction in cost
without compromising accuracy or precision. These properties directly meet the
needs in several industry segments such as pharmaceutical dispensing, scientific
research, and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is to advance a method of elastic filament velocimetry (EFV), which
utilizes a strain-based sensor to measure the velocity of fluid passing over a
free-standing, electrically-conductive nanoscale ribbon. Drag from the passing
flow deflects the nanoribbon and induces an axial strain and a change in the
resistance that is directly related to flow. The small dimensions of the sensing
element result in viscously-dominated drag force, enabling sensitivity to both
liquids and gases. Most commercial strain-based sensors utilize calibrated
cantilevers or plates embedded with strain gauges on one or more surfaces before
the entire member is calibrated to the fluid velocity. The current approach
combines the calibrated member and strain gauge into a single unit, eliminating
the most complicated and expensive aspects of previous designs. The project will
further enhance this technology by exploring more accessible nanoribbon
materials, quantifying sensor drift over time, characterizing response to
differing fluid properties, and define operating parameters by exposing the
sensor to non-ideal conditions. At the conclusion of the project, the sensors
will have defined calibration and operating parameters and will be suitable for
use with a wide array of fluids, including
injectables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.