* 2129580
* Revitalizing a field wireless network for research, education and outreach at the Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* J Munger, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 161,588.00

Research in environmental science is increasingly dependent on sensor arrays,
computer networks, and near-real-time data processing and visualization. At the
Harvard Forest, the Field Wireless Network extends the university computer
network into the research forest where there is little or no cell phone
reception. Since 2010 the Field Wireless has supported a wide range of research
projects with investigators from many different institutions, resulting in (as
of March 2021) 27 datasets publicly available online and 291 related scientific
publications. Many of these projects are long-term experiments associated with
the LTER and AmeriFlux networks; others are short-term projects by researchers
drawn to the Forest because of its infrastructure and long-term data. The Field
Wireless enables scientists to monitor and control their equipment and collect
data remotely, reducing travel costs and loss of data from problems that would
otherwise have gone undetected since the last in-person visit. In recent years,
and especially after the onset of the pandemic, the Field Wireless has supported
virtual field trips and remote instruction, broadening the audience and
geographic reach of the Forestâ€™s education and outreach efforts. This project
will greatly improve the performance of the Field Wireless by significantly
increasing network bandwidth and the number of sites with Wi-Fi capability.
These improvements will enable exciting new possibilities for research,
including data collection from more extensive sensor arrays, video streaming,
and near-real-time ecological forecasting. They will also expand the number and
diversity of field sites available for remote instruction, especially benefiting
groups that are underrepresented in the sciences and often unable to visit the
Forest in person due to distance, cost, or physical accessibility. Virtual field
trips and remote learning via the Field Wireless will remain a major means for a
reaching a broader audience long after the pandemic has
receded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand and revitalize the
Harvard Forest Field Wireless Network, which was commissioned in 2010 with
support from NSF, DOE, and Harvard University and is jointly managed by the
Forest and Harvard Network Operations. The Field Wireless currently provides
Internet access to field sites spread across the 375-ha Prospect Hill Tract,
including 10 major sites with a walk-in equipment shed, 24-port network switch,
and wireless access point (AP), and 10 minor sites with an instrument enclosure
and data logger or phenology camera. Sites are connected by carrier-grade
unlicensed spread-spectrum radios: 5.8 GHz radios for tower-to-tower
communications with unobstructed line of sight and 900 MHz radios for tower-to-
ground communications through the forest canopy. Network bandwidth is limited by
the radios and ranges from 2 to 5 Mbps, depending on the site. A dedicated
virtual private network (VPN) allows researchers to access their equipment
remotely when not at the Forest. This project will retain the basic design of
the Field Wireless but greatly improve its performance by (1) replacing the
current radios (which are no longer available) with new radios at least an order
of magnitude faster, (2) adding two new experimental sites, (3) adding Wi-Fi
capability at nine sites that currently lack it, and (4) augmenting Wi-Fi at
four sites that are regularly used for education and outreach. The resulting
increase in network bandwidth and Wi-Fi availability will significantly improve
support for data-intensive research projects, virtual field trips, and remote
instruction; by improving communications, it will also enhance safety for
students and scientists working in the Prospect Hill Tract of the Harvard Forest
(https://harvardforest.fas.harvard.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.