* 2129197
* I-Corps: Evidence-based intervention software platform for autistic individuals
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Joanne Nicholson, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an online software platform to enhance workplace support for and
increase productivity of Autistic individuals. There is a growing body of
evidence about the organizational value of hiring workers with disabilities.
Many top corporations in the US embrace a social responsibility agenda, seeking
to comply with federal guidelines and appeal to like-minded customers. Federal
support for the inclusion of individuals with disabilities is reflected in US
policies and states offer tax credits to employers who employ individuals with
disabilities. The aim of the proposed technology is to build an accessible,
scalable solution, available via mobile devices (e.g., smartphone, tablet,
laptop) that empowers the employee while conveying benefits to the employer. The
most important anticipated impact will be in increased opportunities for
Autistic and other neurodivergent individuals, particularly those living with
co-occurring behavioral health challenges, to achieve successful employment. The
use of the proposed online, accessible tools and resources may contribute to
positive changes in motivation, self-efficacy, social support, and job tenure
while being readily scalable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based
on the development of user-friendly online software tools and resources
available via smartphone, tablet, or laptop to support Autistic employees in
achieving employment success. The proposed technology is derived from evidence-
based, in-person supported employment studies and knowledge and understanding
gained through years of implementation, research and multiple randomized
controlled trials. In-person support is relatively expensive (e.g., training the
provider, implementing logistics), not widely available, and not readily
accessible in the workplace. The initial prototype technology has been developed
and validated through user-experience design and feasibility studies. It is
unique in its workplace focus, research foundation, and attention to both
behavioral health and neurodivergence. The proposed tools may be effective
stand-alone resources or may be used in addition to in-person support to broaden
and sustain impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.