* 2129047
* Collaborative research: FW-HTF-R: The Future of News Work: Human-Technology Collaboration of Journalistic Research and Narrative Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kevin Crowston, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 721,700.00

This project explores the future co-evolution of news work and computational
tools. Journalists and news work are important to study because, even in the
face of numerous challenges, news organizations remain a powerful force for
keeping communities safe and healthy by providing information about events and
trends to help people make better decisions about their lives. Journalism, as an
information-based industry and profession, has always been impacted by new
technologies, most recently by the rise of the Internet and loss of advertising
revenue, as well as the long-standing tension between journalistic values and
business interests. These pressures take a toll on journalistic processes and
products. Some important stories are not getting told: they take too much time
to discover, research, and craft into narratives, and time is increasingly in
short supply. The project seeks to address these problems through a combination
of fieldwork and user-centered development of interactive tools for supporting
journalists in research and narrative discovery, i.e., finding the story that
the data tell and interesting and relevant ways to convey that story to a
reader. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge about
technology and news work through field studies and user-centered development of
interactive tools for supporting journalists in research and narrative
discovery. The resulting technology-supported work processes will be evaluated
in experiments with freelance journalists and through deployment in newsrooms.
The proposed project is composed of several interwoven components, each with a
specific focus, yet designed to be mutually supportive and to lead to research
convergence: (1) focus on better understanding workers, their work and
especially their current relationship to technology in newsrooms; (2) build and
assess ways to support journalistic research, specifically finding relevant
information in large document collections of different kinds, using deep
learning techniques for entity extraction and coreference resolution (AllenNLP),
semantic search (BERT) and common sense reasoning (COMET); and (3) build and
assess ways to support narrative discovery. Resulting tools will be evaluated in
field experiments and through their impacts on work examined in field studies.
Both sets of tools will later be augmented by adding the ability to work on
audio data. Assessment will be extended to consider alternative ways to divide
tasks between human journalists and the computational tools. Running throughout
the project will be work on evaluation, synthesis, dissemination of findings and
tools, planning and project management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.