* 2129795
* Applying Student Knowledge for Success in Cybersecurity and Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Daehan Kwak, Kean University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,641,645.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Kean University, the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Fairleigh
Dickinson University, Brookdale Community College, and Union County College. In
particular, it responds to areas of national need in cybersecurity and data
science by increasing the number of students graduating in Computer Science (CS)
and Information Technology (IT). Moreover, the project will build regional
workforce strength and contribute to the knowledge base on the role of student
competence and belonging in ensuring persistence to degree attainment. Over its
five-year duration, a total of 256 students will benefit, receiving scholarships
to complete CS or IT degrees. Project components include scholarship support for
students, undergraduate research and/or professional experience opportunities
prior to graduation, and generation of new knowledge through research on
economic realities for students and impact on career trajectories in
cybersecurity and data science. Students in this program will be prepared to
enter the scientific workforce or graduate school as competent, highly trained
individuals with a background in teamwork and research. Furthermore, they will
contribute to increased professional diversity in the fields of CS and IT, and
serve as role models to members of their communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
students recruited for this program will participate in workshops, take
advantage of cohort experiences, and interact closely with faculty who will
provide i) academic advising, ii) guidance for navigating higher education and
postgraduate opportunities, and iii) supervision of teamwork, research, and
working professional experiences. Through undergraduate research opportunities
and experiences from participation in faculty research programs and/or existing
summer research and internship programs, these individual and cohort experiences
will provide a basis for overall intellectual growth and promote increased
student confidence, retention, and timely degree completion. These academic
outcomes are in turn expected to allow students to successfully navigate common
attrition points including financial hardship and professional identity
development for post-graduate employment and continued education. The project's
academic environment includes student-faculty advising and undergraduate
research activities, using the Affinity Research Group (ARG) model and peer-
mentoring. The use of teamwork, collaboration and student-motivated question and
answer sessions will positively support research in the field of computer
science and information technology regarding educational impact and retention,
particularly for minorities, female, and first-generation students. This project
is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.