* 2129211
* I-Corps:  Optimization Applications of Differential Geometry and Optimal Transport
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Yanir Rubinstein, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of applications of differential geometry and optimal transportation
toward solving complex optimization problems. The focus of this project is
understanding which bio-mechanical parameters capture the key features of
complex human motor activities in the area of sports training and recruitment.
The proposed technology may have numerous applications for professional sports
as well as for aspiring and amateur athletes. Moreover, it may be beneficial for
reducing injury risk for athletes and reducing recovery times for athletes
returning from injury. The proposed technology also may be used for player skill
development, which plays a central role in sports at all levels. Talent
evaluation and player recruitment, which also receives significant resources
both at the professional and collegiate levels may also be impacted. Other
fields that may benefit include weather forecasting, optimal network design,
economics, physics, and optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of mathematical tools and algorithms inspired by the
deep theory of the fully nonlinear Monge-Ampere equation that is a common
denominator for the vast fields of Differential Geometry and Optimal
Transportation. Differential Geometry is combined with data-analytic tools from
Machine Learning and state-of-the-art bio-mechanical research in order to
analyze in-depth and develop a new bio-mechanical understanding of certain
complex human motor activities that involve the simultaneous use of multiple
limbs. The proposed technology is focused on activities that require a high
degree of skill and coordination and that are challenging to train and learn.
Understanding whether a specific equation may be used to give mathematical
insights on optimizing complex human activities could provide yet another real-
world application of this equation and the deep theories used to study it.
Iterative processes from Differential Geometry such as the Ricci iteration and
flow provide inspiration for training models in infinite-dimensional
configuration spaces that may model complex human activities and optimization
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.