* 2129072
* FW-HTF-R: Impact of Artificial Intelligence Aids on Clinical Skill Acquisition, Atrophy and Adaptation
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Amy Wilson-Delfosse, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,999,999.00

Medical professionals learn many complex work skills. In future,
&lt;br/&gt;artificial intelligence computer assistants will help these workers
&lt;br/&gt;accomplish their work, and even take over some skilled tasks. When
&lt;br/&gt;artificial intelligence aids assume skilled tasks, workers may adapt
to &lt;br/&gt;rely on the aids, and their skills, if once learned, could
atrophy. This &lt;br/&gt;project is investigating how learning and use of
professional skills are &lt;br/&gt;changed by artificial intelligence
assistants. The project is also &lt;br/&gt;studying how different assistant
designs might affect learning and &lt;br/&gt;atrophy. Understanding these issues
could lead to re-design of &lt;br/&gt;artificial intelligence aids and how they
are used, with ultimate impact &lt;br/&gt;on workplace safety, training
protocols, and patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions,
the investigators are focusing on two &lt;br/&gt;critical skills used by
clinical professionals: visual search, used by radiologists&lt;br/&gt;examining
medical images, and spatial navigation under misaligned&lt;br/&gt;visuomotor
spaces, which is necessary to surgeons performing robotic&lt;br/&gt;laparoscopic
surgeries. For each skill, human participant experiments are&lt;br/&gt;designed
to evaluate the impact of artificial intelligence assistance on &lt;br/&gt;skill
learning, adaptation, and atrophy. The investigators are &lt;br/&gt;collecting
data from participants without prior experience with these skills, as they learn
and use the skills, and from medical residents, as they use these skills.
Different artificial intelligence designs are being tested &lt;br/&gt;to
understand their comparative impact on these participants' perceptual and
spatial &lt;br/&gt;navigation skills. These skills are useful in many other work
&lt;br/&gt;contexts, and the findings may generalize beyond these clinical
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.