* 2129949
* Distributed Time-varying Coordination of Uncertain Nonlinear Multi-agent Systems: A Unified Model Reference Scheme
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Wei Ren, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2024
* USD 383,000.00

Distributed coordination of multi-agent systems has numerous applications.
Existing research on distributed multi-agent coordination is often limited to
static problems, while time-varying problems can respond to moving objects of
interest and real-time changes in the environment/missions (for example,
coordinated exploration, cooperative monitoring, cooperative transport, region-
following formation tracking, and multi-robot multitarget navigation) but are
more challenging. In reality, multi-agent systems often exhibit nonlinearity and
uncertainty but corresponding results are limited. Addressing the two aspects
(distributed time-varying coordination and uncertain nonlinear agent dynamics)
simultaneously will substantially enhance the existing functionality of multi-
agent systems. Unfortunately, the interwoven challenges caused by the two
aspects are often intractable, not to mention further complexity due to
switching graphs and partial measurements. A systematic approach to tackle the
two aspects simultaneously is lacking. This project aims at deriving a novel
model reference coordination scheme to bridge the gap between distributed
coordination of linear systems and tracking control of a single uncertain
nonlinear system. Education and outreach activities will broaden participation
of underrepresented groups in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to derive a novel unified model reference coordination scheme
combined with new inverse backstepping thinking in design to systematically
address distributed time-varying coordination of uncertain nonlinear multi-agent
systems. In the proposed scheme, each agent’s reference model is chosen as a
linear system driven by distributed time-varying nonsmooth nonlinear
coordination terms defined by physical states between neighbors (e.g., relative
state/output measurements). Distributed time-varying coordination of uncertain
nonlinear multi-agent systems is divided into three parts: i) coordination of
the reference models themselves; ii) tracking of the state/output of each
agent's reference model by with uncertain nonlinear dynamics; iii) study of
mutual influence/feedback of the first two parts. The PI will explore the usage
of the scheme to accommodate various uncertainties and dynamics and address
distributed time-varying coordination with nonsmooth nonlinear algorithms
accounting for unavailable information and heterogeneous uncertain systems of
different types and orders. The proposed research will solve challenging open
research problems and advance the state of the art in distributed multi-agent
coordination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.