* 2129776
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Instabilities and Local Strains in Engineered Cartilage Scaffold
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Lawrence Bonassar, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) collaborative
research project will focus on the mechanical properties and deformation of
cartilage scaffolds under external loads. Soft porous scaffolds are commonly
used to promote cell growth for therapeutic applications in the repair and
regeneration of different tissues, including cartilage and bone. The porosity of
these scaffolds facilitates cell growth and the transport of nutrients. The
mechanical function of such soft implants during the early stage of implantation
is dominated by the scaffold that has to carry the applied load and maintain the
integrity of cells within its pores. Structural instabilities, often encountered
in soft porous materials, can both compromise the mechanical function of the
scaffolds as well as damage the encapsulated cells. The research outcomes will
advance national health and improve the quality of life for millions of people
by transforming engineered cartilage scaffolds in order to maintain implant
functionality, prevent cell death, and thus increase the probability of a
successful implantation procedure. Furthermore, this collaborative project aims
to engage several high-school and undergraduate students from underrepresented
minorities through summer outreach programs at Cornell University and Johns
Hopkins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates experimental, theoretical,
and computational efforts in order to answer the following fundamental
questions: (1) how do key microstructural characteristics of the porous scaffold
affect the critical buckling load and the distribution of local strains; (2) how
do the mechanical properties of the parent collagen influence the nonlinear
response of the scaffolds; (3) how does a non-homogeneous distribution of a
compliant filler material affect regions and modes of elastic stability. The
research plan involves experiments on additively manufactured complex 3D
architectures, state-of-the-art deformation mapping at the microscale, and the
development of novel multiscale models of soft architected composites that
capture all aspects of the material nonlinear mechanics. The research findings
and predictive tools developed will have significant impact in several areas
involving soft materials ranging from biological engineering and biomimetic
systems to soft robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.