* 2129872
* SHF: Small: Tackling Mapping and Scheduling Problems for Quantum Program Compilation
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Zheng Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 07/31/2024
* USD 492,576.00

Quantum computing has the potential of enabling the next revolution
in&lt;br/&gt;computing. It can quickly solve problems that no classical computer
could solve&lt;br/&gt;in any feasible amount of time. Recently, the impressive
advances in&lt;br/&gt;quantum hardware have brought quantum computing from
theoretical curiosity to&lt;br/&gt;technical reality. However, there is a
significant gap&lt;br/&gt;between the theory of quantum algorithms and the
realization of the algorithms&lt;br/&gt;on physical devices. To bridge this gap,
this proposal focuses on providing a&lt;br/&gt;compiler framework for
translating high-level algorithm specifications to &lt;br/&gt;low-level
hardware-compliant code. It enables programmers to take advantage of
quantum&lt;br/&gt;computers without having to obtain significant domain
expertise in the low-level&lt;br/&gt;hardware details.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
particular, this proposal focuses on the mapping and scheduling problems
in&lt;br/&gt;the compilation process for superconducting quantum computers.
Superconducting&lt;br/&gt;technology, as the leading technology for quantum
hardware implementation, has&lt;br/&gt;multiple types of constraints that
prevent the realization of the full potential of&lt;br/&gt;theoretical quantum
algorithms. The mapping and scheduling process deals with&lt;br/&gt;the
practical constraints of superconducting qubits, and are the
most&lt;br/&gt;challenging problems during quantum program translation.
This&lt;br/&gt;proposal formally addresses the mapping/scheduling problems and
models them as&lt;br/&gt;graph-theoretic/AI problems. It not only advances the
state of the art in the&lt;br/&gt;field of quantum program compilation, but also
pushes the boundary of the&lt;br/&gt;traditional graph-theoretic and AI fields
by linking them with unique challenges&lt;br/&gt;in quantum compilers.
Ultimately it spurs the productivity of quantum&lt;br/&gt;programmers and
unleashes the massive computing power of quantum computing&lt;br/&gt;that will
fuel the technical and economical innovations in
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.