* 2129282
* Collaborative Research: RFE: Pandemic Impact: Undergraduates’ Social Capital and Engineering Professional Skills
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Kerrie Douglas, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2024
* USD 194,777.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has caused many changes in educating engineers, one of the
more pronounced changes is the relationships students have with each other and
campus-based personnel. For example, a recent study of engineering
undergraduates found that first-year students struggled to develop relationships
on campus that support their success, whereas senior students relied on their
previous close relationships on campus. As we transition out of the pandemic,
this research will investigate how engineering undergraduates use relationships
with other students, faculty, and staff as well as off-campus contacts to
develop their professional skills. Non-technical professional skills such as
teamwork, communication, and professional ethics are essential for the
professional formation as engineers, as today’s engineers work in diverse teams
to solve complex 21st-Century problems. These skills have traditionally been
developed both within the engineering curriculum (in courses) and outside of the
curriculum, in activities such as student organizations, student chapters of
engineering professional societies, and internships. As engineering higher
education inevitably changes in the post-pandemic world, this work will offer
research to support the design of effective in-person and virtual opportunities
for students to develop and practice professional skills. Knowledge generated
from this project will promote the professional formation of engineers by
providing educators and students with recommendations and examples of how to
foster professional skill development both as part of the engineering curriculum
and outside of it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s overarching research
question is: “How do engineering undergraduates leverage relationships
(operationalized as social capital) to gain opportunities to develop
professional skills?” The social capital theoretical framing acknowledges the
importance of social relationships in developing these skills within and outside
of the engineering curriculum. The research will use an explanatory sequential
mixed methods design with carefully designed quantitative and qualitative phases
and special attention to mixing. The quantitative phase will utilize a survey
instrument from NSF-funded projects (EEC-2030083 and EEC-2030133), the
Undergraduate Student Support Survey, along with a Professional Skills
Opportunities survey. We will study three groups of engineering learners who
started during various phases of the pandemic, recruiting up to 1,500 students
for the quantitative phase. The research design will use stratified purposeful
sampling to select a subset of about 30-45 survey participants for interviews.
The project’s propagation plan focuses on (1) reciprocal partnership with
participating institutions by providing tailored and contextualized findings
along with recommendations for practice for (2) the (inter)national engineering
education community. Within these audiences, the researchers will promote
interactive dialogue with (1) engineering instructors and teaching assistants,
(2) advisors of co-curricular activities, (3) student leaders of engineering co-
curricular activities, and (4) administrators and staff. The researchers will
share findings with these audiences and collaboratively develop plans for
helping students build academic social capital and professional skills. This
work has potential to transform engineering education by promoting development
of much-needed professional skills for future members of the workforce. The work
will ultimately contribute to tomorrow’s engineering work by ensuring that
workforce members possess essential non-technical skills that facilitate the
success of their engineering teams and designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.