* 2129076
* Co-Development of Telehealth, Remote Patient Monitoring, and AI-based Tools for Inclusive Technology-Facilitated Healthcare Work of the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2026
* Oded Nov, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,515,999.00

As the use of digital health technologies grows, gaps between the potential of
new technologies, existing healthcare practices, and workers’ preparedness for
new technologies limit the potential of digital health to achieve acceptance and
effective utilization at scale. This transition to scale research project views
inclusion as a key driver of scale in future technology-facilitated healthcare
work. Inclusive technology for healthcare work will enable workers in diverse
roles and skills to leverage increasing access to data-driven technologies. The
project focuses on the growth of Data-Intensive Technologies (DIT), which
include telehealth and AI-based tools. The project’s approach to transition to
scale centers on alleviating existing misalignment between current healthcare
work and data-intensive technologies in three ways. First is through the co-
development of tools and generalizable design principles with users that lower
the barrier to technology integration for healthcare workers. Second is by
empowering individuals within healthcare systems who have diverse roles to adopt
and use the tools and improve their skills. Third is to enable patient-centered
healthcare that promotes autonomy and strengthens clinician-patient concordance.
The project represents a multi-institutional commitment to transitioning
innovative healthcare to scale, through DIT facilitated inclusion of diverse
workers in healthcare systems across the U.S., which together encompass over
1000 care sites in U.S. 24 states, multiple work roles, and different levels of
training and hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
several scientific fields, including human-computer interaction, health
informatics, artificial intelligence (AI), sensing, medicine, organizational
behavior, and research on diversity and inclusion. The investigator team is
structured to achieve multiple convergent goals such as quantifying the impacts
of scaling DIT on inclusive healthcare work and modelling prescription and
adoption of DIT towards inclusive deployment at scale. Additionally, the
investigators seek to identify generalizable DIT design principles for inclusive
healthcare work at scale, and to develop theory and tools to facilitate at-scale
inclusion through DIT-based patient-provider concordance. Finally, the project
expects to develop tools and practices for lowering barriers to comprehension of
and engagement with DIT by diverse healthcare workers; to create AI-based team-
focused tools; and to analyze the opportunities and challenges in using AI for
diverse healthcare teams’ work. This project has been funded by the NSF Future
of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to promote
deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology partnership in
work contexts by advancing design of intelligent work technologies that operate
in harmony with human workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.