* 2129586
* RAPID: Science Mission Planning, On-orbit Commissioning and Science Activation of the Ionosphere Thermosphere Scanning Photometer for Ion-Neutral Studies (IT-SPINS) Cubesat Mission
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* John Sample, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 04/30/2023
* USD 109,869.00

The Ionosphere Thermosphere Scanning Photometer for Ion-Neutral Studies (IT-
SPINS) cubesat will provide novel observations of the composition of Earth’s
ionosphere, whose variations influence space weather. This RAPID award will
support significant mission planning tasks to prepare the recently launched
satellite, developed under previous NSF awards, to achieve its scientific goals.
Project tasks include identifying optimal science operation modes, commissioning
and checking out the satellite upon deployment to its desired orbit, and
verifying science operations in order to get the longest possible science
mission duration. These are highly time sensitive tasks, necessitating a RAPID
grant award. Undergraduate and graduate students at Montana State University
will continue to be integral participants in the project. Additionally, students
and a faculty member from the Salish Kootenai College (a tribal land-grant
community college) will participate in mission planning and satellite
operations, advancing diversity in STEM research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary science goal for the IT-SPINS
cubesat investigation is to understand the behavior of the topside transition
region of the ionosphere, the boundary wherein oxygen ions in the ionosphere
interact with low mass constituents of the Earth’s upper atmosphere through
charge exchange collisions. IT-SPINS will profile the oxygen ion distribution in
the topside ionosphere from low Earth orbit through remote sensing of 135.6nm
emissions from the nighttime ionosphere. Completed under challenging
circumstances during the pandemic, the cubesat was launched in February 2021 and
is in an interim parking orbit on the International Space Station, from where it
will be deployed in May 2021 to its unique orbit for science investigations.
This RAPID project capitalizes on previous NSF investments by commissioning the
IT-SPINS cubesat and performing science operations testing and evaluation. Owing
to the very limited time on orbit prior to reentry of the satellite, it is
prudent to perform these tasks before deployment into the desired orbit (for
planning and simulations) and as quickly as practical after deployment (for
operations evaluations) in order to get the longest possible science mission
duration. The scientific broader impact of the mission will be to improve space
weather prediction related to dynamic processes in Earth’s ionosphere by
increasing understanding of the drivers for spatial and temporal variations in
the mass species distribution in the near-Earth plasma environment. By
integrating students, including tribal college students, into all aspects of the
mission planning, satellite testing, and science operations, this project will
broaden participation in space physics and space
weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.