* 2129443
* RUI: Spatiotemporal mapping of the membrane trafficking networks involved in secretion and autophagy in the unicellular zygnematophyte, Penium margaritaceum
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Domozych, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 573,372.00

The goal of this research project is to provide a comprehensive examination of
the membrane trafficking networks inside the cell involved in the processing of
the extensive extracellular matrix (ECM) of Penium margaritaceum, a single-
celled zygnematophyte, or algae, whose ancestors gave rise to land plants. This
is important because at present, no detailed maps of the membrane trafficking
network of Penium or any other zygnematophytes exist. Membrane trafficking
networks responsible for the production of the ECM were critical for ancient
terrestrialization (movement from sea to land). Today, these networks are
responsible for supporting zygnematophytes in major freshwater communities,
including ephemeral blooms and biofilms. This project will construct structural
models of the membranes inside the cell by using high resolution, electron
microscopy analyses, and the functions of specific membrane components will be
explained using targeted chemical and antibody agents. This project will not
only provide critical insight into the ECM secretion dynamics in plants and
membrane trafficking events that were key in plant movement to land, but will
also expand opportunities for Skidmore College undergraduates and local high
school students to engage in a meaningful cell biology research program using
new space and available equipment at the newly opened Center for Integrative
Sciences (CIS). It will also include a unique training and mentoring program for
a postdoctoral researcher that will involve participation in the research and
preparation for a potential career at an undergraduate
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the structure
and function of the subcellular machinery associated with the production of the
extensive extracellular matrix of Zygnematophycean algae, the group of green
algae most closely related and ancestral to land plants. The project will yield
models that synthesize the architecture and function of the membrane trafficking
networks involved with ECM secretion, cytokinesis, vacuolar dynamics and
autophagy in the model unicellular zygnematophyte, Penium margaritaceum. It will
use multiple microscopy tools, tomography, immunolabeling and experimental
analyses to acquire data for the construction of detailed maps and 3-D models of
the trafficking networks. These will provide key insight into the rapid cell
growth and associated hyper-secretory activity that many zygnematophytes exhibit
when forming ephemeral blooms and biofilms. It will elucidate modulations of
these networks in cells exposed to various abiotic stressors and targeted
chemical agents. This project will also provide significant insight into the
unique furrow-cell plate system employed during cytokinesis and the evolution of
the plant phragmoplast/cell plate. Finally, it will provide new information
about vacuole- and autophagy-based compartments and their functional roles in
zygnematophytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Directorate of Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.