* 2129185
* Student Travel Support to 3D Printing of Polymeric Composites &amp; Hybrid Systems Symposium at American Chemical Society National Meeting; San Diego, California; March 20-24, 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Kenan Song, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2022
* USD 47,984.00

This award provides travel support for students, post-docs and young faculty to
attend and participate in the Symposium on "3D Printing of Polymeric Composites
and Hybrid Systems " at the Spring American Chemical Society (ACS) national
meeting in San Diego, CA, in March 20-24, 2022. The symposium focuses on new
research in the field of polymer processing, composite and hybrid systems and
additive manufacturing. The students present through oral and poster sessions
their latest research results to the polymer processing, advanced manufacturing
and broader engineering communities. Priority is given to student and young
faculty participants who are women or who come from underrepresented minority
groups. This approach promotes diverse participation at the conference, in the
short term, and in STEM fields, in the long term. This award benefits the nation
through the education of a skilled and diverse manufacturing workforce, which is
better prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges in their
chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participant support is expected to
benefit the students' professional, scientific and technical development.
Attendance at the conference gives the students and young faculty a broader view
of the polymer processing, composite and hybrid systems, additive manufacturing
and engineering profession and of state-of-the-art research in their fields via
access to several technical and professional development talks by leading
domestic and international speakers. In particular, the symposium will discuss
sustainability, recycling and remanufacturing. It will also discuss 3D printing
strategies to mitigate polymer waste. Students enhance their communication
skills through oral and poster presentations, in-depth discussions of their work
with peers in their fields. This interactive experience significantly broadens
student education, increases their enthusiasm for their research topic,
acquaints them with expectations for scientific careers, and exposes them to new
approaches for innovative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.