* 2129113
* FW-HTF-P: Human-Agent Teaming for the Future of Work in Aircraft Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gamal Weheba, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 149,965.00

The vision of this Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier: Core
Research planning project is to bring the benefits of a digital workspace to
labor-intensive tasks in the aerospace industry. Human-agent teaming presents
substantial challenges that are not present in all-human or all-digital
workspaces. The research will build upon results in natural-language processing,
human-robot collaboration, artiÔ¨Åcial intelligence (AI), control engineering,
data analytics, statistics, and community education to establish the feasibility
of an innovative human-agent teaming framework for aircraft manufacturing. The
goal is a comprehensive and integrated environment in which human workers and
managers, robots and AIs, will cooperatively communicate, set goals, plan tasks,
make decisions, and solve problems. The project will address challenges in
quality control, risk mitigation, and workforce management via support for
worker teaming, data analytics, visualization, verification, and communication.
In this setting, process automation, AI, and robotics will free human workers to
concentrate on high-value and creative tasks. Benefits to workers and employers
include lightened work intensity, improved quality of manufacturing work, and
minimization of safety risks. The research results will improve the productivity
and competitiveness of the aircraft manufacturing industry. By deemphasizing
specific physical requirements, the project could create new job opportunities
and increase employment equity, accessibility, and inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the technical and managerial barriers
obstructing the integration of human workers into the future digital workspace,
specifically in the context of aerospace manufacturing. The research will
cultivate the theory of human-agent teaming in manufacturing by designing a
holistic framework of natural-language communication, visual informatics,
physical interaction and augmentation, and mutual understanding. The research
will also advance knowledge by addressing the challenges in work management and
analytics derived from future manufacturing work. Specifically, this project 1)
examines the feasibility of a human-agent teaming framework that establishes
mental and physical bindings for digital workers and human workers to
collaborate efficiently and safely in the context of aerospace manufacturing; 2)
bridges the knowledge gap in workforce management, quality control, and business
modeling for future manufacturing industry, founded on a hybrid workforce
through the implementation of integrated workforce management; and 3) conducts
surveys, collects data, and holds workshops to gather information about the
critical worker and managerial skills and training required by the new work
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.