* 2129515
* RAPID: Leading Practices for Improving Accessibility and Inclusion in Field and Laboratory Science – A Conversation Series
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 187,214.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) will
convene a series of webinars that explore leading practices for improving
accessibility for people with disabilities in scientific disciplines that
conduct field and laboratory research. The COVID-19 pandemic has provided a
valuable perspective to discuss the changing landscape of opportunity in this
area. The webinars will explore strategies for increasing accessibility for
field and laboratory research in the physical, social, and life sciences,
including: current barriers to full participation, accommodations that might
assist with accessibility and inclusion, similarities and differences between
fieldwork and laboratory research solutions, the role of mentoring and other
support networks, how individual successes could translate into more
generalizable practices, and the institutional policies and cultural change
needed to ensure long-term change. This activity will encourage greater
collaboration and coordination among members of the scientific community, with
the goal of institutional and cultural change, and build upon the knowledge base
that has been acquired since the beginning of the pandemic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine (NASEM) will organize and convene a series of virtual conversation-
style webinars that explore leading practices for improving accessibility for
people with disabilities in disciplines that conduct field and laboratory
research. The COVID-19 pandemic provides a valuable perspective to discuss the
changing landscape of opportunity for improved inclusion and accessibility. In
this series, NASEM will explore the opportunities related to increasing
accessibility for field and laboratory research in the physical, social, and
life sciences, including current barriers to full participation; the potential
for accommodations including, but not limited to, assistive technologies,
support, or modification of duties to increase accessibility and inclusion;
commonalities and differences in solutions for different types of fieldwork and
lab science; the role of mentoring and other support networks in improving
inclusion; how one might scale up individual successes into more generalizable
practices; and the institutional policies and cultural change needed to ensure
sustainability. This project builds upon the knowledge base that has been
acquired since the beginning of the pandemic, when laboratories were closed and
field work delayed or cancelled. Many of these actions have had a side effect of
allowing increased inclusion of people with disabilities in activities. However,
without a commitment to sustained change, practices explored during the pandemic
might not be disseminated, scaled up, or continued. The conversations will be
planned by a volunteer committee that will engage a broad range of perspectives
and experience in the physical, social, and life sciences and will include
several scientists with disabilities. The conversations will be scheduled
approximately monthly over a six-month period. The format(s) will be determined
by the planning committee, and may include talks that present information,
panelists that delve deeply into different aspects of the topics, time for broad
discussions with audience members, and appropriate break times. The conversation
series will be held on a virtual platform, and will be livestreamed, recorded,
and captioned to broaden the audience reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.