* 2129903
* NSF-BSF:A genomic view of gene regulatory network co-option and morphological novelty
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2026
* Mark Rebeiz, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 925,000.00

One of the greatest mysteries in biology is how the marvelous diversity of life
on our planet originated. An important facet of this problem is that of
anatomical novelty: how do new structures come into existence? This project will
study how a newly evolved structure in the vinegar fly (Drosophila melanogaster)
first arose. Work in the developmental biology field has traced how most
anatomical structures are genetically encoded in the genome by genetic networks
that control which subset of genes are expressed in a tissue as it develops. The
problem of morphological novelty can be expressed in terms of these networks –
how do the networks that underlie novelties originate? This has been an
exceedingly difficult problem for the field to tackle in a satisfying way.
Because these networks are complex, we will employ cutting edge genomic
approaches to holistically inventory likely participants and pinpoint their
relevant gene function-altering mutations. Combining such genomic descriptions
with empirical follow-up using the powerful genetic toolkit of Drosophila will
permit a deep examination of the molecular changes that occur as new structures
evolve. Doing so will inform a wide variety of similar developmental and
evolutionary processes in other organisms in which the tools for manipulation
and rigorous validation are lacking. This project will have numerous additional
broader impacts, including training of scientists, outreach activities for
middle school and high school students from backgrounds underrepresented in
science, and development of software tools and databases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The posterior lobe is a morphological novelty specific to
Drosophila melanogaster clade. We have previously discovered that the posterior
lobe emerged by co-option of a gene regulatory network from another organ
system, the posterior spiracle which first forms during embryonic development.
However, it is not known which genes upstream of this co-option event were
modified and how they were modified. In addition, it is unclear how a similar
gene regulatory network generates two completely different structures. These
issues will be addressed by identifying altered changes in the network’s
regulatory hierarchy and differences in its downstream cellular processes. This
will be done by cell sorting with posterior-lobe and spiracle-specific cellular
markers, followed by RNA-seq and ATAC-seq analyses. Follow-up studies will
identify regulatory sequences responsible for species and context-specific gene
expression. These will be validated by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing, as well as
comparative studies of transcriptional regulatory activity with reporter genes
in both lobed and non-lobed species. Resources will also be established to test
regulatory elements in the comparison species D. ananassae. Together, this
research will establish a premiere system in which the genetic changes
underlying a morphological novelty will have been traced and tested in vivo, a
problem that has been difficult to unravel in any
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.