* 2129896
* Preparing STEM Scholars for Transfer and the Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Douglas Mooney, Northwestern Connecticut Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Northwestern Connecticut Community College (NCCC). Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to thirty-five (35) unique full-
time and part-time students who are pursuing associate's degrees in STEM
disciplines. In particular, the program will recruit five cohorts of four full-
time students and three cohorts of five half-time students over the six-year
duration of the project to address unmet financial need with scholarships as
well as to provide a system of student-support services. Support will include
scholar cohorts, a designated STEM counselor, proactive advising, enhanced
tutoring, mentored research and internship real-world STEM experiences, and
career development activities. In addition, transfer exploration and visitation
opportunities will be used to ensure that students develop the knowledge and
skills they will need to complete an associate's degree in a timely fashion and
successfully transfer into a bachelor’s degree program or employment in a STEM
field. An innovative recruiting feature is the plan for Free Application for
Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) workshops for area high school students. The
progress and outcomes of this project will be disseminated to external audiences
including the High-Impact Technology Exchange, the Association of American
Colleges and Universities (AACU) STEM Conference, and the National Association
of Biology Teachers annual conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need, the project will pursue three goals. First is to provide STEM
students with scholarships to reduce their unmet financial need, thereby
allowing them to work less and spend more time on their studies. Second is to
support these students with enrichment experiences and other evidence-based
practices shown to promote learning and increased persistence to degree
attainment. Third is to enhance student knowledge of transfer and career options
to generate an increase in transfer rate to STEM programs and an increase in the
STEM career placement rate. Insights and outcomes from rigorous mixed-methods
evaluation and an educational research program will generate new knowledge on
adaptations of high-impact practices by studying the effects of career and
transfer explorations as well as interactions between students and their
cohorts, advisors, faculty research and internship mentors, and the impact of
these interactions. These lines of investigation will address gaps in the
literature and inform other higher-education professionals seeking to support
traditional and non-traditional students with holistic support services,
especially at community colleges. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.