* 2129365
* Dimensions US-São Paulo: Animal biases in fruit selection and seed dispersal as drivers of biotic filters in the assembly of successional forests and their carbon capture potentia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Tomas Carlo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,729,656.00

Tropical forests play a major role in regulating the earth’s climate through
their effects on water cycles and their large capacity to remove and store
atmospheric carbon. Because of their global preeminence as life-supporting
systems and the widespread threats they face, understanding how tropical forests
regenerate, store carbon, and maintain high biodiversity levels is urgent. The
project will advance the understanding of the roles that animal-plant
mutualisms, involving animals that eat fruit and disperse seeds, affect the tree
composition, diversity, growth rates, and soil-microbe communities that
influence forest growth and atmospheric carbon storage potential. The project
will advance the practical principles that promote cost reduction and
maximization of biodiversity conservation in restored forested areas. The
project fosters international collaboration and cross-fertilization between
Brazilian and US scientists and the mentoring of junior faculty, postdocs, and
students of all levels. Specifically project will train at least 10 graduate and
40 undergraduate students, and develop a field biology course for students of
diverse backgrounds. Community outreach activities include involvement of rural
school students from middle and high school in science-learning activities at
the classroom and the field study site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds
around three aims that link phylogenetic, genetic, and functional aspects of
biodiversity in the context of the role of plant-frugivore mutualisms (FSD) on
community assembly patterns of early-successional tropical forests. With anwell-
replicated experimental design that strategically incorporates functional plant
traits and phylogenetic relationships as fixed-effects, the project test
functional relationships between FSD processes and phylogeny on community
assembly. The project then examines how the interaction of FSD processes with
the functional-phylogenetic traits of pioneer plants affect the genetic
diversity of the colonizer species that follow, and in turn, how patterns of
genetic diversity lead to differences in plant survival, growth, and community
assembly. The project ultimately explores how the biotic filtering interactions
of FSD processes and the functional and phylogenetic traits of successional
communities influence, or are influenced by, soil microbiomes and the nutrient
pools and carbon transformation processes they control. The project advances
basic knowledge by exploring mechanisms and outcomes across diverse scales of
biological organization rarely brought together in a single experimental
framework: from trophic interactions and dispersal processes, to soil microbes
and their biogeochemical cycling effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.