* 2129765
* Understanding and Harnessing Traffic Fundamental Diagram in the Era of Connected Automated Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Soyoung Ahn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 06/30/2025
* USD 423,131.00

The traffic ‘fundamental diagram’ describes fundamental relationships among the
key traffic variables of flow, density, and speed. It is used to understand
traffic phenomena and develop traffic management strategies. The adoption of
connected automated vehicles is expected to bring systematic changes to traffic
flow patterns and increase the complexity of traffic dynamics. This requires a
deeper understanding of how stochastic and non-static traffic flow properties
are manifested in the fundamental diagram. To this end, this project aims to
develop a new theoretical framework to enhance the fundamental diagram with
stochastic and non-static dimensions. The framework will be empirically grounded
and developed based on trajectory data of human-driven vehicles and vehicles
with automation features (adaptive cruise control). The framework will also
utilize computational models to characterize the stochastic behavior of these
vehicles, particularly when the exact algorithm of adaptive cruise control is
unknown. The anticipated outcome of this project includes a better understanding
of and models to describe stochastic and non-static features of highly
heterogeneous traffic flow. This project will also engage a range of
educational, outreach, and dissemination activities, including (1) industry and
transportation agency outreach, (2) local K-12 school outreach, (3) Engineering
Expo participation, (4) development of educational modules using the developed
simulation tools, (5) promoting diversities by recruiting students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional fundamental
diagram is a time-invariant and deterministic description for traffic conditions
in steady states. Further, it represents the collective behavior of vehicles,
often missing a connection to vehicle-level behavior important for some dynamic
traffic phenomena. Thus, the traditional fundamental diagram is not well
equipped to describe complex traffic dynamics in highly heterogeneous traffic.
This research will: (1) construct a generic stochastic calibration framework
based on a Bayesian approach to describe car-following behavior of a wide range
of vehicles (e.g., human-driven and automated vehicles); and (2) establish a
theoretical approximation framework to extend the traditional fundamental
diagram to a non-static and stochastic version, based on the calibrated
stochastic car-following models. The fundamental knowledge, models, and
simulation tool from this research can lead to better design of automated
vehicle control strategies and smart traffic management that will ultimately
improve traffic throughput, stability, and resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.