* 2129494
* Collaborative Research: Reaping the Whirlwind: Re-energizing Boundary Layers by Targeted Manipulation of Coherent Structures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* David Goldstein, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2024
* USD 230,880.00

In a turbulent flow, for example near the surface of an airplane wing or in the
atmosphere as it flows over the Earthâ€™s surface, there is a range of eddies of
different sizes. The largest of these coherent eddies, called Large Scale
Motions (LSMs), carry a significant portion of the turbulent kinetic energy and
are largely responsible for mixing high-speed flow far away from the surface
with the low-speed flow right near the surface. This mixing may be enhanced by
selectively displacing the LSMs toward the surface, and this is very desirable
in some applications. For example, bringing high-speed flow to the surface can
keep a wing from stalling and losing its lift. The goal of this project is to
prove via simulations and in matched experiments an approach to detect and
manipulate LSMs to re-energize the near-surface flow. The success of the present
approach is also expected to motivate the emergence of technologies such as
controlling acoustic noise or heat transfer for underwater, ground-vehicles, or
air-vehicles or combustion in turbomachinery. This project thus has the
potential of initiating a new direction in turbulent flow control.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop an experimentally-
validated system for active detection and manipulation of LSMs for turbulent
boundary layer re-energization. Advances in the fundamental understanding of
LSMs, actuator innovations, and advanced control theory make this goal
achievable. The first step towards the goal is to demonstrate energizing a
boundary layer by manipulating controlled, well-characterized, synthetically
generated structures in well-coordinated boundary layer experiments and direct
numerical simulations (DNS). The preliminary DNS successfully demonstrated
optimization of control jet actuation using two different control methods, which
deflected a prototypical LSM towards the surface. Preliminary work has created a
suitable actuator based on a synthetic jet and demonstrated it in the lab. The
specific tasks proposed in this collaborative 3-year project are: (1) develop
and implement control algorithms to selectively move synthetically generated
LSMs in matched experiments and DNS, (2) quantify the re-energization achieved
by moving different kinds of LSMs to guide target prioritization, and (3) test
and optimize the re-energization of a turbulent boundary layer with an eye
toward separation control and wind power applications. The results of this
project will be made publicly available through online platforms and enhanced
classroom activity. The project will also help recruit graduate students from
underrepresented groups and for several undergraduate research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.