* 2129274
* Major improvements of the outdoor mesocosm facility at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Samantha de Putron, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 343,390.00

Ocean life is being impacted by global climate change with the effects of
increases in seawater temperature and ocean acidification on marine species and
ecosystems being particularly apparent. Continued monitoring and analyses of the
impacts of climate change are critical to our understanding of the current
situation, as well as our ability to provide accurate predictions and to design
and implement appropriate adaptation strategies. This project provides such
infrastructure capacity through the establishment of a marine mesocosm facility
at the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS: http://www.bios.edu). Marine
mesocosms, or a series of outdoor experimental aquaria systems with flowing
seawater, help scientists examine species and their natural environment under
controlled conditions. They provide an important bridge between strongly
controlled single species laboratory- based experiments and largely ‘un-
controllable’ in situ (in nature) experiments and observations, thereby offering
a more realistic understanding of how environmental changes affect organisms
and, consequently, community structure and ecosystem functioning. The facility
will have the ability to accurately manipulate and measure environmental
parameters, such as seawater temperature, flow rate, ocean acidification, and
light, which are essential for making realistic predictions on global change
impacts to marine ecosystems. The new facility will have a far-reaching impact
on the research capacity of the marine sciences community through the promotion
of collaborative and interdisciplinary research between BIOS and overseas
scientists. The facility will also expand hands-on education opportunities by
training undergraduate and graduate students to conduct and analyse complex
multi-stressor studies. Local and visiting K-12 programs and public outreach
will benefit from demonstrations and tours that communicate the research
undertaken and technology utilized, as well as teaching modules, internships,
and work shadow opportunities. In addition, dissemination of the research will
demonstrate how global change facilities provide scientists with greater
insights on how climate change will affect the marine environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to develop the Bermuda Marine
Mesocosm Facility (BMMF), an infrastructure that is robust, easy to handle,
versatile, and enables a wide range of near-natural organism- and community-
scale single- and multi-factor manipulation experiments, which are vital to
bridge the gap between research on physiological responses of marine organisms
and community/ecosystem impacts. The main facility components of the BMMF
include robust temperature control units for all basins of flowing seawater,
which is fundamental for all experiments on marine organisms; a CO2 supply and
monitoring system; and a number of supplies that increase the versatility of the
facility: controlled seawater supply, natural and controlled sunlight, an
increase in the number of basins and improvements to design, and a floating dock
for immediate access to the marine environment. Together, these components will
enable a wide range of experimental designs (from flume experiments to highly
replicated organism-based experiments) to study marine ecosystem responses
across various levels under both natural conditions and global change
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.