* 2129250
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions US-China-South Africa: Establishing genetic, phylogenetic and functional mechanisms that shape microbiome diversity of polar and alpine soils
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Thomas Hanson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2026
* USD 401,061.00

Microorganisms are the foundations of ecosystems and drive the biology and
chemistry in soils, e.g. the conversion of soil organic matter into the
greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and methane, as well as nitrogen and phosphorous
compounds that can be used by plants. Soil microbial community diversity
maintains ecosystem stability and sustainability. Understanding the ecology of
these microorganisms is one of the most compelling scientific challenges. This
project will focus on the microbial ecology of soil ecosystems in the Arctic,
Antarctic, and Tibetan Plateau. These “tri-polar” soils are chosen for study as
they are disproportionately impacted by climate change and predicted to show
increased microbial activity and enhanced turnover of soil organic matter in the
future. While microbes excel at adapting to environmental change, the functional
implications of microbial community transitions remain to be characterized.
Laboratory- and field-based approaches will identify microorganisms that are
successful in these “tri-polar” soil ecosystems and why, i.e., which bacterial
species/strains are successful and what functional traits make them successful.
Understanding how soil ecosystems respond in these polar regions is critical for
evaluating the controls of biogeochemical cycling and clarifying microbial
feedbacks in a changing world. This project will assemble an international team
and recruit young scholars to reflect a blend of expertise in microbiology,
ecology and environmental sciences. Research will be integrated with educational
activities by involving samples and data into hands-on classroom training at the
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
delineate mechanisms that lead to diverse soil microbial communities that are
hallmarks of stable and sustainable soils. We lack predictive understanding of
mechanisms that regulate and maintain microbial biodiversity and how this
relates to biogeochemically relevant microbial functions. Integrative approaches
are needed to identify the principles that shape and maintain this biodiversity.
This project combines genetic, phylogenetic, and functional dimensions of
biodiversity to probe factors that shape the “morass of diversity” of soil
systems. The overarching hypothesis is that resource partitioning, selective
predation, and temporal separation of activity each contribute to the success of
particular bacterial strains/species in polar and alpine systems. The
international research team will focus on testing these hypotheses in soils
across Arctic, Antarctic and Tibetan Plateau habitats with the Acidobacteria as
a model microbial phylum for study. Laboratory- and field-based approaches will
be linked to describe the genetic, phylogenetic and functional diversity the
Acidobacteria, one of the most ubiquitous but elusive bacterial phyla found in
terrestrial ecosystems around the globe. The study will identify their ecosystem
functions in soils, their interactions with other microbes, their adaptations to
environmental stress such as climate change, and will assess their in situ
dynamics and activity. Integration of these data will address which organisms
compete for resources, avoid predation, and ultimately, occupy fundamentally
distinct niches in these ecosystems. Elucidating these equalizing/stabilizing
mechanisms can begin to explain the tremendous bacterial diversity observed in
soil microbiomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.