* 2129362
* Research and Development Support for Early Career Geomorphology Scientists
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Joe Collins, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,615.00

This project supports early career researchers in the field of geomorphology to
attend the 2021 Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium (BGS). This project targets
the professional development of early career scholars who are currently
completing a graduate degree, or are in the early stages of their academic,
professional career. The theme of the symposium is the contribution of humans to
environmental disturbances that advances our understanding of the role of humans
on geomorphic systems, and their role in protecting, improving, and managing
environmental resources. This symposium is an ideal scientific venue for young
scholars to engage with established experts, present their research, and to talk
face-to-face with an international community of scientists. The merit of this
funding is evident from previously NSF funded symposiums reflected in scientific
publications and collaborations. The broader impact of this support for students
and early career scholars is research innovation and collaboration that promotes
future global leaders, and to broaden participation of underrepresented
scientists in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in the BGS will
lead to the development of cutting-edge research and will enable U.S. scholars
to take the lead in these endeavors. These young scholars develop new research
agendas that investigate key scientific and societal challenges, promote
collaboration with the international community, and disseminate advances in
human-environment research through workshops, seminars, and peer-reviewed
publications. These accomplishments result in the development of more innovative
and productive research on human influences on the Earth that serves the
Nationâ€™s interests regarding human impact on environments. The event will
provide new insights and approaches to preserving environmental resources
throughout the world, including the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.