* 2129415
* SBIR Phase II:  Chalcogenide Polymer Infrared Optics
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Jay Liebowitz, NORCON TECHNOLOGIES HOLDING, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2023
* USD 984,268.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to improve the optics and lenses used in
near infrared 3D imaging. Glass lenses, which have excellent transmittance and
thermal properties, are used in light detection and ranging (LiDAR) and
rangefinders for distances beyond a few tens of meters. Polymer lenses, which
are moldable and lower cost, are typically used in consumer-mobile 3D cameras
and emerging automotive LiDAR systems. The refractive indices of these lenses
limit the numerical aperture and require longer-than-desired lens barrels. The
proposed polymeric chalcogenide lenses combine infrared transmittance, index,
and thermal properties with the cost and moldability of optical polymers. The
innovation enables the molding of freeform polymer lenses with increased
numerical aperture and reduced barrel lengths. These properties make possible
more compact, lighter, and lower cost 3D imagers. With these advantages,
rangefinders can be more easily carried and scan faster and smartphone cameras
can have wider viewing angles. Additionally, LiDAR systems can image more
accurately around a vehicle and improve both driver and pedestrian
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project seeks to advance sulfur polymer chemistry and materials processing for
the development of a new class of near infrared (NIR) optical components.
Innovative chemical synthesis and infrared fingerprint engineering has led to
the development of a new class of optical polymers with the potential for
imaging applications in the NIR. As a result of extensive optical and mechanical
characterization, including the determination of the optical constants over the
full infrared spectrum, measurement of mechanical properties such as the
coefficient of thermal expansion, measurement of thermo-optic coefficients, and
determination of stress-optic coefficients, the materials will now be developed
and integrated for product applications with innovative optical designs based on
material's unique property set. Freeform optical design concepts will be used
which, to date, have not often been used in infrared imaging. Such designs may
lead to more compact, lighter, and higher performance optical systems for
infrared imaging applications, further leveraging the advantages of the
material's transmission spectrum, incorporating absorption, bulk scattering and
surface scattering, and surface scattering
contributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.