* 2129221
* Collaborative Research: Processes Determining the Climatology of Atmospheric Unstable Layers
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Marvin Geller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 156,447.00

This research seeks to answer a number of questions that have arisen from recent
observations of unstable layers at various altitudes in the atmosphere; that is,
these layers are characterized with air temperature decreasing with height.
Unstable layers have been identified by examining a fast meteorological sensor
attached to meteorological balloons launched from stations operated by the
United States (US) Weather Service. The fast meteorological sensor can take air
temperature at every second, which is at every 5 meters as a balloon rises.
Unstable layers are commonly associated with turbulence. Within each turbulent
layer, air motions cascade from large eddies to small ones due to kinetic energy
dissipation. Atmospheric turbulence is dangerous for aircraft operations and has
impacts on remote sensing atmospheric phenomena. The researchers for the project
will investigate what causes these unstable layers. Understanding of the origin
of these unstable layers could improve safety of aircraft operations. Recently
global observations using this type of fast meteorological balloon sensors
become available. The investigators also plan to organize an international
workshop to stimulate international research for using this dataset.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will answer two principal questions: 1)
Why are there more unstable layers in the lower stratosphere at midnight
Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) in the western contiguous US than at noon GMT, with
the opposite being true in the eastern US? 2) Is the observed phenomenon of a
great number of thick unstable layers and a relative paucity of thinner layers
at near 12 km altitude at Koror (7.3 N, 134.5 E), which is also called “notch”,
present at other near equatorial stations? In what way might this “notch” be
related to the minimum in atmospheric stability that has been noted earlier by
other authors in the same general atmospheric region? The research plan to
address question 1 is to try to identify differences in the times and locations
of atmospheric gravity buoyancy waves that lead to the lower stratospheric
unstable layers. This is planned to be done using a ray-tracing methodology. The
research plan to address question 2 is to compare the geographical and temporal
variation of the “notch” feature to that of the stability minimum. The
investigators also plan to identify the “notch” feature with in-cloud and cloud-
outflow turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.