* 2129540
* I-Corps:  Development of a Periodontal Ultrasound/Photoacoustic Imaging Device
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project may lead to an
accurate and early detection of periodontal disease to reduce the pain and cost
of dental care. Periodontal disease is common and often results in dental pain,
tooth loss, reduced quality of life, and even systemic effects like
cardiovascular disease. The current methods for periodontal evaluation use
manual probing and visual inspection. These methods are often inaccurate and
have poor reproducibility, as well as being time consuming and sometimes
painful. While X-ray imaging captures detailed information about intra-oral hard
tissues, more detailed information about soft tissue is missed. There is an
essential unmet need for non-invasive imaging to assess dental health. This
project will improve periodontal evaluation and diagnostics, treatment planning,
and therapy monitoring. It may also make dental exams less painful for patients
and more accurate for dentists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
develops a novel non-invasive periodontal imaging device that provides key
information for periodontitis diagnosis. Dual modality ultrasound and
photoacoustic imaging can be used as a superior alternative to the current
standard of care for periodontal evaluation. This approach combines the
resolution of ultrasound with the contrast and spectral behavior of optics.
Photoacoustic imaging of the gingiva can detail the contours of the entire
pocket with markedly less variability than conventional probing. This modality
offers a perspective for early diagnosis of inflammation which is inaccessible
by direct visual clinical assessment. In addition, ultrasound imaging can
quantify gingival thickness which in turn, determines the final aesthetic
treatment outcome. Current clinical attachment loss is visually measured based
on cementoenamel junction (CEJ) location and it is only visible if gingival
margin has already recessed due to disease. In contrast, the ultrasound approach
can image anatomical landmarks including CEJ and gingival margin to quantify
attachment loss. The successful demonstration of the proposed project may lead
to an accurate diagnosis of gum disease in the early stage of gingivitis that
reduces the risk of advanced periodontitis and tooth
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.