* 2129675
* SaTC: CORE: Small: SLIQ: Securing Large-Scale Noisy-Intermediate Scale Quantum Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Swaroop Ghosh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Application-specific parametric quantum circuits designed to solve societal and
science problems using powerful quantum computers contain assets and embed
Intellectual Property (IP). Next generation quantum computers will face two new
security issues: (i) evolution of multi-tenant computing (MTC) where multiple
programs will share the hardware. The unwanted coupling between qubits can leak
information and allow fault/Trojan injection; (ii) dependence on untrusted
third-party compilers which can steal IP and tamper the circuit. This project
will identify the vulnerabilities and threat vectors and develop a suite of
defenses at the circuit and system level to secure future large scale quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project are
rooted at, (i) identification of various assets in quantum circuits, algorithms
and hardware; (ii) identification of vulnerabilities in MTC environment such as,
crosstalk, qubit allocation, scheduling and hardware splitting policies and
untrusted compiler such as, embedding of IP, crosstalk, sensitivity of circuit
quality to qubit allocation and gates; (iii) identification of security and
privacy threats from MTC environment e.g., crosstalk-based fault/Trojan
injection and data leakage and untrusted compiler such as, reverse engineering
and tampering; (iv) development of circuit and system-level defenses such as,
machine learning-based screening, obfuscation and split compilation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By addressing security, this project will remove a major
roadblock towards applicability of quantum computers in security/privacy
sensitive sectors. It will lead to widespread adoption of quantum computers in
healthcare, energy and defense sectors and therefore, make a positive economic
impact. This project will establish collaboration with industry and experts from
computer science and cryptography communities to exchange ideas and will
contribute directly to the Quantum Initiative Act and AI initiative Act. It will
train new generation of workforce to solve problems using quantum computing. The
tools and methodologies from this project can be plugged into existing
commercial optimization tools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All publicly released data
will be posted at PI’s academic website http://personal.psu.edu/~szg212 and the
code developed in this project will be released in github
(https://github.com/szg212) throughout the project and preserved without
restrictions after the award ends. The conference and journal papers produced in
this project will be archived in publisher’s website (e.g., ACM, IEEE). The
presentations, tutorials and images will be hosted in PI’s academic website
throughout the project and preserved without restrictions after the award ends.
The video files of demonstrations and presentations will be uploaded in YouTube
and will be preserved without restrictions after the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.