* 2129904
* Chemical imaging of sheets, surfaces, and interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Janice Musfeldt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 416,184.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, which is supported
by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, Professor Janice Musfeldt and her research group will explore the
properties of material sheets, and material surfaces and interfaces using near
field-infrared spectroscopy, and will invest in the education of a diverse group
of young people at the University of Tennessee. Both initiatives will advance
the use of chemical imaging spectroscopies at synchrotron facilities and
contribute to important societal values and outcomes. A variety of material
systems will be imaged including van der Waals, ferroic, and catalytic
materials. These material sheets and textures are small in size - well below the
diffraction limit of traditional infrared spectroscopies - which is why near-
field imaging approaches such as those employed in this project have the
potential to be transformative, also in unraveling important structure-property
relationships. A broad range of educational, outreach, and service activities
will also take place under the auspices of this National Science Foundation-
funded program, especially in the areas of diversity, conference and workshop
organization, and service to various national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research, which is supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program
in the Division of Materials Research, employs synchrotron-based near-field
infrared spectroscopy to image a variety of materials with different
functionalities. The focus is on van der Waals, ferroic, and catalytic
materials, as well as the structure-property relationships that can be unraveled
in these systems. The goals are to: (i) explore symmetry and properties of
magnetic and heavy chalcogenides and halides in the ultrathin limit, (ii) reveal
interface dynamics in unusual settings such as at ferroelastic and ferroelectric
domain walls, (iii) untangle chemical bonding heterogeneities and their
relationship with catalytic behavior, and (iv) understand how these effects can
be enhanced and controlled. What brings these efforts together is an overall
interest in imaging heterogeneity in quantum materials and the opportunity to
explore completely new types of light-matter interactions. Findings from this
program will advance the development of theoretical approaches and of energy-
related applications. This program also supports the interdisciplinary education
of a diverse group of young researchers for future employment in academics,
government laboratories, and industry in the area of advanced
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.