* 2129469
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of an Optical Biosensor to Facilitate Screening, Validation, and Development of Novel Drugs and their Biological Targets
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Brandon Moyer, AUCTUS BIOLOGICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 228,697.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will improve drug discovery. The proposed project will advance the
development of Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR), a novel optical biosensor
technology, that will accelerate the pace and efficiency of drug screening
campaigns in academia as well as the pharmaceutical and biotechnology
industries. There are currently no biosensor technologies on the market that
offer the combination of high sensitivity, robust reusability, antibody-like
binding affinity, and low cost. This project will culminate in the development
of a technology and reagent-based kits for applications at scale.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances a technology engineered from
a temperature, pH, and chemically stable proprietary protein composed of two
fragments that bind with antibody-like affinity and specificity. The technology
has been demonstrated to be effective in a variety of antibody-like
applications, but without the stability shortcomings that plague traditional
antibodies. By overcoming key barriers that limit large-scale use of SPR chips,
this technology enables chip reuse and streamlines laboratory workflows, thus
endowing the system with broad utility in antibody-centered applications. The
project has three goals: establish suitability of the technology for the
complete characterization of molecular interaction pairs, evaluate the
technologyâ€™s robustness and versatility, and validate the technology in drug
screening campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.