* 2129835
* Collaborative Research: Laboratory Studies of the Role of Organic Peroxy Radicals (RO2) Chemistry on the Evolution of Atmospheric Organic Carbon
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Jesse Kroll, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2024
* USD 582,732.00

The goal of this project is to improve knowledge about reactive chemistry and
the atmospheric oxidation of organic compounds. A suite of instruments will be
used in the laboratory to develop a more complete understanding of how certain
chemical regimes control the amount, identity, and properties of gas-phase and
aerosol products during atmospheric oxidation. This project will yield new
insights into the chemistry underlying the formation of atmospheric organic
aerosol, an important component influencing air quality and global
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on peroxy radical (RO2)
chemistry and how it controls the distribution of reaction products formed
during the atmospheric oxidation of organic compounds. Volatile organic
compounds will be oxidized in an environmental chamber under carefully-
controlled RO2 reaction conditions, and the formation and evolution of the
resulting products will be measured using a suite of real-time time-of-flight
mass spectrometric techniques to provide information on the concentration,
chemical formula, oxidation state, and volatility of organic species. Key
outputs include comprehensive measurements of gas- and particle-phase products,
volatility distributions (including secondary organic aerosol yields), and
evolving OH reactivities. Finally, measurements of key ensemble properties of
the reaction mixture (e.g., carbon oxidation state, carbon number) will be
compared against predictions from state-of-the-art atmospheric chemical
mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results from this project can be used in 3D
models, and time-dependent concentrations will be made publicly available as a
community resource for testing and refining state-of-the-art models of
atmospheric oxidation and the formation of secondary organic aerosol. This
project includes training for early-career scientists, including both graduate
and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.