* 2129352
* EAGER: A Microfluidic Device for Studying Environment-Triggered Migration of Glioblastoma Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Stefan Bossmann, University of Kansas Medical Center Research Institute Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 04/30/2023
* USD 263,767.00

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and most aggressive adult primary brain
tumor. GBM is known for the patient's poor survival of less than 16 months
despite surgical resection, radiation, and/or chemotherapy. There is a growing
awareness that the interaction of tumors with their microenvironment, together
with metabolic factors, is responsible for altering gene expression patterns,
which enable the tumor to adapt and escape tumor treatment. This collaborative
research project aims to develop novel biophotonic methods to recognize genome-
wide epigenetic mutations in GBM. This methodology will not only permit the
early diagnosis of GBM, it will also lead to a combination of mechanic and
metabolic stimuli, which will be able to restore apoptosis (programmed cell
death) in GBM and other solid tumors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has
the following aims: 1: Development of Nanoscale Technologies for Visualization
and Characterization of Chromatin Alteration Induced by Mechano-metabolic Cues;
Aim 2: Chromatin Level Epigenetic Engineering; and Aim 3: A Deep Hybrid Learning
Model to Recognize and Predict Mechano-metabolic Conditions for Introducing
Programmed Cell Death in GBM. The development of a new toolbox for reprogramming
of transformed cells will have implications that will reach far beyond
glioblastoma. It will apply to virtually all diseases with epigenetic drivers,
among them numerous cancers, neurodegenerative diseases, cardiovascular
diseases, obesity and metabolic syndrome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.