* 2129253
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Permafrost degradation impacts on soils, human societies, water resources and carbon cycle
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Go Iwahana, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 139,158.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to understand the hydrological,
geochemical, geomorphological, microbiological, and socio-economic impacts of
permafrost thaw to soils and surface/groundwaters in the Arctic and Subarctic,
and their sustainability in the changing climate. The overall objective of the
work is to compare sites in Siberia and Alaska with different permafrost
characteristics (ice-rich Yedoma permafrost or carbon-rich permafrost peatland;
continuous or discontinuous permafrost), climate-sensitivity, vegetation, and
degradation types along latitudinal and longitudinal gradients. To accomplish
this, the team will study several key small watersheds in Siberia and Alaska.
Each study area was chosen based on its representativeness of the region and
more importantly for comparative power across a broad range of permafrost,
vegetation, and degradation types. The main objective is to analyze the
differences and similarities between sites to better understand the variations
of impacts. To understand and compare the impacts of permafrost degradation
between the different sites, the team has defined several indicators of the
vulnerability of soils, surface/ground waters: natural and anthropogenic
stressors, permafrost conditions and degradation, hydrologic and aquatic
chemistry, carbon cycle and microbial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.