* 2129782
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Network Coordination Office 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Julio Ramirez, Purdue University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,887,799.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high-performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office (NCO), CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation
Center, and Experimental Facilities, including a natural hazard and post-
disaster reconnaissance research facility. Information about NHERI resources is
available at the NHERI web portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made
for NHERI contribute to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction
Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP).
This award will renew the NHERI NCO from October 1, 2021, to September 30, 2025,
at Purdue University, with its partner institutions (University of Texas at San
Antonio, Texas Tech University, and University of Hawaii at Manoa). The NCO will
continue to serve as the leader and focal point for NHERI, building a global,
multi-hazard, collaborative research community and research infrastructure
focused on mitigating the impacts of earthquakes, windstorms, and the related
hazards of tsunamis and storm surge on civil infrastructure and on cultivating
the next generation of natural hazards researchers and educators. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The NCO will provide the following activities for NHERI: (1) convene
and support NHERI governance for network leadership (Council, Network
Independent Advisory Committee, and User Forum); (2) update the NHERI Science
Plan; (3) deploy transparent procedures for users to access the NHERI
experimental facilities and field resources through a centralized scheduling
platform on the NHERI web portal; (4) conduct educational and outreach
activities, including a Research Experiences for Undergraduates program, Summer
Institute for early career researchers and practicing engineers, and monthly
graduate student meetings; (5) disseminate knowledge and accelerate the transfer
into practice of research conducted in earthquake, coastal, and wind engineering
and social sciences conducted by NHERI users; (6) communicate information about
NHERI resources, events, and research and education accomplishments to the
natural hazards community; and (7) form national and international strategic
partnerships that can leverage and broaden NHERI resources to achieve a global,
multi-hazard community. Through the NCO's community coordination of NHERI's
human, experimental, field, cyberinfrastructure, and computational modeling and
simulation resources, researchers will be empowered to build new knowledge and
innovation for national resilience and sustainability of civil infrastructure
with fewer fatalities, less interruption to societal functions, and reduced
economic loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.