* 2129209
* Understanding Highly Heterogeneous Biological Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ron Elber, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 757,389.00

Biological membranes are highly complex environments that play a central role in
a wide range of cellular functions such as cell-cell communication and energy
production. Membranes contain hundreds of unique lipids organized on a nanometer
length scale, and this organization is critical for cellular function. Membranes
contain a large number of lipids, which serve specific functions. For example,
certain lipid species are present as signaling molecules to regulate certain
biochemical processes. Abnormal lipid distributions have been linked to human
diseases. The specific biological roles of lipid membrane composition are not
fully understood since the tools to investigate membrane architectures are
severely limited. Microscopic interactions among the different components, on a
molecule-to-molecule basis, determine the microscopic distribution of lipids and
local membrane structure. This project will bring forth cutting-edge
experimental tools based on time-resolved spectroscopy and single-molecule
imaging to investigate the specific environment and the molecular geometries
associated with membrane signaling. In addition, the team will develop
multiscale simulation methods to obtain an atomistic view of membranes and aid
in the interpretation of experiments. Specifically, the project will focus on
understanding how certain negatively-charged lipid species can alter the binding
affinities of signaling proteins. This collaborative project will provide a
platform for training visiting students across research groups and to increase
the number of underrepresented students enrolled in the Chemistry and
Neuroscience graduate programs at UT-Austin. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the research team will investigate lipid membrane environments and
the role of signaling lipids using a combination of biochemical methods,
fluorescently-labeled lipids, vibrational spectroscopy, single-molecule
microscopy, and enhanced-sampling molecular dynamics simulations. Specifically,
the team will focus on harvesting intact plasma membranes from mammalian cell
lines that will be imaged using fluorescence microscopy and tip-enhanced
infrared spectroscopy. This project seeks to establish a molecular-level view of
lipid-lipid and lipid-protein interactions to inform the importance of membrane
composition. The following aspects of membranes will be the primary focus of the
project: 1. The team will characterize how model transmembrane helices sample a
different range of local environments in a mixture with other lipids, with
specific emphasis on the sequence of the protein sequence. 2. The team will
determine how proteins become partitioned in heterogeneous bilayers using model
helical peptides with a well-defined balance between hydrophobic and hydrophilic
residues. The team will measure IR spectra of single transmembrane helices
embedded in harvested plasma membranes. 3. The team will explore the role of the
membrane as a “signaling lipid reservoir” by capturing the interactions between
PIP2 signaling lipids and other anionic lipids within the membrane bulk to
inform how these interactions drive signaling
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.