* 2129574
* Collaborative Research: Theory-Grounded Guidelines for Solver-Aware System Architecting (SASA)
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Zoe Szajnfarber, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 10/31/2024
* USD 263,492.00

The objective of this project is to advance the scientific understanding of a
new paradigm of system architecting in engineering, referred to as Solver-Aware
System Architecting (SASA). SASA actively considers the capacity of talent and
expertise from outside organizational boundaries (e.g., gig workers, crowd)
during the formulation phases of the system design process. This research
hypothesizes that the joint consideration of system architecture, diverse
external solvers, and contract mechanisms, can significantly improve system
design outcomes. The research will result in new theory and best practices for
when and how to incorporate novel sources of effort into complex systems design,
which has positive implications for workforce management. With an explicit focus
on translation to practice, the guidance generated by this work has the
potential to make a tangible impact on how system architecting is practiced, and
the way organizations engage with outside and non-traditional solvers, which
promises greater effectiveness and efficiency in technical business operations.
The theoretical innovations will be reduced to practice in the form of
actionable guidelines relating SASA principles to design outcomes. Additional
deliverables of this project include a set of educational tools to educate
students and industry practitioners on SASA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful,
the research will result in scientific foundations for the paradigm shift from
traditional approaches to system architecting, which assume traditional players
bounded by organizational boundaries, to more open innovation approaches for
complex systems design. The research will establish a firm scientific foundation
consisting of (i) socio-technical theory for architecting complex systems; (ii)
computational models of open innovation processes for systems design and
computational methods for designing contractual mechanisms for SASA; and (iii)
empirically-validated design guidelines to support practitioners of SASA. The
research will extend the frontier of knowledge in systems engineering research
and practice by shedding light on the linkages among innovation processes,
designer knowledge, systems architecture and contractual structures. The
resulting educational tools will have a direct impact on student learning about
system architecting. The tools will be tested at the PIsâ€™ institutions and then
made freely available to other members of the Engineering Design and Systems
Engineering (EDSE) community. The focus on leveraging non-traditional
contributors has implications for broader societal goals around diversity and
inclusion, broadening participation in STEM through new avenues for access, and
eliminating barriers to traditional professional
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.