* 2129705
* The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) 2021 Principal Investigators/Project Directors Meeting
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Christopher Botanga, Chicago State University
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 07/31/2022
* USD 215,422.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in diversifying the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) workforce through their efforts at significantly
increasing the numbers of students from historically underrepresented minority
populations(African-Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians or Alaska
Natives, NativeHawaiians or Other Pacific Islanders) to successfully complete
high-quality degree programs in STEM. Chicago State University will lead an
Organizing Committee to develop and hold a Principal Investigators/Project
Directors (PI/PD) meeting. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will take place
in a hybrid format over two days at the beginning of October, with both in-
person attendance and virtual attendance at all the in-person sessions. The
meeting will provide a forum for discussing the accomplishments of the program
over the last 30 years, as well as the challenges and opportunities going
forward, especially in light of COVID19 impacts. All LSAMP PIs and PDs will be
invited to the meeting. As the last LSAMP PI/PD meeting was held in 2019, this
meeting will provide the opportunity to foster and renew connections, to share
information and resources gained in addressing pandemic-related issues, and plot
a course going forward for the LSAMP community to meet the challenges of post-
pandemic academia for groups underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.