* 2129468
* Online Workshop on Synchrotron X-Ray Needs for Soft Matter Far From Equilibrium; June/July 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2022
* USD 9,071.00

This grant will support a highly interdisciplinary on-line workshop identifying
important fundamental questions related to soft matter far from equilibrium and
how to employ X-ray tools to answer these questions. Much of the richness of the
world around us – and in fact life itself – arises from conditions and processes
far from equilibrium. And yet in contrast to systems at or near-equilibrium, our
understanding of the basic principles of far-from-equilibrium systems is in its
infancy. Non-equilibrium processes are particularly relevant in soft-matter
systems, with huge impacts on areas ranging from health to energy to
manufacturing. X-ray scattering studies, particularly using synchrotron
radiation, are uniquely able to probe the three-dimensional, atomic-scale
structure of soft matter over a wide range of time- and spatial scales,
providing critical information needed to elucidate the fundamental processes and
later to control them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium processes are
particularly relevant in soft-matter systems. Since their structures are based
on weak interaction forces, including dipolar, hydrogen bonding, pi-pi, or
screened electrostatic interactions, even small external perturbations can
substantially alter the behavior of soft matter. In macromolecular systems, for
example, structural relaxation times can be very long. As a result, they often
retain a memory of the preparation or processing conditions, a key to the large
diversity of macromolecular structures and many technological innovations.
Furthermore, in analogy to biology, the study of soft dissipative systems with
an ability to produce energy and convert it from one form to another has led to
the emergent field of active matter. In recent years, efforts have intensified
to study non-equilibrium processes in soft matter systematically in order to
explore the entirely novel phenomena associated with transient structure, order,
and dynamics, and to improve our fundamental understanding of them. Synchrotron-
based x-ray radiation has emerged as a particularly useful tool to contribute to
this understanding. This workshop will:&lt;br/&gt;1. Identify important science
questions related to “Soft Matter Far From Equilibrium” during advanced
manufacturing processes such as roll-to-roll printing of highly structured
materials;&lt;br/&gt;2. Determine how these questions can be addressed using
synchrotron-based X-ray capabilities; &lt;br/&gt;3. Identify critical needs for
and characteristics of synchrotron-based x-ray resources to support this
research; and&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify the broader impacts of providing such
resources to the soft matter community.&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of the workshop
will be captured in a workshop report to be submitted for
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.