* 2129752
* I-Corps:  Coffee Bean Conversion as a Direct Additive Flavoring to Food and Beverage Products
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Wade Fulghum, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development a coffee-sourced food and drink additive product to provide an
alternative to conventional methods of achieving coffee flavor. Current methods
begin with brewed coffee drink as a food additive precursor while using added
chemicals to achieve the desired color and flavor in food and beverage products.
The proposed technology preserves larger amounts of caffeine and antioxidants as
compared with current technology, while enhancing key volatile compounds for
superior color, flavor, and aroma. The goal is to provide food product companies
with a more sustainable, accessible, and healthier alternative to conventional
methods for achieving coffee flavor. The proposed technology may be an
attractive option for food product companies as it will help them appeal to
consumers that are growing increasingly health and environmentally
conscious.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a technology for conversion of whole roasted coffee beans to achieve coffee
flavor in food and beverage products. Current technologies are based on water-
extracted brewed coffee that is spray dried, concentrated, or freeze dried. The
proposed process involves converting the entire roasted coffee bean into an
ultra-ground, one-ingredient flavoring agent that may be used as a direct
additive in food and beverage products to achieve coffee flavor with natural
coloring. Unlike current methods for achieving coffee flavor, this process
eliminates significant water consumption as well as the spent coffee ground
waste stream, making it a sustainable alternative to traditional methods. In
addition, the proposed process has been shown to yield maximum nutritional
content, enhances key volatile compounds for taste, aroma, and color, and
reduces a number of undesirable volatile compounds that result from current
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.