* 2129628
* Collaborative Research: Associations between climate shifts and ammonoid turnover across second-tier extinctions during the early Late Cretaceous greenhouse
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Peter Wagner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 03/31/2025
* USD 296,242.00

As climate changes, it will be important to accurately predict how environmental
shifts will impact marine animals in order to assist conservation biology
efforts. Cephalopods like squid and octopus are ecologically important, as both
predator and prey, and economically important for the U.S. fisheries industry.
This project will investigate patterns of evolution and extinction in fossil
relatives of modern squid and octopus, the ammonoids. Between 90 and 100 million
years ago, Earth experienced multiple episodes of cooling and warming. By
investigating the traits that helped some ammonoid species survive these events,
the project will identify key factors that control extinction risk in
cephalopods. The project will also include training for undergraduate and
graduate students at two universities, contribute to publicly available
databases and computer- and internet-based research tools, and develop
educational materials for children and the general public on how climate change
affects marine animals and ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cenomanian-
Turonian interval of the early Late Cretaceous witnessed three substantial
climate shifts, cooling and sea level falls in the middle Cenomanian and middle
Turonian and warming, widespread anoxia, and elevated sea level over the latest
Cenomanian and earliest Turonian. This project will include the use of both
Bayesian phylogenetic analyses and ecomorphospace analyses of the ammonoid
cephalopod superfamily Acanthoceratoidea to tease apart the extent to which
these environmental perturbations affected acanthoceratoid diversity dynamics as
a whole and how those perturbations affected different morphotypes associated
with different basic ammonoid ecological habits. The project team will test
hypotheses related to phylogenetic and ecomorphological selectivity across each
of these three events and assess alternative extinction and origination models
across Acanthoceratoidea. The phylogenetic analyses represent the first use of
Bayesian phylogenetic methods for ammonoids and also contribute to advancements
for simultaneously assessing macroevolutionary models and phylogenetic
relationships via Bayesian methods. Thus, the final results will both be
informative about how particular climate shifts affected ammonoid extinction
rates and provide a model for similar assessments of other taxonomic groups
during other critical intervals of Earth system evolution. Ultimately, the
proposed research will identify key factors that drive diversity dynamics and
extinction risk for mid-level predators, an important but often overlooked
marine ecologic guild.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.