* 2129408
* I-Corps:  Programmable pediatric motor activity center for children with disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Sarah Berger, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rehabilitative toy for infants and young children with motor
delay and/or impairment. In the United States about eleven percent of infants
(&gt; 500,000) are born prematurely and the premature birth rate in the U.S. has
risen by more than thirty percent in the last 25 years. Prematurity is
associated with health and developmental disabilities, including motor delay.
Early intervention typically involves using toys to encourage infants to
interact with the environment and to practice balance control. Parents often
search for toys that are developmentally appropriate for their children. One
problem with the currently available toys is that those that are functionally
accessible to infants with motor delay/impairment tend to be under-stimulating
when motor delay is not accompanied by cognitive impairment. The proposed design
is an automatized, personalized, programmable pediatric activity center for the
home or clinic that promotes balance control and object exploration in infancy
and early childhood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a pediatric activity center for the home or clinic that promotes
balance control and object exploration in infancy and early childhood. Informed
by research suggesting that direct physical exploration of the environment
during infancy has cascading effects for development, this technological method
balances motor and cognitive demands that are matched in toys developed for
typically-developing children, but may be mismatched in infants with
developmental delays. One advantage of this new method is that it automates the
toy presentation to both foster motor activity and free up caregiver resources
so they can offer additional support. A second advantage is that the components
of the activity center can be custom-programmed so that they can become
increasingly challenging, matching the child's changing skills. Infants with
motor delays lack the typical experience of interacting with the world which
puts them at an academic and social disadvantage because early interactions with
objects impact later cognitive, language, and social development. However, early
intervention and developmentally-appropriate play have the potential to change
the developmental timeline and learning trajectory and minimize negative
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.