* 2129302
* Understanding plant root immunity against the global crop destroyer Macrophomina phaseolina using natural variation in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Thomas Eulgem, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 397,770.00

Plant diseases caused by pathogenic microbes, such as fungi and bacteria, cause
massive agricultural losses. Dubbed a “global destroyer of crops”, the soilborne
fungal pathogen Macrophomina phaseolina infects the roots of more than 500 plant
species including many economically significant crops. Global warming promotes
the spread of M. phaseolina. Losses in US field crop production caused by this
fungus are increasing due to restrictions on toxic fumigation methods. Thus,
alternative, innovative methods to reduce damage caused by M. phaseolina are
urgently needed. Plant defense processes against M. phaseolina are poorly
understood and immunity in roots is an understudied area. Taking advantage of
the model plant species Arabidopsis thaliana, which allows for rapid progress in
experimental studies, the genetic basis of natural disease resistance in plant
roots against M. phaseolina will be examined. This study is expected to identify
genes and biological processes which mediate protection of plants against this
detrimental fungus. Results from this study will accelerate the development of
crop cultivars with enhanced disease resistance against M. phaseolina. Its
ultimate goal is to reduce the negative impact of M. phaseolina on the U.S.
economy. This study will be performed at UC Riverside, a Hispanic Serving
Institution, and one of the most ethnically diverse research universities in the
USA. The investigators are deeply committed to the scientific training of
members of historically underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diploid model plant Arabidopsis thaliana offers
substantial advantages over crop systems to study the molecular genetic basis of
host resistance against M. phaseolina. Arabidopsis is easily transformed, has
genome-wide collections of mutants and transgenics, has a very short generation
time, and large populations grow in minimal space. A particularly useful
resource is a collection of &gt;1000 natural A. thaliana accessions for which
genome sequences have been determined. In this collection, a substantial degree
of variation in M. phaseolina resistance is observed, allowing defense loci and
biological processes contributing to root immunity against this detrimental
pathogen to be uncovered. The central hypothesis of this project is: Natural
variation in Arabidopsis thaliana will allow the discovery of fundamental
mechanisms of root defenses against M. phaseolina. The specific aims being
pursued are:(1) Use natural variation within A. thaliana to uncover defense
mechanisms against M. phaseolina.(2) Study root cell type-specific immune
responses against M. phaseolina.(3) Identify key loci mediating protection
against M. phaseolina. By profiling transcriptional patterns associated with M.
phaseolina resistance among A. thaliana accessions a description of
transcriptionally-controlled regulatory, physiological, and biochemical
processes involved in host immunity against M. phaseolina will be delivered.
Using root cell type-specific fluorescent marker lines, information on how
distinct root tissues operate to mediate protection against M. phaseolina will
be provided. Reverse genetics and gene mapping will identify plant genes that
contribute to immunity against M. phaseolina, which can be used to inform
molecular genetic breeding approaches in crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.