* 2129697
* Giant viruses in the open ocean: Is large size adaptive where cells are scarce?
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Grieg Steward, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,176,227.00

Viruses can infect all forms of life. Viruses are highly diverse, and one aspect
of diversity is size: genomes of viruses vary more than a thousandfold in
length, and the size of viral particles varies nearly a millionfold. The
discovery of “giant” viruses was astounding because they can be physically
larger and code for more genes than many free-living microorganisms. There is
growing evidence that giant viruses are widespread and diverse in the ocean, but
much about their ecology remains unknown. What critical ecological tradeoffs
vary with virus size, allowing small and large viruses to coexist? Do these
tradeoffs cause the distribution of virus sizes to vary across habitats? This
project aims to answer these questions for viruses that infect phytoplankton,
the microscopic plants that are the foundation of ocean productivity. This
research can also influence a diverse array of scientific fields because virus
size varies greatly in other ecosystems and host-associated microbiomes. The
fundamental constraints on size may be broadly similar across systems, but the
processes driving virus size have not been thoroughly investigated in any of
them. This project supports the training of a postdoctoral researcher, two
graduate students, and undergraduate students in integrative science that
includes field, laboratory, and modeling components. National Science
Foundation-supported Research Experience for Undergraduates and Tribal Colleges
and Universities programs at UH Manoa that serve Pacific Islanders and other
underrepresented groups are used for recruiting students. In addition, science
outreach at public events in Hawai’i includes an interactive game to communicate
ideas about giant viruses and their role in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Large viruses may have four advantages over smaller viruses: i)
ability to infect a greater diversity of host genotypes, ii) better control of
host metabolism, iii) large enough size to enter host cells by ingestion, and
iv) greater persistence in the extracellular environment. These advantages may
compensate for the advantages held by smaller viruses: higher contact rates with
their hosts and greater offspring number per infection. The advantages of large
size may be more consequential in oligotrophic habitats, where the microbial
eukaryote community is primarily small phagotrophic flagellates (mixotrophs and
heterotrophs), at low population densities, with resource-limited growth. The
project goals are: (1) To test whether giant viruses indeed dominate in the
oligotrophic ocean compared to a productive coastal location, as suggested by
initial observations of this research team; (2) To test the above four
hypotheses about the advantages of large size by conducting laboratory
experiments with diverse viral isolates, and (3) To use an eco-evolutionary
model of eukaryotic microbes and their viruses to explain observed size
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.