* 2129537
* Role Of Non-Phototrophs In The Growth And Fitness Of Biological Soil Crust
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Ferran Garcia-Pichel, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,112,373.00

Biological soil crusts (or “biocrusts”) are communities of microorganisms that
develop naturally on the surface of soil from arid and range lands based on the
photosynthesis of tiny, plant-like organisms known as cyanobacteria. In
unaltered settings biocrust can cover much of the landscape, providing several
important benefits to the ecosystem. They can take up nutrients from the air,
for example, increasing soil fertility. And, importantly, they build veritable
surface crusts that protect the soil from erosion by wind and water and prevent
the formation of fugitive dust. Their effects are measurable both locally and
globally. Unfortunately, biocrusts are negatively impacted by several human
activities, including cattle grazing, agriculture, urban sprawl, and global
warming, among others. This often leads to the degradation of soil quality and
increases in fugitive dust formation. During the last decade, the rehabilitation
of biocrust has become a goal in ecological restoration efforts in many
countries, including the US. However, less than optimal outcomes on this front
made it patent that knowledge about the basic biology and ecology of these
communities is insufficient. While we have learned much about the biology of the
all-important photosynthetic microbes that build these crusts, the lack of
success in producing new crusts pointed to some yet unknown factor or factors
that are crucial for their growth and overall fitness. This research focuses on
the non-photosynthetic microbes that establish specific biological relationships
with the photosynthetic microbes. This project will provide training to graduate
and community college students and will provide critical information necessary
to advance biocrust restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address
this knowledge gap experimentally by first rigorously identifying and
characterizing the main non-photosynthetic microbial actors involved in such
interactions using a combination of pedigreed cultivation and molecular
approaches. Subsequently, the project will study the mechanistic nature of the
interactions at play, by reconstructing the mutualistic interactions in culture
and by experimentally disrupting the need for a mutualistic interaction in field
samples. Finally, the project will assess the importance of these interactions
as determinants of growth and fitness in natural biocrusts. Because of their
particularly crucial role, the project will focus on microbial interactions with
pioneer cyanobacteria and on early stage biocrusts. The plan calls for three
discrete tasks, each driven by specific hypotheses based on preliminary
evidence. These are: 1) that interactions are a staple of pioneer biocrust
forming cyanobacteria, 2) that these are based on mutualisms that are specific
with respect to purpose and partner, and 3) that predatory bacteria constitute a
universal, ecologically significant loss factor in biocrusts. The project
includes efforts to involve stakeholders in land management, to facilitate
technological transfer, and contributes significantly to science workforce
development at various levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.