* 2129911
* Walking Together to Increase Participation of Students from Underrepresented Groups in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Noel Hennessey, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Arizona (UA), a Hispanic Serving Institution, and two
regional Tribal Colleges - Tohono O’odham Community College (TOCC) and San
Carlos Apache College (SCAC). During the project, faculty from the three
institutions will spend time on the three campuses to gain insight into the day-
to-day student life at TOCC and SCAC as well as the College of Engineering at
UA. TOCC and SCAC faculty will learn about the 15 undergraduate engineering
degree programs. Everyone will participate in workshops to design collaborative
student programs in which UA, TOCC and SCAC student communities are formed prior
to transfer to the UA. By providing need-based scholarships and structuring a
community through which students will advance through challenging curriculum and
develop a sense of belonging in their career pathway, this program aims to
benefit society by increasing students from underrepresented minority (URM)
groups and low-income students’ access to the engineering profession. Through
increased persistence of low-income students and students from URM groups in
engineering, subsequent incoming students will see themselves better represented
and continue to pursue a career in engineering. More diverse engineering
graduates will shift and widen the lens through which technical problems are
solved in society and employers realize that this encourages
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The team will begin with a Collaborative Planning
project to better understand the barriers to success for Indigenous students as
they enter STEM programs and transfer to large institutions of higher learning.
The team will strive to incorporate culturally relevant concepts such as Himdag
(the O’odham way of life that includes respect for oneself, for others, for
elders, and for the land), and the heritage of the San Carlos Apache (deeply
tied to Mother Earth) into UA engineering courses. The team will study how
programs that employ mentorship from peers, professionals, and faculty, impact
students’ sense of belonging. Sense of belonging has been studied in terms of
students’ affiliation with a campus, but this project extends previous research
to evaluate students’ sense of belonging in the engineering profession, and how
academic support and co-curricular programming impacts that sense of belonging,
persistence, and retention. The educational researcher in collaboration with the
program evaluator will organize focus groups and surveys to uncover student
needs. The ultimate goal is to submit a S-STEM Track 3 proposal in March 2023.
The planning grant provides time to gather institutional data from the 3
institutions to develop appropriate interventions, define scholarship
eligibility requirements, establish scholarship amounts, and establish advisory
boards. The institutions will establish memorandums of understanding and
transfer articulation agreements. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.