* 2129634
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: From atoms to molecules to cells - Multi-scale tools and infrastructure for visualization of annotated 3D structure data
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Stephen Burley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,105,493.00

This US RCSB Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB) - UK Protein Data Bank in Europe
(PDBe) collaborative project will significantly redesign existing open-source
Molstar molecular graphics infrastructure to develop an extensible, one-stop-
shop for visualization and interrogation of open-access three-dimensional (3D)
structure data integrated from the Protein Data Bank (PDB), NextGen PDB, PDB-
Dev, Electron Microscopy Data Bank, Electron Microscopy Image Archive, and
BioImage Archive. Molstar works entirely with the users internet browser (e.g.,
Chrome, Firefox, Safari). It consists of an easy-to-use graphical interface with
no user login or software product download, update, or registration required.
The redesigned Molstar system will be FAIR (Findability, Accessibility,
Interoperability, and Reusability) and FACT (Fairness, Accuracy,
Confidentiality, Transparency) Principles compliant. It will support efficient
data delivery and visualization and study of 3D structure data together with
structural, biological, and functional annotations across length scales ranging
from individual atoms to whole cells. Researchers, educators, and students
accessing the new system will be able to combine, visualize, and evaluate
structure data and related biological, medical, and chemical information from
multiple open-access data resources. It will also support analyses of 3D
structures of biomolecules their respective in organellar or cellular contexts
Users of the redesigned Molstar infrastructure will be able to study
macromolecular machines (e.g., prokaryotic RNA Polymerase-Ribosome Super
Complex; eukaryotic Nuclear Pore Complex) in 3D in situ combined with biological
and functional information integrated from a diverse array of open-access
biodata resources operating in the Americas, Europe, Oceania, and
Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address significant challenges
resulting from the growing corpus of 3D structure data stored in disparate open-
access primary data resource. These include the need for integration and
interoperation of these data with related biological and functional annotations
from knowledgebases; the need for a standard data representation for display of
3D structure data across length scales; the need to examine multiple 3D
structures of biological macromolecules in groups of related structures coming
from cutting-edge techniques such as serial femtosecond X-ray crystallography
and cryo-electron microscopy; the need to combine atomic level/multiscale
structures with lower resolution information from cryo- electron tomography and
super-resolution microscopy; and the need for efficient data packaging,
compression, and delivery for users with diverse levels of internet
connectivity. The project will overcome current limitations in data management,
interoperability, and visualization that make it difficult, sometimes
impossible, for molecular, cellular, and organismal biologists to fully utilize
the worldâ€™s open-access 3D biostructure data. The software products of the
project will be freely accessible at https://www.molstar.org. Utilization of the
Molstar software will be exemplified within the web portals of RCSB PDB
(https://www.rcsb.org) and PDBe (https://www.pdbe.org), which are available to
all users at no charge and with no limitations on data usage under the most
permissive Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license
(https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.