* 2129111
* FW-HTF-P: Managing Time and Work-Life Boundaries in Support of Future Remote Workers
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Amy Jo Metz, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 150,000.00

Remote work can offer benefits to workers including time flexibility, the
elimination of commute time, and expand access to job opportunities by removing
geographic and ability-driven constraints. Remote work can also add value for
employers in the form of increased productivity and reduced real estate costs.
However, removing the physical boundary between work-life and home-life
increases the likelihood of work encroaching on family life and family
responsibilities interrupting work. The effects of such conflicts negatively
impact worker stress, anxiety, satisfaction, exhaustion, and burnout. Not only
does computing technology enable remote work, but it also has the potential to
empower remote workers with tools to better manage these challenges posed by
remote work. This Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF)
Planning Grant project promises to advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare by illuminating the challenges that workers encounter as a result of
their remote work, and to understand their needs for support and the potential
for future technology to facilitate that support. The project will advance the
frontiers of science by exploring possible solutions to the threats posed by
remote work. Focus will be paid to the challenges by rural workers, who lack
equitable access to the employment opportunities afforded urban dwellers, and
working women, who are disproportionately responsible for carrying out household
and family responsibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
understand the challenges remote workers face through three primary objectives
that will provide a foundation for a long-term research agenda. First, the
project team will build relationships with relevant partners and stakeholders.
Second, the project gathers data through a diary study and a survey with remote
workers and managers of remote workers to understand the challenges that remote
workers encounter. Third, the project engages remote workers in design
activities to explore possibilities for future technology to better manage
remote workers' work-life vs. home-life conflicts. The project will advance
understanding of how current remote workers manage issues of family-to-work and
work-to-family conflict, and the effects of those conflicts including stress,
anxiety, dissatisfaction, exhaustion, and burnout. The project will advance
development of a theoretical model of boundary management in remote workers. The
project will also contribute to practical outcomes in the form of design
insights for the development of future technologies that can support desirable
work-life boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.