* 2129542
* Quantifying the temperature responses of symbiotic nitrogen fixation and its carbon cost
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Kevin Griffin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,245,785.00

How does temperature affect physiological processes? This fundamental question
helps people understand how organisms live in extreme environments, adjust to
daily/seasonal cycles, and respond to climate change. For many processes, like
photosynthesis, the basics have been known for decades. For one process, though,
knowledge has been severely limited by technology. The process, “nitrogen
fixation,” takes nitrogen gas (78% of air) and makes it available to organisms.
It is done by certain bacteria, often in symbiosis with certain plants (beans,
peas, and some wild herbs, shrubs, and trees), and is the main natural way that
nitrogen gets into ecosystems. Given that nitrogen is an essential part of
protein and DNA, nitrogen fixation is critical for life. It also plays a major
role in climate change. According to models, plants will store more carbon if
nitrogen fixation provides enough nitrogen to balance their nutrition. Here’s
where temperature comes in: models currently assume that nitrogen fixation
always works best at 25 degrees Celsius, leading to predictions that tropical
forests will fix less nitrogen as the world warms. Recent work in the labs of
investigators Menge and Griffin used new technology to show that, in a handful
of species, nitrogen fixation works best at 29-37 degrees Celsius and adjusts to
recent temperature. The proposed work will use this new technology to test
whether these findings hold across a wide range of species and growing
conditions. This work will train scholars, diversify ecology, and improve models
that are used to set climate policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The temperature
response of symbiotic N fixation (SNF) is poorly understood. What’s the basic
shape of the curve? How does it vary across taxa? How ubiquitous is acclimation
to growing temperatures? Answers to these basic questions are fundamental to
biology. They are also critical for understanding global environmental change,
given that different ways of modeling SNF modify C storage by 50 Pg C by the end
of the century. The models that include a temperature response of SNF use a
function that comes from a small set of measurements, nearly all of which were
from asymbiotic bacteria. The function does not include acclimation. This
function has been applied at the global scale to both the rate of SNF and,
despite zero data, to the carbon cost of SNF. Preliminary data from the
principal investigator’s labs suggest that the temperature response of SNF is
drastically different than the function currently in use. Furthermore, the
preliminary data reveal the potential for acclimation to growing temperature.
The proposed work will address the questions: What are the temperature responses
of SNF and the respiratory carbon cost of SNF? How do they vary across taxa and
growing temperatures? How do they compare to the temperature response of
photosynthesis? To do so it will use continuous ethylene and carbon dioxide
analyzers to measure SNF activity, respiratory carbon dioxide fluxes from
nodules, and photosynthesis on many N-fixing symbioses grown at different
temperatures in growth chambers. This work will make major progress toward
fundamental understanding of a woefully under-studied
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.