* 2129234
* The function of lipid flippases in plant growth and thermotolerance
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2026
* Jeffrey Harper, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 03/31/2026
* USD 757,350.00

A broader impact objective of this project is to develop crop plants that are
more tolerant to heat stress. Climate change is expected to result in more
frequent and severe periods of heat stress that will significantly reduce yields
from agricultural crops. Simultaneously, projections indicate that world-wide
food production must increase by more than 70% to feed an expected increase in
the global human population to 10 billion by 2057. To meet the growing food
demands it is critical that we develop crop plants that are more tolerant to
heat stress conditions (i.e., the new normal). The proposed project aims to
better understand how plants remodel their lipid membranes during heat stress,
with a specific focus on a family of enzymes that flip lipids across membranes
(lipid flippases). The research goals include engineering selected lipid
flippases to be more active and testing whether these modified enzymes can
accelerate the rate in which plants remodel their membranes to cope with
changing temperatures. The research will determine whether this “faster membrane
remodeling” strategy has any positive effect on plant growth, fertility, and
seed yield under heat stress conditions. If successful, this technology could be
applied to crop species and potentially improve yields under heat-stress
conditions, thus strengthening global food-security in a warming world.
Additionally, the research will provide a venue for teams of undergraduate
student researchers to gain in-depth research experience in the field of plant
biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term scientific goal is to understand
the cellular functions of lipid flippases in eukaryotic cells and to use that
knowledge to develop strategies to make crop plants more climate resilient. In
plants, lipid flippases are referred to as ALAs (Aminophospho-Lipid ATPases, or
P4-type ATPases) and these enzymes utilize ATP hydrolysis to catalyze the
flipping of specific lipids from one side of the membrane to the other. Genetic
knockouts of several ALAs in Arabidopsis result in plants that are
hypersensitive to temperature changes. The central hypothesis guiding the
research is that lipid flippases play critical roles in the rapid remodeling of
membranes in response to changing temperatures. The first aim is to use domain
swapping and site specific mutagenesis to identify important regulatory features
within different ALAs. A key hypothesis to be tested is that variations in the
C-terminal domain confer specific cellular functions, either by changing an
ALA’s activity, regulation, localization, or substrate specificity. The second
aim is to use lipidomics to quantify the abundance of specific lipids and
determine whether a temperature-sensitive ala3 mutant has a defect in lipid
remodeling during hot and cold temperature stresses. The third aim will
determine whether the expression of a hyperactive ALA can improve vegetative
growth or reproductive fitness under heat-stress conditions. The practical focus
is to use recently gained knowledge on the C-terminal regulatory domains of ALAs
to develop a novel strategy for improving thermotolerance in crop
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.