* 2129388
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Feedback-Driven Mutation Testing for Any Language
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Claire Le Goues, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 255,457.00

Testing, validation, and verification are all central activities in programming
and software engineering. Unfortunately, existing techniques for testing remain
inadequate for finding and eliminating key vulnerabilities before software
deployment -- even the most critical modern software is rife with security
vulnerabilities and defects that ultimately cost the economy billions of dollars
annually in lost productivity and compromised data. A technique known as
"mutation testing" has been researched since the 1970s; it aims to help software
engineers improve their tests and their software at the same time, by
automatically adding bugs to a program and checking whether the test suite can
detect them. Although in theory this technique is extremely effective for
improving software quality, there are several fundamental factors that prevent
it from being widely used in practice: it is difficult and time-consuming to
use, and the tools that exist for it cannot all handle the diversity of program
languages that are deployed in modern software systems. This project will tackle
these challenges and allow this important technique to be used to improve
quality of real-world software by developing efficient tools that can apply
mutation testing to programs written in any language; prioritize the output of
the tools to reduce the amount of time and effort needed to make maximal use of
them; and incorporate user feedback into the technique to maximize testing
efficiency. The project will be evaluated on real-world open source software
like the Linux kernel, and build on the researchers' previous collaborations to
substantially improve program and test effort quality on critical real-world
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core problem this project aims to address is
making program mutants practical in nonresearch settings, in a way that meets
the needs of developers and test engineers, by making it possible for someone
creating or enhancing a test suite, or developing code and test suite in tandem,
to (1) use "just enough" mutation testing for their needs, maximizing benefit
gained in exchange for work performed, and (2) to work in any programming
language without worrying about the quality of tool support provided for
mutation testing, and without sacrificing the ease of understanding of source-
based mutants, while easily adding custom mutation operators that target their
specific software development task. This project aims to adapt the Furthest-
Point-First metric previously used in fuzzer bug triaging to the problem of
maximizing the novelty of mutants examined by a user, in order to make it
possible to quickly discover unkilled mutants that expose serious defects in a
testing or verification effort. However, novelty alone is not sufficient:
feedback-driven mutation testing must also help users avoid inconsequential,
equivalent mutants, kill mutants high in the dominance hierarchy, and (most
importantly) incorporate user feedback. If a user marks a mutant as
inconsequential, or equivalent, or (especially) high impact, then that
information must be used to inform the ranking of future mutants as well. In
order to make such an approach maximally valuable, this project also proposes to
improve the state-of-the-art in source-level multilingual mutant generation,
allowing users to easily generate mutants for new programming languages, or even
for custom DSLs that are part of a specific project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.