* 2129624
* Engineering host-pathogen interactions to understand influenza A infection
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Gregg Duncan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2025
* USD 536,244.00

Respiratory viruses like influenza have evolved to circumvent the body’s natural
defenses to infection. Following inhalation into the lung, viral particles must
navigate through mucus that coats and protects that lung. However, it is not yet
fully understood what allows these viruses to bypass airway mucus to reach
underlying cells. This project seeks to understand how the physical size and
shape of influenza virus influences its ability to overcome the mucus barrier.
In addition, studies will be designed to determine how the preference of these
viruses to bind to certain sugars found in abundance within mucus and on airway
epithelial cells impacts their movement within mucus. This work will lay the
foundation for future studies on other respiratory pathogens such as rhinovirus,
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and coronaviruses (e.g., SARS-CoV-2). The
project will provide multidisciplinary training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students who will be actively recruited from diverse backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand both the viral
and host factors that influence the ability of Influenza A virus (IAV) to
penetrate the mucosal barrier to infection. Mucus is composed of heavily
glycosylated mucin proteins and presents both a biochemical and physical barrier
to pathogens within the lung microenvironment. To initiate infection, influenza
A virus (IAV) binds to alpha 2,3- and/or 2,6-linked sialic acid on the airway
epithelial surface with a strain-dependent receptor preference. The preference
of IAV for sialic acid glycoforms may alter virus interactions with mucin-
associated sialic acid. Yet, it is unknown how this may influence trapping of
IAV by mucus. Furthermore, IAV naturally produces virions with both spherical
and filamentous shape. While other virion-associated factors in IAV infection
have been explored, the role of IAV morphology remains unclear. On the host
side, barrier function of mucus and its impact on IAV infection are not
understood due to the challenges in effectively modeling mucosal antiviral
defense. To examine these complex host-pathogen interactions in detail, the
project will measure diffusion of IAV particles in mucus collected from human
bronchial epithelial cultures and bioengineered synthetic mucus using
fluorescent video microscopy and multiple particle tracking image analysis. The
approach taken will incorporate molecular virology to produce IAV particles with
specified receptor preference and shape as well as biochemical engineering
methods to modulate glycan expression in synthetic mucus barriers. This
comprehensive toolbox will be used to analyze the hypothesis that IAV
penetration is a function of virion morphology and glycan-binding preferences as
well as the composition and architecture of the mucus barrier. The unique
ability to quantitatively examine IAV-mucus interactions makes this approach
highly valuable and complementary to standard assays of infectivity. Building on
this fundamental work, a novel high-throughput viral infectivity screening
system that accounts for the impact of mucus barrier properties will be created.
The unique, highly innovative tools developed through this work will enhance our
understanding of IAV and offer a new perspective on the factors that influence
how viruses pass through mucus prior to infection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.