* 2129758
* Collaborative Research: Timescale-Dependent Effects of Transient Dynamics in Plant-Pollinator Networks
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Mark Novak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2025
* USD 140,459.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). Biological communities are comprised of multiple plant
and animal species that interact to form dynamic networks that profoundly shape
the coexistence of species. These networks are constantly confronted by both
anthropogenic and natural perturbations such as drought, fire, and habitat loss.
Predicting how these complex systems respond to perturbations is challenging
because the perturbations can propagate through the interwoven networks in
unexpected ways. A particular challenge is that perturbations create impacts at
different timescales: some species can respond in a matter of hours via the
behavioral changes of individuals, others in a matter of years via changes in
population abundance, and still others over decades by going extinct. This
project will combine mathematical models, computer simulations, and network
analyses with extensive observations and field experiments to understand how the
responses of plant-pollinator networks – whose functioning is vital to natural
and human-managed agriculture– can be understood and predicted. As perturbations
to ecological systems become increasingly frequent and extreme, society will
need to develop the tools to predict how ecological systems will respond to
perturbations and to develop appropriate solutions. In addition, integrating
mathematical models with real world data is a broader impact challenge that this
project addresses by offering a workshop for early career scientists with
diverse backgrounds in years 2 and 3. This project also supports diversity
initiatives through the Center for the Advancement of Multicultural Perspectives
on Science.&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance understanding of the responses
of plant-pollinator communities to perturbations by identifying which ecological
processes (e.g., adaptive foraging, functional responses, benefit accrual) are
relevant and necessary for prediction across time scales. More specifically, the
goal of this work is to understand how short-term (hours, days) behavioral
responses propagate to medium-term (years) responses in abundance of species,
and how these short- and medium-term responses, in turn, propagate to the long-
term (decades, centuries) persistence and functioning of plant-pollinator
networks. We will develop models for each of these timescales—parameterized and
validated with field data from the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory—and use
scale transition theory to understand how responses from shorter timescales will
propagate to longer timescale. This work will fill important gaps in
understanding responses to perturbations in ecological networks; in timescale
separation in ecological models; and in theory-data integration in mutualistic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.