* 2129631
* EAGER: Design of Distribution-Level Electricity Markets: Demarginalization and Decentralized Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Xiaojun Lin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2024
* USD 219,993.00

This NSF EAGER project aims to design new electricity markets for distribution-
level power systems, which can enable small prosumers with renewable generation
to directly trade energy at the distribution level. Such distribution-level
markets face significant new challenges due to low marginal cost and high
uncertainty of renewable generation, as well as decentralized decision making of
a large number of prosumers. This project will bring transformative changes by
developing new market structures that are radically different from the existing
transmission-level markets, which greatly reduce price-volatility, eliminate
price-fixing, encourage long-term investment, and improve grid reliability. This
will be achieved by considering new energy products that are tailored to
resources with low marginal costs and significant generation uncertainty. The
intellectual merits of the project include (i) novel distribution-level market
designs that will produce much more stable market prices and encourage
investment despite uncertain long-run outlook of future operating conditions;
and (ii) learning algorithms that enable small and inexperienced prosumers to
learn how to bid in the market. The broader impacts of the project include (i)
contributing to the increasing adoption of renewable energy, which benefits our
society as a whole and is essential for the evolution towards a sustainable
future; and (ii) training of students interested in future energy systems and
dissemination of results to both academic and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While electricity markets at the transmission
level are well-established, markets at the distribution level are still at their
infancy. Replicating the market principles from the transmission-level market to
the distribution level will likely produce highly volatile market prices,
increase the financial risks of both consumers and suppliers, and may even
incentivize price-manipulation. To address these challenges, this project will
design novel plan-ahead usage-right markets for both energy and ancillary
services that naturally lower price-volatility and greatly eliminate the
potential for market-power abuse and price-fixing. Further, in view of the
limited expertise and resources of prosumers, the project will design bidding-
by-learning strategies to automate the bidding processes for rationality-bounded
bidders who may not even know their own valuation of electricity
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.