* 2129051
* Data CI Pilot: VariMat Streaming Polystore Integration of Varied Experimental Materials Data
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Ilkay Altintas, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,316,305.00

VariMat is a pilot project to integrate experimental data sources with
cyberinfrastructure components and bridge the data variety gap in experimental
materials research data. The central goal of Materials Science and Engineering
is to discover and deploy innovative materials to serve society, but the process
is complex and frequently slow. Recent work to accelerate such materials
discovery is focused by the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI), which recognizes
the critical need for new materials in fields as diverse as energy,
transportation, and national security. The MGI centers on harnessing the data
revolution and fueling data-intensive methods including artificial intelligence
and machine learning. To reach the potential of the MGI, however, there is
pressing need for robust, high-performance data cyberinfrastructure (CI) that
facilitates machine-actionable data and better implementation of FAIR data
principles suited to the materials domain. Among remaining CI gaps, none is more
important than the need to integrate experimental data in ways that make it more
operable and consonant to the research community needs. This complex gap is
compounded by the transdisciplinary nature of materials science and engineering
where most projects depend on experimental data collected by highly varied
techniques, in distributed labs, and by multiple investigators. The variety and
volume of this data layers onto the dispersed nature of materials research to
create a data variety gap that impedes both rapid use and valuable reuse of data
as required by many data-hungry machine learning methods. The VariMat Data CI is
designed to break these barriers with a pilot instantiation in the subdomain of
quantum materials and maximize experimental data value across its whole
lifecycle. The project links teams from the UCSB Quantum Foundry and PARADIM, a
Materials Innovation Platform (MIP) â€“ two of the NSF's premier investments in
the Quantum Leap. This linkage integrates strong science drivers with
infrastructure development while adopting a strategic focus on influential
centers of high-quality, high-volume data production that are conduits to user
training and workflows. VariMat will provide investigators with integrated and
timely access to the breadth of experimental data needed to enable new discovery
pathways and drive novel-materials development that relies on controlled,
replicable synthesis; structural and compositional characterization; property
determination; and connectability to theory and modeling
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will establish a new
paradigm for an integrated data infrastructure leveraging a streaming layer for
real-time ingest to a polystore. VariMat uses an automated streaming layer to
link instrumental data to a polystore of heterogeneous data management systems
that optimize storage, query, and access for disparate data types. The polystore
encompasses multiple data models while unifying the query process for users. The
VariMat polystore creates a new option for unified management and query of
disparate experimental Big Data created across distributed facilities and to
expand FAIR data compliance in the materials domain. VariMat implements an
innovative stream processing Data Ingress Module for analytics driven ingest of
experimental data. Together, the streaming and polystore layers serve a user-
oriented web portal that combines advanced search with data analysis,
visualization, and compute resources. Such integration will be facilitated by a
unified semantic standard specific to the instantiation and that spans the
project. VariMat will leverage the PARADIM data model describing synthesis and
characterization with a directed acyclic graph (DAG) allowing traversal of the
materials entire history. VariMat's "loosely coupled" architecture provides
operational and managerial independence of subsystems well suited for
geographically distributed systems with on-going evolution in components as is
typical in mid-scale or larger materials science research. While the
infrastructure fills a critical, community identified gap, VariMat components
will be readily deployable and have broad applicability in other scientific
fields dependent on distributed, operationally independent instrumental
laboratories. Automated deployment and open source components will facilitate
ready instantiation in new domains. To maximize impact, concepts and tools
developed will be disseminated through freely available, open source codes,
online tutorials and data sets, and trainings that leverage existing schools and
workshops at the Quantum Foundry and PARADIM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by
the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division
of Materials Research within the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.