* 2129589
* IntBIO: Integrative Demography: Combining Ecology, Remote Sensing, and Genomics to Understand Population Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Troy Magney, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,372,311.00

Biodiversity is critical for the health of ecosystems, our biosphere, and
humankind. However, biodiversity is threatened by habitat loss and climate
change. Habitat loss and climate change have resulted in the acceleration of
species extinctions across the world. Within species, the extinction or
persistence of populations determines whether a species will survive at all.
Thus, understanding the factors that contribute to population persistence or
extinction is critical for predicting future population dynamics and managing
biodiversity in a changing world. Population persistence is determined by
genetic composition, ecological habitat, environmental stresses, and
interactions among these factors. This award will integrate advances in
genomics, remote sensing, and statistical modelling to develop new predictive
models of population persistence and extinction. The models created in this
project will be critical for understanding population dynamics, predicting
responses to future change, and providing tools to direct the implementation of
genetically-informed conservation strategies. The project also includes an
educational component that will provide research and training opportunities for
a new generation of biologists to prepare them to incorporate integrative
approaches to understand complex aspects of climate change and its effect on
biological systems. Training the next generation of biologists to be able to
integrate across fields is vital to addressing the complex impacts of climate
change. To achieve this, graduate level workshops in Field Ecology, Remote
Sensing, Genomic Data Analysis, Demographic Modeling, and Science Communication
and Professionalism will be developed and taught. To help build an inclusive
STEM pipeline, an integrative Course based Undergraduate Research Experience
(CURE) for freshmen will be developed, and the project will support Master’s
students for summer research as part of the Advancing Diversity to Educate the
Professors of Tomorrow (ADEPT) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
predict how the genetic composition of populations impacts their long-term
persistence or extinction in different and changing environments requires
integrating analysis techniques and data across diverse fields. Evolutionary
genomics can identify past targets of selection and current determinants of
fitness, but has not been effectively integrated with demography to explain
multi-generation population dynamics. Conversely, demographic modeling can
determine which aspects of organismal establishment, growth, survival, and
reproduction (life history) are most critical for population growth or decline,
but does not usually consider genomic determinants of these fitness components.
Streptanthus tortuosus (Mountain Jewelflower) will be used for this research. S.
tortuosus is an ideal species for this research due to its sensitivity to
climate, variation within and among populations in traits and life history
timing, and demographic and genomic tools currently in development. This project
will: 1) use genomics to quantify genetic variation among individuals; 2) apply
spectral remote sensing to understand the impact of stressors, the environment,
and genotype on plant physiology and growth; and, 3) develop a statistical and
demographic modeling framework to integrate these measures to understand and
predict the factors underlying population persistence or extinction. While past
research has investigated these components individually and some interactions
among them, this award explores whether population dynamics is an emergent
property that can be best understood by developing new demographic models that
integrate all of these inputs. Together, understanding how diversity in genes,
traits, physiology, and environment scales to impact individual performance and
population dynamics will provide critical new insights into the ecological and
evolutionary processes driving persistence or extinction. The resulting
integrative demography models will provide a road map for conservation
biologists and managers to use genomic information to predict effects of
different conservation strategies, such as assisted migration or introducing
genetic variation, which can be applied across wild, managed, and agricultural
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.