* 2129092
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF-P: IntelEUI: Artificial Intelligence and Extended Reality to Enhance Workforce Productivity for the Energy and Utilities Industry
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,11/30/2022
* Xiaoli Yang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 11/30/2022
* USD 79,996.00

Emerging computing technologies have been recently employed for industrial
training and predictive maintenance in several industries to improve workforce
productivity and increase manufacturing and production. However, there is
limited adoption of technologies in Energy and Utilities Industries (EUIs).
There is also a wide gap between the jobs to be filled and the skilled pool
capable of filling them in EUIs. Additionally, the aging workforce is creating a
risk of losing workers with hands-on field expertise. Maintaining contemporary
equipment for power generation, storage, transmission, and distribution in EUIs
is expensive and arduous as they are more versatile and inherently complicated.
Therefore, challenges arise for their efficient and productive maintenance. The
project aims to design a framework that will meet the needs of smart training
and predictive maintenance in EUIs by employing emerging technologies and
develop a working prototype of the framework. The project investigators
collaborate with EUIs to design the framework. In the long-term, the improved
training will reduce the skill gap between skilled and less-skilled workers and
increase situational awareness and safety in the workplace. The predictive
maintenance model will reduce costs by predicting maintenance needs and downtime
of equipment.&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates cutting-edge technologies in the
framework design and development including Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine
Learning (ML), and Extended Reality (XR) to improve workforce productivity
through customizable and effective training, enhance work efficiency, and reduce
cost on unplanned maintenance. State-of-the-art ML methods will be applied to
develop the predictive maintenance module of the framework to improve
reliability and sustainability of various equipment in EUIs that will eventually
save time, human efforts, and increase customer satisfaction. Comprehensive
measures and metrics will be employed to assess the technology, economic, and
social impact of the framework in the industry context. A set of research
questions is proposed to understand how AI and XR technology is transforming
work and workforce in EUIs. The project findings will be disseminated to the
academic and industry community through a dedicated website, research
publications, and social media platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.