* 2129728
* Engineering photosensory proteins through the better understanding and control of proton-coupled electron transfer reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Brian Crane, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

A wide range of biological processes make extensive use of electron transfer
(ET) reactions, which underlie much of energy transduction and metabolism in the
cell. Biological systems are well adapted to direct the movement of electrons
among macromolecules while retaining the free energies necessary to drive
chemical transformations. ET is often a multistep process in that reactive
protein residues act as way stations to harbor electrons or their vacancies
during long-range charge migration. Moreover, proton movement is often coupled
to ET and the acids and bases in the vicinity of the centers undergoing
reduction and oxidation (redox) can exert substantial influence over net
reactivity. This project will undertake the study of proton-coupled electron
transfer (PCET) in a well-developed model system of protein partners to better
understand key parameters of energy transduction and metabolism in biology.
Stabilizing charge separation is relevant to energy harvesting strategies,
sensing technologies, and the production of stable radical pairs, the latter of
which have been implicated in the sensing of Earthâ€™s magnetic field. Better
understanding of multi-step PCET in proteins will be exploited in the design of
genetically encoded probe molecules and actuators. Control of cofactor redox
state with light will enable the application of small fusion proteins as
structural probes for cellular studies. The project will couple to an on-going
program to advance the success of underserved students and engage them in
scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to study proton-
coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions that involve reactive protein side
chains (i.e. hopping sites) to both better understand these essential processes
of life and to enable the design of new photosensory proteins to be used as
tools in cell and neurobiology. The investigators will apply a photoactive model
system composed of zinc-porphyrin-substituted cytochrome c peroxidase and
cytochrome c to investigate how management of protonation reactions impact the
ability of radical-forming sites to accelerate and steer electron transfer (ET).
Kinetic and structural studies will explore the reactivity of tryptophan and
tyrosine residues that have been substituted by unnatural derivatives and
altered by changes to interacting residues. The properties of the redox partners
will be further modulated by controlling their association and their structures
and reactivities will be characterized through a variety of spectroscopic and
structural approaches. Experiments involving crystals at high-pressure will
potentially reveal the subtle dependence of PCET on detailed bonding networks.
Through both rational and selection methods the investigators will optimize
photoreduction of flavin-binding Light- Oxygen- Voltage (LOV) photoreceptors to
generate new genetically encoded probes for in vivo electron-spin resonance
spectroscopy applications. Control of flavin PCET will also enable the design of
new cryptochrome proteins that sense in altered regions of the spectrum and
drive interactions that can be adopted for optogenetics. In exploring these
systems, the investigators will take a comprehensive mechanistic approach that
includes enzymology, spectroscopy, structural biology and
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.