* 2129338
* EAGER: Spinal cord neuromodulation to promote recovery of forelimb function in spinal cord injury
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Abhishek Prasad, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating condition. There are over 270,000
cases of SCI in United States, and each year over 12,500 new cases are added to
this total. An injury to the spinal cord results in loss of movement and
sensation, with a higher level of SCI resulting in a greater loss of function.
The loss of voluntary control over hand and arm movements results in an
inability to perform activities of daily living, thus creating a lifelong
dependence of the individual on caregivers. In SCI patients, the functional
deficits are generally permanent, and therefore, there is a need for new
technologies that can restore movement and function in persons with
disabilities. The goal of this research project is to advance neuroprosthetic
approaches within the spinal cord with an application towards returning movement
and function in patients with high SCI. This research project will use
innovative experimental approaches to understand the changes in the electrical
signals in the spinal cord after SCI, thereby, advancing scientific knowledge
about the condition. By understanding the effects of SCI on electrical signals
in the spinal cord, the research team expects to develop effective
neuromodulation technologies for SCI patients. The education and outreach
programs associated with this project aim to increase participation of students
in interdisciplinary engineering fields, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities, and to promote hands-on experiences for students in laboratory
techniques related to neural engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aims to advance neuroprosthetic approaches applied within the spinal
cord by understanding the underlying physiological changes after SCI. The
specific objectives of this research project are to determine the effect of
electrical stimulation in the spinal cord on behavioral, functional, and
histological outcomes and to study changes in signal characteristics in the
spinal cord after SCI. The project will use a combination of experimental
approaches to develop effective methods for neuromodulation in the spinal cord
for rehabilitation. These discoveries could lead to the development of new
technologies to return movement and function for individuals with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.