* 2129311
* NSF/FDA SIR: The Role of Microbial Growth on Breast Implant Complications: Integration of Surface Properties, Extractable By-Product, and Biofilm Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jeseth Delgado Vela, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,945.00

Both the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the World Health Organization
have identified a rare type of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma associated with breast
implants. FDA data indicate that textured implants are more likely to develop
this type of complication. The link is strong enough that the FDA issued a
voluntary recall of some textured breast implants (Class I recall). However, the
mechanism between how textured implants may trigger this rare non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma is unknown. Thus, the goal of this NSF/FDA Scholar in Residence project
is to better understand how these textured surfaces are distinct from smooth
surfaces, which may help medical device makers and regulators prevent
complications from cosmetic and other types of implants. The project will
support the interdisciplinary training of a post-doctoral researcher at Howard
University. Additional activities associated with this research include an event
at Howard University with experts from various federal and local regulatory
agencies to discuss how interdisciplinary science is needed for regulatory
activities, standards development, and opportunities for graduate students to
work in government agencies after graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to assess how surface properties and particles that are shed
from breast implants impact biofilm formation. Evidence of a link between BIA-
ALCL (breast implant-associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma) and textured
implants was conclusive enough to have recently triggered a series of regulatory
actions worldwide. The work is motived by studies that have shown that these
textured breast implants shed particles, which has led to the central hypothesis
that the surface physicochemical properties such as extractables and particle
shedding on breast implants influence biofilm formation. The investigators will
employ experimental systems and computational models to test this hypothesis
with two objectives. First, a biofilm reactor system will be used to evaluate
biofilm formation rates on surfaces with various physiochemical properties,
e.g., porosity, how surface features affect particle distribution, and the level
of bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation on surfaces with and without
particles. Second, a computational model (COMSOL) will to be used to evaluate
the effects of surface properties and extractables. A sensitivity analysis will
be conducted to determine which model parameters drive the results, including
biofilm detachment parameters, Monod kinetic growth parameters, and particle
transport parameters. Following sensitivity analysis, the parameters of interest
will be calibrated using experimental results obtained in the first objective.
Finally, the model will be evaluated using a different experimental condition
(different surface roughness) to assess the predictive capability of the model.
Information garnered from this project will advance regulatory science by
providing a more mechanistic explanation for biofilm growth that may contribute
to BIA-ALCL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.