* 2129627
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Global Agricultural Impacts of Stratospheric Aerosol Climate Intervention
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jonas Jaegermeyr, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 33,158.00

Injection of aerosols into the stratosphere, an approach known as stratospheric
aerosol climate intervention, has been suggested as a strategy to compensate for
anthropogenic global warming. Much research has focused on climate changes
associated with stratospheric aerosol climate intervention (also called
stratospheric aerosol geoengineering â€“ SAG), but only a few studies have
addressed its potential societal impacts, in particular global agricultural
productivity. This project will examine how anticipated climate changes from
SAG, compared with the present and a future without SAG, would interact with the
global agriculture system, influence crop growth, and impact world food
production. Spatially explicit climate changes considered here associated with
SAG include less total solar radiation, more diffuse solar radiation, reduced
surface temperature, changed precipitation, changed surface ozone concentration,
and different global mean CO2 levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
multidisciplinary collaboration to evaluate global agriculture impacts of SAG
with an integrated assessment framework, including a state-of-the-art Earth
System Model linked to multiple mechanistic crop models. These models are
targeted to advance the frontier of process-based crop modeling with
representations of ozone damage and diffuse radiation in photosynthesis
processes. Impact uncertainties will be systematically quantified through the
model ensemble setup and multi-crop model assessment, and by using different
downscaling methods for climate forcing data. Detailed impacts of individual
climate factors on crop yields will be studied, while considering feedbacks from
the agriculture system to the anticipated SAG climate impacts. The results of
this project will provide new quantitative evidence of SAG implications for
world food production in view of present day and potential future climates
without SAG. The project will foster communication between the climate modeling
community (including the Geoengineering Model Intercomparison Project) and the
crop modeling community (the Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement
Project), to advance understanding of agricultural impacts under global warming
and a future climate with stratospheric aerosol
intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.