* 2129801
* RAPID: Implications of Utilities Decision-making and Communication Strategies in Urban Populations Response under Extreme Weather Events
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Keri Stephens, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will investigate how
local utilities develop their communication strategy plans and decision making
under an extreme weather event and identify both inefficiencies in the
communications and decision-making approaches to enhance communications and
ensure more equitable outcomes. The extreme weather events caused by the Polar
Vortex in spring 2021 impacted Texas’ energy and water infrastructures, leaving
millions of Texans without access to these basic services. An issue that played
a role in exacerbating the impacts incurred by communities was the inadequate
communication between utilities and the community. This RAPID project seeks to
understand inefficiencies in the communication approaches from utilities to
their community-based customers as well as decision making when grid failures
forced blackouts. The empirical knowledge derived from this work will support
research at the intersection of disasters, utilities' communications, and impact
on households and the built environment. Additionally, findings have the
potential to help identify opportunities for utilities to build resilience in
their decision making and communication efforts. The project team will create
technical guidance for utilities to proactively strengthen communication
strategies thereby promote NSF’s mission of generating science to help advance
the health, prosperity, and welfare of our nation’s communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on capturing the ephemeral data from
semi-structured interviews in three research thrusts areas. First, existing
outage data will be coupled with interview data and data from other sources to
spatially capture and resolve areas within communities that experienced power
loss, their duration, and timing during the extreme weather events. Next,
interview data collected from utilities will enable the understanding of their
communication approaches and decision making under 'typical' and 'crisis'
periods. These data will identify opportunities for utilities to build
resilience in their communication efforts. Lastly, additional interviews with
community groups and stakeholders will provide an understanding of how
utilities' communications were received and processed, and how alternative
grassroots communication approaches were developed in response to the lack of
basic services. Broadly, this research will create technical guidance to inform
key critical sectors (e.g., water, electricity) on effective communication
approaches with customers during extreme weather events and highlight equitable
decision-making opportunities. The research will also inform communications
theory by linking social interactions under crises with communication patterns
between utilities and customers. An iterative process will identify and suggest
strategies for evaluating equity-oriented decision-making processes prior to
electric load shedding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.