* 2129961
* Scholarships for Talented Underprivileged STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Zhengtao Deng, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Alabama A&amp;M University (AAMU), a historically Black (HBCU) land-
grant and EPSCoR institution. Over its 6-year duration, this project will
provide scholarships to 36 unique full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in Mechanical Engineering, Computer Science, and Construction Management
Technology. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective supporting activities, including mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, career counseling, internships, graduate
school preparation, and participation in discipline-specific conferences. With
the help of mentors, the scholars will create Individual Development Plans
outlining their career goals and steps toward achieving those goals. The project
will also support curriculum improvements aimed at improving student retention
and success in STEM. Because Alabama A&amp;M University has a high population of
underrepresented students, this project has the potential to broaden
participation of minorities in STEM fields and to learn how mentoring and
individual development plans support retention and graduation of this student
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the
project will facilitate the adaptation of evidence-based engaged learning
pedagogies in STEM courses to enhance student learning outcomes, success, and
retention. Faculty development workshops on evidence-based pedagogies will be
provided. Supplemental Instruction (SI) will help the students with gateway
mathematics and science courses where most attrition occurs. Based on their
extensive experience, the PIs of the project and active faculty members in the
STEM disciplines will provide mentoring to the students and guide them from
entry to successful graduation. The project will also provide undergraduate
research opportunities for the students. The AAMU Career Development Services
will arrange various professional development activities and career counseling
to prepare students to attend graduate school or join the STEM workforce after
graduation. A research study will investigate and document the effect of these
interventions on students learning outcomes in STEM courses, as well as on
retention, persistence, and graduation rates. The project will be guided by an
Advisory Committee and evaluated by an external evaluator. Results obtained from
this project will be disseminated through web pages and STEM related
professional conferences targeting similar institutes, including ASEE, NSF PI
Symposium, HBCU-UP &amp; AAAS-ERN conference. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.