* 2129445
* Collaborative Research: Micromechanics-based Framework for Modeling Fracture of Weldments in Structural Steel
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Amit Kanvinde, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 10/31/2024
* USD 245,101.00

Civil infrastructure constructed from steel relies heavily on welding to connect
various parts (such as beams and columns) to each other. Welded connections are
often the weak points in these structures and are prone to fracture, leading to
catastrophic failure or collapse under loads such as during earthquakes.
Predicting and simulating such fracture are essential for safety assessment and
design of these structures. However, this type of failure is challenging to
simulate in computer models, because current methods cannot properly represent
the changes in material properties caused by welding processes and how these
changes weaken the structure. This award will support fundamental research to
understand how welding changes material properties over very small dimensions in
these connections, and then will create a method to use these properties within
computer simulations to predict the failure of welded connections. The findings
and software technology from this research will enhance the safety and
resilience of buildings and other infrastructure, benefiting the nationâ€™s
society and economy. The involvement of underrepresented groups, education of
students with new knowledge, and technology transfer to practitioners will
result in broad impacts. This award will contribute to the National Science
Foundation role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Welded steel connections often fail under extreme loads
due to the complex and multiple microstructures that are formed in weldments,
and the steep stress and strain gradients that interact with these
microstructures. Current methods for simulating weldments cannot simulate the
mechanical properties of these microstructures or their interactions with
applied loads. This is especially true when these connections are subjected to
large-scale yielding or Ultra Low Cycle Fatigue fracture (which occur commonly
under extreme loads such as earthquakes). This research will develop fundamental
understanding of weld microstructures and their mechanical properties through
laboratory experiments on thermomechanically generated samples. Then, the
research will upscale these findings to the structural scale through an
innovative framework of multi-scale simulation. This knowledge and framework
will be implemented for convenient integration within various numerical
platforms (open source as well as commercial) that are popular with researchers
and structural engineers. This approach (including its implementation) will be
informed and validated by extensive laboratory testing and finite element
simulation, and broadly disseminated to target audiences and user groups. Data
generated by this research will be archived in the Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.