* 2129739
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Defense by Deception of Smartphone Software Applications For Users With Disabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Mark Grechanik, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2024
* USD 483,610.00

Graphical User Interface (GUI)-based APplications (GAPs) are ubiquitous, both in
business and personal use, and are deployed on diverse software and hardware
smartphone platforms. Unfortunately, many users of such GAPs have disabilities -
approximately 50 million in the USA alone and over 600 million worldwide - and
it is difficult for these users to work with GAPs on their smartphones. Since
there are hundreds of types of disabilities that may impair people in vision,
movement, memory, oral communication and hearing, users with disabilities need
specialized enhancements to GAPs that are based on accessibility technologies,
which are fundamentally insecure, thus exposing users with disabilities to a
variety of cyber-attacks. These malicious apps can use the accessibility
technologies to prey on users with disabilities for financial gain, harming the
users financially. Although there are hundreds of assistive approaches, there is
almost no research to secure users with disabilities in using GAPs, especially
after they are tricked to install and give permissions to run malicious
assistive apps on their smartphones. This project addresses these issues by
developing software to automatically deceive these malicious applications into
revealing their intent, thus effectively detecting them, and protecting Internet
users with disabilities. Furthermore, the project includes many activities to
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on a novel idea of the
first-ever automated Defense by Deception (DbD) approach that protects targeted
financial GAPs from malicious assistive apps by using game theory combined with
weaponized phishing and realistic login generation, whereby smartphones will be
secured even after complex malicious apps are deployed with full accessibility
privileges. A key part of this project is to reconstructively generate fake GUIs
of the doppelganger GAPs, whose user interface structures closely resemble the
target financial GAP, from which the fake GUIs cannot be distinguished
algorithmically. With the game-theoretical foundation of automating the use of
deception to protect users with disabilities that the investigator produces in
this research work, other researchers can collaborate more closely in securing
GAPs by building on the proposed unifying abstraction of applying deception in
an automated way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.