* 2129816
* AF : Small : Fast algorithms for LPs, TSP, and Connectivity
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Kent Quanrud, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 02/28/2025
* USD 499,334.00

The field of theoretical algorithms has long emphasized the difference between
polynomial and exponential running times, which has formed a sound theoretical
basis for computation as a science and has also been robust to many
technological advancements. Recent computing trends, featuring copious amounts
of data as well as the end of Mooreâ€™s law, puts greater emphasis on extremely
scalable algorithms such as those with nearly linear running times. This project
addresses these modern challenges by developing faster algorithms for a
selection of fundamental problems in combinatorial optimization, building
towards a broad algorithmic foundation of scalable algorithms. This project
augments theoretical algorithms research with efforts to develop implementations
and expand applications, in part through the Computational Science and
Engineering group at Purdue among other avenues. This project will support two
or more PhD students and the investigator will organize activities to promote
research in fast algorithms, with particular effort to recruit and train
students from underrepresented minorities. The investigator will integrate
modern and advanced algorithmic techniques informed by the research initiatives
of this project into the curriculum at Purdue both at the undergraduate and
graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses a family of
interrelated problems that investigate the rich and timely interplay of (a)
linear programs and continuous optimization, (b) graph structure and algorithms,
(c) randomization, and (d) data structures. They are grouped into the following
verticals. The first group, on accelerating positive linear programs, focuses on
reducing the running-time dependence on the relative-error parameter for a
variety of linear programs useful in combinatorial optimization. The second
group of problems, on fast approximations for the traveling salesman problem
(TSP), seeks to develop linear-time approximations for variations of TSP as well
as related problems of independent interest. The third and final group of
problems develops fast approximation algorithms for connectivity, including
problems for both undirected and directed graphs. There are rich theoretical
connections across these problems that this project leverages and further
develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.