* 2129856
* Microfluidic Cell Sorting and Manipulation Based on Bulk Acoustic Waves
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Eun Kim, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 01/31/2026
* USD 404,995.00

An award is made to University of Southern California (USC) to advance the
transducer technology based on focused bulk acoustic waves for cell sorting and
manipulation in microfluidic systems. Specifically targeted biological
applications will be on cell sorting based on cell’s size or mechanical
stiffness, microinjection of genes into living cells, and selective collection
of cell-containing droplets in a microfluidic channel. As the transducers are
based on bulk acoustic waves, the technology offers tweezing live cells without
force limitation, heat, or requirement of transparent media. Moreover, since the
transducer focuses acoustic energy only on a very small spot and is capable of
delivering acoustic energy through an intermediate solid, it can be applied to
various microfluidic platforms for management of cells, liquids, particles and
proteins. The transducer’s electrical controllability on the location/direction
of the trapping force, combined with amenability of the transducers being formed
into an array, allows the creation of complex biochemical assays and/or
biomedical treatments at high throughput. Thus, the transducer’s unprecedented
capability of capture and on-demand manipulation of living cells and/or
particles (tens - hundreds of microns in diameter) in three dimensional (3D)
space will open up many new possibilities in cell study, gene transfection,
juxtaposition and manipulation. Sets of the transducers and power amplifiers
will be delivered to four selected biological labs during the years 2 and 3 of
the research period so that the labs may use them for sorting, gene delivery or
any other biological experiments in their labs. The results of the research will
be incorporated into the second edition of the principal investigator’s textbook
on microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), entitled “Fundamentals of MEMS,” as
well as in the MEMS curriculum at USC. Outreach activities will include research
experience for undergraduate and high school students who will be excited with
the experiments involving cells and microparticles. Also, students from
underrepresented groups will be actively recruited for the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transducers will be based on Multi-foci
Fresnel Transducer (MFT) capable of capturing and moving microparticles in 3D
space on demand. Specifically targeted biological applications of the capture
and move will include gene microinjection (through sonoporation) and lipid-
mediated gene delivery. Also developed will be MFT-based cell sorting in
microfluidic channels as well as formation and collection of cell-containing
droplets in a microfluidic channel. An advanced version of MFT having two
overlapping circular electrodes has been shown to make the ultrasonic waves
arrive at a narrow region along the vertical axis with constructive wave
interference to create a narrow Bessel-beam-like focal zone with long depth-of-
focus. This process also produces bottle beams and quasi-Airy beams where
radiation force toward the inner region exists and thus, multiple particles can
be trapped. This advanced version along with various other versions of MFT will
be developed, optimized and tested for the specific biological instrumentations.
Electrical controllability of the tweezing location in 3D space will be
developed so that the captured cells may be: (1) moved from one location to
another, (2) stretched or compressed, (3) brought into contact with other cells
or gene-containing liposomes, all upon electrical command signal without having
to move the transducers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.