* 2129842
* Leaders Emerging And Pursuing STEM (LEAPS)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Daniel Fried, St Peter's University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Saint Peter's University (SPU), a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) in
New Jersey. The project will support students through a combination of financial
assistance and academic and other support. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to thirty (30) high-achieving, low-income
undergraduate STEM majors in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, computer science,
mathematics, and physics. Additional support will include the fostering of
student participation in summer programs, seminars, faculty and peer mentoring,
individual research, internships with industry partners, access to and use of
career preparation services, and community building. To help diminish challenges
often faced by students, the project aims to address problems of student under-
preparedness, financial and time strains, and continuity to post-graduate
studies and STEM careers, especially for commuters, who constitute a large
population of the SPU student body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need, the project will pursue several goals. First is to adapt and
implement evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities to support
project scholars. Second is to implement, test, and study through research and
project evaluation strategies for systematically supporting student academic and
career pathways in STEM in ways that are congruent with the institutional
context and resources. Third is to contribute to the knowledge base so that
other colleges may successfully implement similar programs. And fourth is to
disseminate outcomes and findings related to the supports and interventions to
other institutions working to support low-income STEM students. Insights and
outcomes from a mixed methods evaluation and an educational research program
will generate new knowledge on which aspects of the project's support
interventions, or combination of interventions, are most effective for
retention, engagement, commitment, self-efficacy, academic performance, and
overall success of students. The lines of investigation will address gaps in the
literature and inform other higher-education professionals seeking to support
students with a combination of curricular and co-curricular interventions,
especially for students who are underrepresented in their participation in STEM
and those who commute. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.