* 2129824
* SHF: Small: Distribution-aware Testing for Neural Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Matthew Dwyer, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 498,460.00

Machine learning aims to learn the definition of a software implementation from
a set of examples. For instance, from a large set of images from the forward
facing camera in an automobile such approaches can learn to detect when a
pedestrian is near the road. This method is attractive because traditional
software development approaches have a hard time with this kind of problem
specification -- consider the challenge of precisely describing what a
pedestrian looks like given all the variations in their clothing, what they are
carrying, their location and pose, whether they are partially obscured,
partially lit, etc. Using machine learning, new capabilities can thus be used to
deploy potentially better systems. The challenge is how to determine that these
new capabilities work as expected. For traditional software, decades of research
has yielded sophisticated frameworks for testing software. This project will
adapt the strategies from that body of research to test machine learning models.
In this way the project aims to improve the safety and quality of advanced
machine-learning-based software systems, which will have positive impacts on
people and organizations who depend on those systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will exploit learned models of a target data distribution to drive
testing of neural networks that are trained on samples from that distribution.
The methods that are developed will exploit generative models that exhibit high-
precision and recall of the target distribution and that have a well-defined
mathematical structure to their latent space. By targeting this latent space,
distribution-aware neural-network testing techniques can leverage its reduced
dimensionality, relative to the neural network's input domain, to assess the
adequacy of a given test suite and to generate new and valuable tests. In
addition, the project will develop a rigorous mutation-based framework for
evaluating the fault-detection effectiveness of neural network testing methods
and to employ that framework in evaluating the benefits of distribution-aware
testing methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.