* 2129531
* Evaluation of GE crop transgene adsorption to microplastics and downstream fate in the environment
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Nicholas Engdahl, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 329,408.00

Genetically engineered crops remain controversial because of the unknown impacts
these crops and their engineered genes have on human and ecological health.
While genetically engineered crop genes can give helpful traits like pesticide
resistance to crops, some can also be harmful if they are released in the
environment. Antibiotic resistance genes (‘ARGs’) and silencing RNA genes are
two examples of genes that are potentially harmful. ARGs can increase the number
of antibiotic resistant bacteria in the environment, which is a threat to public
health. Silencing RNA genes can affect the genetic material of other organisms
and the behavior of these genes in the environment is not well understood.
Persistent pollutants like microplastics have been shown to make these genes
more stable in the environment, making it more likely that they can be
transported widely and negatively affect beneficial organisms. The goal of this
research is to assess the transport, persistence, and uptake of ARGs and
silencing RNA genes that are attached to microplastics in the environment.
Understanding how genetically engineered crop genes behave in the environment is
important for many fields including agriculture, medicine, and water treatment.
The results have strong potential to advance knowledge and benefit society
through the development of risk-based management policies to protect health by
minimizing the spread of harmful genes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of
genetically engineered (GE) crops has remained controversial due to uncertainty
regarding the ultimate fate and potential impacts the engineered genes can have
on the surrounding environment. Common transgenes contained in modern GE crops
include ARGs and silencing RNAs that have recently been detected in wastewater
treatment plants and other environments. These findings are concerning because
transgene contributions to global antibiotic resistance and their potential
impacts to gene expression in environmental microbes are highly uncertain.
Transgenes have also recently been shown to adsorb to the surfaces of micro- and
nano-scale plastics (‘MNPs’) that are frequently found in wastewater treatment
plants and soils, suggesting their transport potential and resistance to
degradation in the environment may be greater than currently estimated. The goal
of this research is to understand how MNPs impact the transport of GEs in the
environment. This goal will be achieved using a combined modeling and
experimental approach to: i) Quantify transgene adsorption kinetics to MNPs,
soils, and wastewater biosolids; ii) Assess the effects of key environmental
factors on the persistence and uptake of GE transgenes; and iii) Evaluate
transgene transport and transformation of model soil bacteria in agricultural
soils. Successful completion of this research directly addresses important
research gaps concerning transgene adsorption to MNPs, their behavior in the
environment, and translation of experimental data to modeling frameworks that
can be utilized by diverse stakeholder groups. Benefits to society result from
interdisciplinary research training for graduate and undergraduate students to
improve the Nation’s STEM workforce. Additional benefits result from enhanced
scientific literacy through learning modules for undergraduate classes and
development of outreach materials focused on microplastics in the environment
for K-12 schools in the Palouse region of Washington
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.