* 2129917
* Improving STEM Undergraduate Student Outcomes Through Partnerships, Mentoring, and High Impact Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Jennifer Aizenman, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Bridgewater State University, a public, master’s degree offering
comprehensive university. Over its six year duration, this project will fund
scholarships for 35 full-time students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Chemistry,
Computer Science, Geological Sciences, Mathematics, Photonics and Optical
Engineering, and Physics. First-year students, in one of three cohorts, will
receive four years of scholarship. Additional targeted supports will include
mentoring and engaging the students in activities (e.g., undergraduate research
and internships) known to improve STEM student outcomes. A unique feature of the
project is its use of a partnership with a professional organization that
specifically serves individuals from groups that are often underrepresented in
STEM. In doing so, the project expects to better understand how partnerships
with professional organizations can aid in students' STEM identity and
retention. This understanding has implications for both generation of new
knowledge and sharing of that knowledge to other institutions and professional
organizations interested in improving STEM student outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduate Scholars with
demonstrated financial need. The project aims to investigate two research
questions: (1) In what ways does a broad mentoring approach involving both
faculty and diverse STEM professionals influence Scholar persistence, self-
efficacy, STEM identity, and the outcome expectations associated with
participation in coursework and co-curricular activities? (2) To what extent do
Scholars attribute the development of their self-efficacy, STEM identity, and
outcome expectations to their specific interaction with mentors from a
professional organization (specifically the National Society for Black
Engineers- Boston), compared with development attributed to program components
not involving outside mentors? This project will be building upon well-
established knowledge that participation in programs integrating high-impact
practices, including mentoring, lead to positive outcomes in STEM retention
through the development of a strong STEM identity. This project will further
examine how the addition of a partnership with a diverse professional
organization can further impact STEM identity, and thus impact STEM retention.
Survey measures and interviews will evaluate growth in how Scholars view their
own STEM identity, how validated they feel by external agents in that identity,
and how prominent and salient that identity is to their lives. These mediating
factors are hypothesized to lead to greater participation in research, service-
learning, and other high-impact practices, and to stronger STEM retention.
Interviews with the Scholars will be examined using a keyword analysis that
illuminates the relative impact of faculty and professional advisor mentor
versus mentoring by a diverse group of STEM professionals external to the
university. In addition to standard dissemination practices of professional
conference and journal publications, project outcomes will be disseminated
through regional and national professional organizations interested in
broadening participation in STEM. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.