* 2129768
* MoCeIS-DCL : Building a Network for  Functional Annotation of Protein Families
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Valerie de Crecy-Lagard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2023
* USD 98,921.00

The proposal is to support a conference to build a roadmap to break a major
barrier limiting the capacity of the biological community at large to mine
available genomic information. The two-day conference will be held in the Fall
of 2021 in North Florida. The goals of the conference are to 1) create a diverse
scientific community that can help build the framework, tools, guidelines and
training that will allow the extraction of all available knowledge on all
members of a protein family, 2) correctly link this knowledge to the iso-
functional subgroups within the family, and 3) visualize the data in an
intuitive and interactive fashion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The information in
genomic sequences cannot be fully exploited until the functions of the predicted
proteins are known. The experimentalists that obtain the information about
protein function are not always aware of how their data are captured in
databases and many of them do not actively contribute their expertise to help
capture and curate this information. This conference will devise strategies that
can educate biologists to make them an integral part of the functional data
flow, in order to make biological data more explorable, sharable, and
interoperable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.