* 2129796
* Single-Step, Rapidly Reconfigurable Grayscale Nanoprinting by Light-Controlled Nanocapillary Effect
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* In Ho Cho, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 525,000.00

Meta-surfaces are material surfaces decorated with nanoscale features, which
often acquire a variety of useful characteristics. Some of them generate vibrant
colors without using dyes. Others can turn the moisture on them into tiny beads
and clean themselves, a very useful feature for solar panels. Some others can
even kill germs on them without using harmful chemicals. Meta-surfaces with such
useful properties benefit society by promoting health, safety and
sustainability. Recently, scientists discovered that spatially varying the
height of the nanoscale surface features, or nanopixels, can make the meta-
surfaces multi-functional. The key challenge is manufacturing the nanopixels
with variable heights in a controllable manner. This award supports research to
find a simple method to realize such variable height nanopixels. It is analogous
to printing grayscale pixels. The grayscale nanoprinting method is based on the
phenomenon of capillary action and its nanoscale control by light. To expedite
the optimal design of the variable height meta-surfaces, the research approach
integrates data science and machine learning. Accordingly, the research not only
enriches nanomanufacturing but also advances fundamental nanotechnology and
computational sciences through interdisciplinary endeavors. Plans for making
science and technology more attractive to the general public and more accessible
to women and underrepresented groups are included.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research explores light-controlled capillary effect for grayscale nanoprinting
and nanotexturing. Conventional nanoprinting produces constant height nanopixels
because the capillary rise of the photopolymer into the nanocavity cannot be
stopped at an arbitrarily chosen height, nor can modulating the height as a
function of position be possible. This research seeks to achieve both by
exploiting the discovery that the capillary rise of certain polymers can be
accurately controlled by light. The key enabling mechanism is the light-induced
changes in the polymer’s liquid volume and viscosity which, in turn, govern the
level of the polymer’s capillarity. Optical control is highly advantageous
because light patterns can be rapidly updated by a spatial light modulator and
easily shrunk down to the microscale by reduction optics, enabling rapidly
reconfigurable, ultrahigh-resolution grayscale nanoprinting. This research
establishes a novel nanomanufacturing paradigm and provides a useful tool for
studying the physical process of polymeric capillarity. The collected data is
leveraged to train a combination of advanced statistical and machine learning
models to enable data-driven optimal design of meta-surfaces and their
manufacturing. To combat the issues of data paucity and complex underlying
physics, a synergistic combination of generalized models and deep learning is
adopted to represent multi-physical performance targets, such as hydrophobicity
and transparency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.