* 2129879
* Probing novel phases of matter in van der Waals magnet Fe5-xGeTe2
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Peng Li, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 523,200.00

Nontechnical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Van der Waals materials have atomically thin
layers that are vertically stacked and have weak interlayer bonds. Graphite is
one example. They can be fabricated into two-dimensional forms, which are of
tremendous interest for the next generation nanometer-scale electronics.
Recently, intrinsic magnetic order was demonstrated in two-dimensional van der
Waals materials opening up new opportunities in data storage and information
processing. Van der Waals magnetic materials are also of interest in fundamental
condensed matter physics, because they possess appreciable interactions between
the crystal structure, electronic states, and magnetic order that could lead to
novel phases of matter with unique properties. This project will establish the
relationships between the structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of a
new van der Waals magnetic material with a high magnetic transition temperature
and complex magnetic order. Understanding these properties will help in the
design of high-efficiency electronic devices. The research goals are
accomplished through comprehensive investigations combining multiple state-of-
the-art experimental techniques. The research activities involve collaboration
with scientists from different disciplines, which provides extensive training
for graduate and undergraduate students at Auburn University. The experiments to
be carried out at the national laboratories will promote the students’
professional development. The principal investigators will integrate the
research topics into two existing courses and will continue to participate in
the K-12 education under established local outreach programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Recently,
Fe5–xGeTe2 emerges as a new member in van der Waals magnetic materials with high
Curie temperature and good stability in ambient conditions. Remarkably, in this
compound, the complex atomic structure, together with the distinct electronic
states and spin moments on the nonequivalent Fe sites can strongly impact the
magnetic order. In this project, the interplay between the crystal structure,
electronic states, and magnetic order will be investigated, to develop an in-
depth understanding of the novel phases of matter in Fe5–xGeTe2. Specifically,
this project consists of three intercrossing objectives: 1) elucidate the
connection between crystal structure and magnetism; 2) reveal the interplay of
electronic states and magnetic order; and 3) realize electric control of
magnetization in Fe5–xGeTe2-based van der Waals heterostructures. The research
team employs a unique toolset combining nonlinear optics, synchrotron-based
photoemission spectroscopy/microscopy, and electro- and magnetic-transport
techniques to identify the properties of this compound. Our findings will lead
to the fundamental understanding of the interactions between lattice, charge,
orbital, and spin degrees of freedom in two-dimensional quantum materials and
open up new avenues in designing spintronic devices. This grant promotes the
interdisciplinary research effort at Auburn University and the long-term
collaboration between Auburn University and national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Electronic and Photonic Materials program in the Division of Materials Research
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.