* 2129268
* RCN: Sampling Nature: A Network to Enhance the Natural History Value Chain for Sustainability Science
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/2021,03/31/2024
* Ramona Walls, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 499,994.00

Material samples are the most basic form of data about the natural world. Their
collection and study are fundamental for solving sustainability goals.
Unfortunately, harnessing existing samples and sample-based data for future
science is nearly impossible, because they are often not Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). A vast number of scientific material samples
has already and continues to be collected, yet most samples remain unknown and
inaccessible to researchers at large. The complex landscape of intellectual,
technical, social, legal, and regulatory issues surrounding material and data
sharing often results in insurmountable barriers to making them FAIR. Overcoming
these barriers demands not only robust transdisciplinary infrastructure, but
also community-driven metadata standards and effective data policies, combined
with training and outreach to support adoption. The Sampling Nature Research
Coordination Network (RCN) will maximize the natural history value chain that
samples nature at field sites, labs, repositories, and museums; processes those
samples for scientific analyses; and stores the resulting materials and derived
data in diverse and distributed databases and repositories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a series of thematic workshops and regular virtual
events, Sampling Nature will build a community of collaborative researchers to
exploit the potential of an accessible, integrated corpus of material sample
data. The RCN will deliver an extensible, domain neutral, community-driven
metadata standard, with recommendations for its short- and long-term governance;
policy recommendations around the collection, transport, storage, preservation,
and sharing of material samples; training materials covering best practices for
sample identification and metadata; an innovative social media campaign to
communicate the importance of material samples in science, society, and
sustainability. Sampling Nature brings together a new and interdisciplinary
group of PIs that will engage researchers from multiple NSF directorates,
federal agencies, Indigenous groups, museums, publishers, and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.