* 2129942
* Invertebrate calcification and behavior in seawater of decoupled carbonate chemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Brian Gaylord, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2025
* USD 564,168.00

This research is exploring the capacity of coastal organisms to cope with
alterations in seawater chemistry driven by both freshwater inputs and
absorption of carbon dioxide into the world’s oceans (ocean acidification). The
project focuses on calcification responses and behavioral impairments of
shoreline animals under altered seawater chemistry, and forefronts a common
mussel species (the California mussel), and a common snail (the black turban
snail), each abundant on rocky shores along the west coast of North America. The
target species operate as exemplar organisms for characterizing the responses of
marine invertebrates more generally. Methods involve experimental decoupling of
multiple components of the carbonate system of seawater to isolate drivers that
are difficult to separate otherwise. Broader impacts include transfer of
scientific information to policy-makers, including legislators, as well as
training and skill-set development of future generations of scientists and
citizens. One Ph.D. student is supported, as are UC Davis undergraduates
conducting mentored research. The project also provides research internships for
undergraduates from a local community college (Santa Rosa Junior College), many
of whom are from underrepresented groups. The latter project component
substantially bolsters an ongoing program at Bodega Marine Laboratory that
includes efforts in diversity, equity, and inclusion. Data and interpretations
from the project are feeding into an existing educational program that links to
local K-12 schools and reaches ~10,000 members of the public each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the research of the project is dissecting
drivers of calcification and behavioral disruption in key shoreline
invertebrates, across present-day and future carbonate system conditions
appropriate to coastal marine environments. Efforts are exploring the extent to
which calcification depends on one versus multiple parameters of the seawater
carbonate system. In particular, existing conceptual models emphasize the
importance of calcium carbonate saturation state (Ω) and/or the ratio of
bicarbonate to hydrogen ion concentrations ([HCO3-]/[H+]), and the project is
examining these mechanisms as well as the possibility that more than one driver
acts simultaneously. It is doing so both in bivalves and in gastropods to test
for generality across molluscs. The project is additionally examining whether pH
is the only carbonate system factor contributing to known patterns of behavioral
impairment in marine invertebrates. Leading explanations for debilitating
behaviors induced by ocean acidification involve altered ion channel function,
but discussion in the literature continues, and studies that explicitly decouple
the carbonate system are necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.