* 2129012
* FW-HTF-P: Future of Work for Strength and Movement Training Professionals
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This planning grant will focus on the future of work challenges for strength and
movement training &lt;br/&gt;professionals(SMTPs) that include physical
therapists, occupational therapists, and personal trainers. These
&lt;br/&gt;workers make up a field that is essential to injury prevention and
recovery, predominantly female, and &lt;br/&gt;924,000 strong growing much
faster than average (15-29% per year). Unfortunately, this field is currently
&lt;br/&gt;underscored by job strain, administrative burden, and burn out. SMTPs
are facing an increasing remote care &lt;br/&gt;trend (accelerated by the COVID
pandemic), and outcome-based reimbursement has been evolving over &lt;br/&gt;the
last decade. The future of work in this area will require versatile and
affordable tools to collect objective and clear performance metrics. With
advances in human strength, movement, and stability monitoring with wearable
sensors, combined with machine learning there is an opportunity to drive
client/patient accountability, give better insights into progress, and enrich
increasing popular remote training sessions. &lt;br/&gt;This will give future
workers in this area greater work flexibility, improve outcomes, and create more
room &lt;br/&gt;for the human connection both trainer/therapist and
client/patient draw satisfaction from. The project will &lt;br/&gt;leverage a
recently developed technology that can track a person’s performance during
strength training. It &lt;br/&gt;measures strength, range and speed of motion,
rest time, number of reps and sets, force applied to the &lt;br/&gt;exercise
equipment, and power. Algorithms use these data to provide detailed reports on a
person’s &lt;br/&gt;performance with accessible visualization. This planning
grant will help develop a research agenda that&lt;br/&gt;includes all the
necessary convergent disciplines to transform the future of work in this area
and provide &lt;br/&gt;the industry with a much-needed tool that promotes
greater job satisfaction and reduced job strain through &lt;br/&gt;increased
training successes. In addition, it will enable future workers in this area to
be more accessible and enable more flexible access to rehabilitation, which will
mean faster return to work after injury and more broadly improve wellness and
reduce disease burden in the general population. This project will bring
together several disciplines, including engineers, social scientists, strength
and movement training scientists, and economists. The investigator team is
structured to achieve multiple convergent goals. This planning grant will seek
to establish a clear landscape of the work context through qualitative research
including a series of worker and stakeholder interviews and review of relevant
healthcare policies. It will also focus on the development of a minimum viable
prototype to collect data from the appropriate body segment or strength training
accessory, algorithms to appropriately interpret the sensor data, and an initial
web application. Finally, it will enable the development and evaluation of a
training module with SMTPs. Each of the three research thrusts – future work,
future workers, and future technology – will be considered when evaluating the
outcomes of the planning grant. Quantitative methods will be used where
appropriate to judge things like technology performance and qualitative
assessments such as interviews and standardized surveys will be used to assess
the social and perception driven elements. This project has been funded by the
Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier cross-directorate program to
promote deeper basic understanding of the interdependent human-technology
partnership in work contexts by advancing design of intelligent work
technologies that operate in harmony with human
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.