* 2129639
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical prediction of wake lock-in for fluid-structure interactions with phase-reduction analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kunihiko Taira, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 278,704.00

When a fluid flow interacts with a non-streamlined object, such as a bridge,
smokestack, or cable, a wake is created consisting of periodically shed
vortices. These vortices exert unsteady forces on the object resulting in
structural oscillations with the potential to damage or cause destruction under
certain conditions. An especially dangerous situation results when the vortex
shedding frequency is close to the resonant frequency of the object. In this
case, the vortex shedding synchronizes with the objectâ€™s natural frequency and
lock-in occurs. Currently, there is no theoretical approach capable of
predicting the onset of lock-in. The objective of this experimental and
theoretical study is to predict conditions when lock-in occurs on a cylinder
oscillating in a fluid flow by focusing on the shedding phase of the vortices
relative to the cylinder motion. This research effort will expose high-school,
undergraduate, and graduate students to experimental and computational fluid
dynamics research. Moreover, the findings will be disseminated to domestic and
international research communities through conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to predict the
occurrence of lock-in using the phase reduction analysis for an oscillating
cylinder undergoing coupled translational and rotational motion. The project
will involve complementary experimental and theoretical work focusing on (i)
generating the required phase-response functions needed to predict the
synchronization condition, (ii) theoretically predicting and verifying the
required translational and rotational forced oscillations required to expand or
collapse the synchronization region, and (iii) consider higher-order nonlinear
terms in the analysis to more accurately capture synchronization that occurs for
larger amplitude oscillations. These tasks will be undertaken through
experimental efforts using hot-film thermal anemometry to measure changes to the
vortex shedding frequency caused by small perturbation and large oscillatory
forced motions. On the computational side, direct numerical simulations will be
performed to capture the wake dynamics and force history on the body under
forced vibrations. The force histories from computations will be used to reveal
the synchronization properties and then be compared to the measured shedding
frequencies to verify the theoretical predictions. The overall effort is
expected to support controlling the occurrence of lock-in by eliminating the
synchronization region and suppress vortex-induced vibrations. Furthermore, it
would allow the expansion of the synchronization region which would result in
more efficient flow control, chemical mixing, and energy harvesting. High school
students with the aim to motivate them to pursue careers in science and
engineering fields and to increase their knowledge in scientific research. The
undergraduate research activities will provide unique opportunities to train
students to prepare for advanced engineering careers in the industry,
government, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.