* 2129845
* Dissecting the phenotypic and functional consequences of sexual selection on sperm competition through a species-specific multigene family
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jose Ranz, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Species-specific genes have been shown to impact crucial aspects of organismal
fertility and viability, mediating adaptation to changing environments.
Nevertheless, how these genes exert their effects - as opposed to ancient genes,
i.e. those present in multiple species - is poorly understood. This project is
focused on the functional characterization of a recently originated, tandemly
duplicated gene named sperm-specific dynein intermediate chain (Sdic), which was
previously shown to be important for male fertility. This project will help
train one postdoc, two graduate students, six undergraduates, and a large number
of high-school students in functional and evolutionary analyses of genomes, with
a particular focus on inclusion of members of underrepresented groups. All data
and materials generated will be made publicly available to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sperm competition is a key mechanism of sexual
selection that biases reproductive output upon mating. Although multiple genes
are likely to impact sperm competition, a much lower number is relevant in
driving its evolution. The Sdic gene is unique to the species Drosophila
melanogaster. It is a defective form of another gene named sw, and it is present
in multiple copies. Sdic has been shown to impact progeny number in cases with
multiple sires of the same female, and the sequence shows signatures of positive
selection. In this project, the effects of Sdic on sperm displacement will be
analyzed using engineered versions of the Sdic region and fluorescence-based
techniques to track the sperm in the female reproductive tract. In addition, the
patterns of expression differentiation among different Sdic copies across
multiple biological samples will be scrutinized using RNA-seq, which will help
reveal how at least some of the Sdic copies have become functionally
specialized. Lastly, using proteomic approaches, the novel functional properties
of the Sdic product in relation to sw will be
uncovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.