* 2129310
* EAGER: Creation and validation of a tool to examine the molecular mechanism of replication fork repair
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Susan Lovett, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,751.00

The overall goal of this project is to develop tools to study how a common
genetic lesion is repaired and removed from the cell. One of the most frequent
assaults to genetic material is the formation of DNA-protein crosslinks,
covalent bonds that form between DNA and protein. Some of these are unavoidable
consequences of cellular metabolism, including the processing of alcohol, and
others can be induced by environmental exposure or pharmaceutical agents. These
lesions interfere with DNA replication and can cause genetic mutations with
deleterious consequences to cell survival. In humans, DNA-protein crosslinks
have been implicated in causing cancer and premature aging. Understanding how
DNA-protein crosslinks are repaired will allow us to develop ways to avoid the
problems associated with these lesions or to enhance their removal. A broader
impact of this project is to train students from diverse backgrounds on how to
conduct scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Producing a DNA protein
crosslink at a particular genetic site and at a particular time would allow
investigators to study the events that that place to achieve crosslink repair.
This project will use proteins that naturally produce crosslinks to DNA,
deoxycytosine methyl-transferases (CMeTs), which can be trapped after addition
of a drug, 5-azacytidine. The study will employ model genetic organisms,
brewerâ€™s yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) and a gut bacterium (Escherichia
coli), which can be grown easily in the laboratory and for which a variety of
genome manipulation tools are available. To achieve site-specificity, CMeT from
bacterial restriction systems will be engineered for expression in both model
organisms. There are plans to engineer a dCAS9-CMeT as well, in which site-
specificity can be conferred by expression of a guide RNA. One CMeT chosen will
produce a crosslink only on one of the two strands of DNA, which is particularly
valuable to resolve how these template strands are processed differently in a
blocked replication fork. By molecular and genetic analysis, the project will
validate that the engineered constructs produce DNA-protein crosslinks, block
replication and determine if they promote genetic instability. Mutants in
various repair pathways will be assayed for their roles in the
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.