* 2129756
* Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM: The 48th NOBCChE Annual Conference (Virtual)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Tyrslai Williams, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 48,365.00

This award will support the participation of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows at the national annual meeting for the
National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) conference in 2021. This award is jointly funded by
Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research, both in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS) Directorate, the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences in the Biological Sciences (BIO) Directorate, and the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, and Transport Systems in the Engineering (ENG)
Directorate. The NOBCChE meeting has become an important conference to recruit
diverse global leaders in the Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(STEM) fields and to create an inclusive environment in the broader scientific
community. Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NOBCChE conference will be held
virtually this year. This award will provide the registration support to
selected participants from populations that have been underserved in STEM. In
addition, this award will enable the development of a robust online platform for
participant engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
opportunities for participants to engage in four major areas of focus: 1) STEM
technical and professional development; 2) networking and mentorship
opportunities with STEM professionals; 3) exposure to prestigious minority role
models in STEM; and 4) STEM career advancement opportunities. Student
participants will interact with peers and professionals from industry,
government, and academia to develop collaborations and to explore opportunities
to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry, chemical engineering and related
disciplines. NOBCChE 2021 will also contribute to the knowledge of best
practices for supporting student engagement via hosting this STEM meeting in a
virtual environment and providing digital access to a repository of intellectual
property pre- and post-conference. The meeting will also serve to enrich the
technical, professional, and leadership skill sets of student attendees and
students working on committees with other senior leaders on conference planning
and execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.