* 2129476
* RAPID International Type I: Understanding the Nature of US-China Research Collaborations on COVID-19
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2023
* Jenny Lee, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2023
* USD 199,999.00

Part 1. &lt;br/&gt;During the SARS-COV-2 pandemic, scientists from the U.S. and
China collaborated more frequently on pandemic-related research papers than they
had on papers in general over the previous five years, underscoring the value of
international collaboration in addressing global crises. What remains largely
unknown is how such collaboration occurred. The primary objective of this study
is to examine how U.S.-China research collaboration on COVID-19 occurred and, in
particular, how scientific nationalism and global competitiveness shaped these
collaborations. The project will move beyond standard bibliometric analysis of
research collaborations to conduct mixed method survey research to better
understand how collaborative relationships were established or maintained and
the challenges experienced or overcome by scientists collaborating on COVID-19
research. The findings will generate crucial insights on how to effectively
balance the need to rapidly produce knowledge, overcome disruptions to research
processes, and ensure research abides by established regulatory protocols. The
long-ranging impact will be to enhance understanding of how science and
technology cooperation can more effectively be supported in the future,
especially in times of global crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2.
&lt;br/&gt;The research addresses the intensifying intersection between
geopolitics and global science by engaging directly with US and Chinese
scientists collaborating on COVID-19. The study employs a multi-disciplinary
approach incorporating frameworks from research policy studies and
securitization studies to identify the range of challenges scientists
experienced during the pandemic and how scholarly relationships were created or
maintained. Data will be based on a survey and interviews among US and Chinese
scientists who have coauthored a US-China scientific paper on COVID-19. Among
the key data analyses will be to examine the extent to which securitization may
have supported or hindered the COVID-19 research collaboration, as well as its
impact on future collaboration. Additional analyses will investigate potential
differences based on whether the scientific research was federally funded. The
findings will contribute to current understandings of the relationship between
the nation-state and international science cooperation, particularly the impact
that global crises and geopolitics may have on scientists’ abilities to engage
in the global knowledge network to produce knowledge on urgent cross-border
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.