* 2129412
* GOALI: Large Scale Synthesis and Manufacturing of Atomically Thin Polar Materials for Quantum Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sefaattin Tongay, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2024
* USD 410,860.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
supports research that establishes new knowledge for the manufacturing of two-
dimensional (2D) polar semiconductors, which are next-generation semiconducting
materials for quantum information systems. Polar or Janus layered materials
contain different atoms on each face and exhibit unusual electronic properties.
Atomic layer deposition is one of the common methods used to grow ultra-thin
layered materials. However, current manufacturing knowledge is limited in the
precise control at atomic scales which is necessary to manufacture these quantum
materials. This GOALI award brings together academia and industry partners to
establish the foundations of atomic layer deposition-based manufacturing
techniques to synthesize polar semiconductors with high structural, electronic,
and optical quality. In the quantum age, this project has the potential to lead
the manufacturing of quantum materials and systems that augments U.S. economic
competitiveness globally. The educational and outreach plans focus on offering
research and development opportunities at the intersection of manufacturing
science, materials science, physics and chemistry to women and underrepresented
minorities in the metropolitan area and beyond. The project offers capstone
projects to undergraduate students and creates industry training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently discovered Janus two-dimensional
(2D) materials exhibit broken mirror symmetry and colossal polarization fields
leading to new quantum effects and functionalities that cannot be found in
classical 2D systems. However, the manufacturing of these materials is very
challenging since it requires atomically precise deposition of three different
elements atom-by-atom in order to form chemically passivated van der Waals
materials. This research aims to fill the fundamental knowledge gap in atomic
layer deposition (ALD) for polar or Janus semiconductor materials by
establishing ALD precursor chemistry and reaction kinetics to achieve high-
quality 2D polar materials at wafer-scale. The research team, together with
industry partners, plans to design, synthesize, engineer and test new types of
ALD precursor species designed to deposit three different atoms and build a
library of ultra-thin polar semiconductors. The project establishes the kinetics
of ALD reaction and models it based on Johnson-Mehl-Avrami-Kolmogorov or Monte-
Carlo simulations. The project tests the hypothesis that proper precursor
chemistry, high enough ALD temperature, ideal pulse/purge times, and hydroxide-
based surface chemistry can enable the manufacture of crystalline, excitonic and
electronic grade polar semiconductors at wafer scales. Advanced characterization
techniques are used to establish the process-structure-property-performance
relations in these novel quantum materials. The overall results aim to give the
researchers access to these completely new highly crystalline polar
semiconductors that are not accessible with today's manufacturing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.