* 2129626
* NSF/FDA SIR: Numerical heart model for irreversible electroporation ablation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Rafael Davalos, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2023
* USD 97,335.00

Traditional cardiac ablation is a medical procedure that uses thermal energy to
destroy a small area of heart tissue that is causing rapid and irregular
heartbeats in atrial fibrillation (AF) patients. Non-thermal irreversible
electroporation (IRE) ablation devices use short but strong electrical fields to
create permanent pores in heart cells and are currently under safety and
effectiveness review by the Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) at
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In this project, a first-of-its-kind
numerical IRE ablation heart model will be developed using quantifiable
measurements of cell death and electrical properties of heart tissue to predict
the size of ablation zone for a particular set of ablation pulse parameters.
This model has the potential to decrease clinical and animal testing in the IRE
device development, inform the FDA regulatory review process and ultimately
accelerate AF patients access to innovative, safe and effective devices. The
work will partner faculty and students at Virginia Tech (VT) and regulatory
scientists at the CDRH/FDA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop a numerical three-dimensional heart model on COMSOL Multiphysics with a
representative geometry of heart tissue suitable for simulation of reversible,
irreversible electroporation and thermal damage effects in pulsed electric field
cardiac ablation. The model will use electric field thresholds of
electroporation obtained from human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CM) and dynamic conductivity of cardiac tissues measured
in ex vivo porcine heart to inform a modified Laplace equation to determine
electric potential distribution of a two-needle electrode setup. The model will
be validated with limited ex vivo studies to confirm the capability of the
numerical model to predict lesion volume in tissues using a large animal tissue
model. Therefore, using the novel in silico-in vitro approach, Virginia Tech and
the FDA will develop a numerical heart model for irreversible electroporation
ablation, producing a scalable tool that can be extended to predicting IRE
ablation treatments of other organs with varied electrode arrays. Successful
accomplishment of this project will address current gaps in fundamental and
regulatory knowledge, provide robust tool for optimization of IRE pulse
parameters for cardiac ablation device development, advance understanding of IRE
technology for AF treatment, and help address an urgent public health need for
2.7-6.1 million Americans affected by this common cardiac arrhythmia that can
lead to heart failure and stroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.