* 2129683
* CFTR: Neuronal roles for a multifunctional transporter
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Evanna Gleason, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,999.00

Neurons rely on their electrical activity to generate signals and to communicate
with other neurons. Like batteries in a flashlight, ion gradients power neurons
and enable the transmission of information. Here, we study the function of
cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR), a chloride channel that when
mutated, causes the disease cystic fibrosis. Because of this link to disease,
CFTR has been heavily studied in the context of systems that produce the life-
threatening effects of cystic fibrosis such as the respiratory and digestive
systems. In contrast, little is known about the function of CFTR in the brain
where it is also found. It is known that one role of CFTR in neurons is to
regulate the chloride ion gradient. This new project will take a deep dive into
the regulation and unique functions of CFTR in neurons. One of the major
objectives of this project is to identify the neuron-specific proteins with
which CFTR interacts. This research will provide insight into the role of CFTR
in the brain and a scaffold of neuronal protein interaction information which
will form the basis of further studies into this multifunctional ion channel. A
middle school neuroscience outreach program called GeauxNeuro has been
implemented that provides a diverse group of neuroscience graduates students at
LSU with outreach opportunities and brings neuroscience to public school
students in Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although CFTR expression has been
demonstrated for neurons in the brain and spinal cord, the role of this Cl-
channel in neuronal function is poorly understood. The expression of CFTR in
neurons is becoming recognized, however, the PI could identify no more than 15
studies that directly address CFTR function in neurons. This proposal focuses on
the role of CFTR in the management of neuronal cytosolic Cl- levels and in
regulating synaptic function. In Aim 1 both the localization and regulation of
CFTR will be elucidated. Subcellular localization of CFTR will be examined using
immunocytochemistry at the electron microscope level because physiological
experiments suggest that CFTR is expressed in the membranes of acidic
organelles. Electrophysiological and molecular biology experiments are designed
to discover the mechanistic links between CFTR and an NO-dependent release of
internal Cl-. In Aim 2, similar methods will be used to investigate the
functional significance of CFTR and two established interactors (anoctamin 1 and
syntaxin 1A) to determine the role these interactions play in pre- and
postsynaptic operations. CFTR is well known to have highly cell-type specific
interactions with other proteins and as such, Aim 3 defines an
immunoprecipitation-mass spectroscopy-based strategy for identifying novel
neuronal binding partners for this multi-functional
protein.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.