* 2129228
* NSF-BSF Application: Developing Sustainable Approaches for Cometabolic Degradation of TCE and cDCE in Groundwater through Stable Isotope Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Alison Cupples, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 269,622.00

Groundwater contamination remains a significant global problem because of the
risk to human health from drinking contaminated water. Increasing water scarcity
has led to an urgent need for effective and inexpensive approaches to treat
contaminated groundwater. The goal of this project is to address this need using
innovative monitoring methods to determine the most appropriate approach. This
research project by an international collaboration of researchers from Michigan
State University and Ben Gurion University will develop a biological treatment
approach called ‘bioremediation’ to remove two of the most common groundwater
contaminants. The research will advance understanding of bioremediation through
novel state-of-the-science chemical and biological analytical techniques.
Successful development of efficient and low-cost treatment technology will
benefit society by increasing availability of clean water. Additional benefits
result from the training of underrepresented students in engineering, thus
strengthening and diversifying the Nation’s STEM workforce. This research is
jointly funded by NSF and The US-Israel Binational Science foundation through
the special submission opportunity NSF 20-094.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to enhance the aerobic bioremediation of the important
groundwater contaminants trichloroethene [TCE] and cis-dichloroethene [cDCE].
This goal will be achieved by specific research designed to elucidate which
microorganisms provide the most sustainable rates of co-metabolic biodegradation
of TCE and cDCE, as well as co-metabolic substrate uptake. The fate of carbon
from both the co-metabolic substrates as well as TCE, cDCE, and their
degradation products will be assessed using stable isotope probing (SIP). SIP
will be combined with compound specific isotope analysis (CSIA) to determine
isotope enrichment patterns for these transformations using the complementary
expertise and facilities of the U.S. and Israeli research teams. The approach of
using both SIP and CSIA will allow for the first time the identification of
biodegradation pathways and responsible microorganisms in the field. Successful
completion of this research will transform our ability to identify the most
sustainable bioremediation scenarios and facilitate elucidation of removal
mechanisms in situ. Such data will enable remediation professionals to predict
contaminant removal times and assess treatment scenarios more accurately. The
research has strong potential to benefit society because these chemicals are
major groundwater contaminants across a large number of aquifers in the U.S.,
Israel, and many other countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.