* 2129699
* EVO-LTER: Multifaceted mechanisms of metropolis: Integrating society, ecology, evolution, and plasticity to advance urban evolutionary ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kevin McGraw, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Paco Moore
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,123.00

More than half of all people live in cities and the percentage in cities is
increasing. Environmental changes accompany this urbanization. These changes
include extreme urban heat, use of water for irrigation, and air pollution. Such
changes shape the animals and plants that live there, and this has consequences
for human health and well-being. Because urbanization can alter where species
live and how they act, it is important to determine the extent, causes, and
consequences of urban change on animals and plants. Recent research suggests
that urban species can undergo rapid evolution due to the rapid environmental
changes that occur in urban areas. Long-term datasets are required to assess
such changes over time for different taxa and different environmental
conditions. This work will assess the viability and impact of species in a
changing urban environment over the long term. In the process it will examine
how urban biodiversity directly affects our lives. The project will also help
train the next generation of urban evolutionary ecologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the organization and execution of two
workshops, bringing together diverse participants in urban ecology and
evolutionary biology from the US and across the globe. It is targeted at
capitalizing on the decades of urban ecological data compiled by the Central
Arizona-Phoenix Long-Term Ecological Research (CAP LTER) site and other sites in
the LTER network along with the evolutionary-biology expertise of workshop
participants to develop more comprehensive studies of the evolution of species
within urban ecosystems. These workshops will develop methods for utilizing long
term data at the CAP LTER for evolutionary study, and then provide those methods
to the larger community of ecologists and evolutionary
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.