* 2129965
* SBIR Phase I:  Coding the Affective Domain and Visuospatial Ability
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Theresa Ferg, BROWNBACK STUDIOS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project supports the development of a visuospatial
educational assessment tool. Visuospatial aptitude is a facet of intelligence
that underlies innovative thinking, i.e., how do new ideas emerge? and What are
the physiological processes involved? Today, there is an overwhelming exposure
within society to digital visual stimuli and national assessment authorities
acknowledge visuospatial abstract reasoning as an accepted and sought after
cognitive ability. Future curriculum designs must develop along with how people
are changing and perceiving knowledge. This project seeks to set standards in
education on visuospatial ability by introducing a novel assessment. This
visuospatial assessment tool will utilize a software platform that allows
customers to take the assessment online, and has commercial potential to improve
industry, science, and educational programs for the advancement of human
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project investigates the development of an information technology
consisting of a visuospatial ability assessment for measuring the biological
processes that are required for being creative. Humans are biologically
predisposed both to perceive and to reproduce symmetry, mainly in visual form,
but also aurally; This proposed visuospatial assessment tool measures some of
the biological processes that are required for the perception and reproduction
of symmetry. Specifically, this assessment measures a form of sensorimotor
perceptual action referred to in this project as ‘affective symmetry gauging’
(ASG). ASG consists of a subject’s innate visual perception/identification of
the division in extreme and mean ratio point (DEMR; i.e., the symmetry point) in
a given pattern. Because this process measures the extent to which a subject can
perceive/identify and reproduce the symmetry point in given patterns, the tool
also suggests the degree to which a subject may be inclined to reproduce
symmetry, marking this inclination as a natural human expression of creativity
aligned to pleasingness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.