* 2129700
* NSFGEO-NERC: Data Mining the Deep: Combining Geochemistry and Imaging Spectroscopy to Quantify the Impact on Ocean Chemistry of Deep Hydrothermal Circulation at Mid-Ocean Ridges
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bethany Ehlmann, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 475,737.00

Ocean crust is formed at mid-ocean spreading ridges and covers more than 60% of
the surface of Earth. Because of the continuous plate tectonic cycle and
subduction, the ocean crust is geologically young (&lt;200 million years), much
younger than the rocks that make up continents. Heated seawater circulates
throughout the ocean crust from its creation until it gets consumed in
subduction zones, reacting with the rock to form new minerals. Key elements and
molecules such as water, CO2, K, and Mg are exchanged between seawater and the
ocean crust. These interactions between fluids and the rock are a major – but
not yet quantified – contributor to seawater chemistry and, through subduction,
the composition of the interior of Earth. A key challenge is that ocean drilling
has not sampled the deepest ocean crust many kilometers below the seafloor.
However, in recent years, the International Continental Scientific Drilling
Program’s Oman Drilling Project has drilled a few kilometers of oceanic crust
and the uppermost mantle in Oman, where tectonics have pushed this critical
portion of Earth’s crust onto the continent. In this project, scientists at the
California Institute of Technology will work with colleagues at the universities
of Southampton and Plymouth in the UK to investigate these drill cores to work
out how much exchange there has been between seawater and the deep ocean crust.
The project takes an innovative approach that combines detailed but traditional
laboratory analyses of select samples of the core with a novel technique, micro-
imaging infrared spectroscopy, which uses the reflectance of infrared light to
determine the mineralogy of the entire drill core at a spatial resolution of
less than one millimeter. This research will achieve major advances in
understanding of deep circulation of fluids within the ocean crust by objective
characterization at a scale and sampling completeness previously impossible. It
will yield insights into the contribution of fluid-rock reactions to global
geochemical cycling and seawater chemistry as well as constrain the role of deep
fluid circulation in cooling and alteration of the lower oceanic crust. A
website will be built with a core viewer to disseminate mineral maps of the
drill cores to the broader scientific community and for educational use in
classes. The project supports the training of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent estimates suggest that hydrothermal fluid
fluxes through upper crustal lavas and dikes are insufficient to solidify and
cool new crust close to the mid-ocean ridge axes, requiring major, but hitherto
unquantified, deep hydrothermal circulation in the lower crust. To date, neither
the pathways nor the geochemical consequences of this deep circulation have been
considered in detail, but preliminary estimates indicate that these systems are
necessary to export 40-60% of the available heat from the lower crust to the
oceans and may influence ocean chemistry for key elements. In this joint project
between NSF-supported scientists at Caltech and NERC-supported scientists at the
Universities of Southampton and Plymouth in the UK, these cores from the Oman
Drilling Project will be investigated to test two hypotheses that connect the
formation of the ocean crust to the wider Earth system: (A) that fault zones in
the lower ocean crust exhibit mineralization and hydrothermal alteration that
record their role as major conduits for thermal and chemical exchange between
the crust and ocean waters; and (B) that deep hydrothermal circulation in the
lower crust has significant impacts on global geochemical cycles of specific
elements including C, O, S, Li, B, Sr, Mg, Ca and base metals. The project has
four objectives: (1) Determine the mineral assemblages of altered rocks and
their geochemistry with depth in the oceanic crust and the requisite
temperatures and chemistries of the alteration fluids. (2) Quantify elemental
and isotopic exchanges between seawater and the lower oceanic crust and
uppermost mantle and their contribution to global chemical cycles of the
composition of seawater; (3) Determine the importance of deep hydrothermal
circulation, including in fault zones, in cooling the lower oceanic crust; and
(4) Build a website with core viewer hosting mineral maps and imaging
spectroscopy datasets to enable use by future researchers and students. The
objectives will be achieved through four tasks that map minerals in the core
with imaging spectroscopy and petrologic and geochemical tie-ins, additional
geochemical characterization, modeling and synthesis of results to determine
chemical and thermal budgets, and development of a web viewer for mineral maps
of the core.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.