* 2130142
* Nebraska STEM Scholars: Improving Student Success through Scholarship and Support Services
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* David Peitz, Wayne State College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 01/31/2028
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Wayne State College (WSC). WSC is a four-year, rural, public college in
located northeastern Nebraska. It is part of the Nebraska state college system
and serves approximately 4,200 students. WSC's vision is to make a notable
difference in rural and community life through learning excellence and student
success. Following an aim of the Rural STEM Education Research Act passed by the
House of Representatives in May, 2021, the project will be uniquely positioned
to increase the capacity of rural northeastern Nebraska to provide quality STEM
education and STEM workforce development programming to students. In particular,
over its 6-year duration, this project will fund 4-year scholarships to 18
distinct talented, low-income students from rural communities (3 different
cohorts of 6 students each) majoring in biology, chemistry, or mathematics. In
addition to financial support, students will be provided with comprehensive
curricular and co-curricular support opportunities aimed at reducing and
removing barriers to STEM success and degree completion. At the initial stage,
students will be able to attend a “Succeeding in the Sciences Week” prior to the
start of their freshman year to prepare them for the rigors of a STEM education
and begin to build a sense of community among their cohort scholar group.
Additional support opportunities will include community volunteering, faculty
mentoring, internships, on campus living for 2 years, participation and
presentations at scientific conferences, special career counseling, supplemental
instruction, and faculty mentoring to help students identify and conduct
research projects. As another component of the project, faculty will be able to
attend a Faculty Mobile Summer Institute, which will provide training in
evidence-based teaching methods. Project investigators will disseminate outcomes
and findings related to project challenges and successes, especially to other
small public rural institutions striving to support low-income STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the project will
pursue several goals. First is to remove financial barriers and to adapt,
implement, and analyze a comprehensive set of evidence-based strategies to build
capacity to support, retain, and graduate the project's rural biology,
chemistry, and mathematics scholars. Second is to enhance the regional STEM
workforce by providing special career preparation opportunities for students to
prepare them to contribute through employment or pursuit of advanced degrees.
Third is to contribute to the knowledge base by implementing, testing, and
studying through project evaluation strategies for systematically supporting
student academic and career pathways in STEM. And fourth is to disseminate
outcomes and findings related to the supports and interventions that promote
student success to other institutions working to support talented, low-income
STEM students. Aimed at addressing the goals, project evaluation is designed to
employ qualitative and quantitative methods to provide insights into the
efficacy of project strategies to provide formative and summative feedback to
the project and to identify the effective ones for replication, especially in
other rural settings. Related to this, the directions of investigation will
address gaps in the literature and strengthen the knowledge base on impactful
and practical interventions unique to rural, first-generation, low-income,
academically talented students. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.