* 2130114
* Growing Opportunities in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (GO STEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2027
* Heidi Munsell, Indian Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 10/31/2027
* USD 989,431.00

The project, Growing Opportunities in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (GO STEM), will contribute to meeting the national need for well-
educated scientists, engineers, and technicians in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Indian Hills Community College will award
scholarships to at least 48 unique low-income students with demonstrated
academic potential and who are pursuing associate degrees in science and applied
science fields of study. Full time students in ten programs will be eligible to
apply for these scholarships. The ten programs include: four Associate of Art
degree programs for science transfer majors (Biology, Chemistry, Physics,
Mathematics) and six Associate of Applied Science programs in career and
technical programs (Computer Software Development, Cybersecurity and Systems
Administration, Electrical and Renewable Energy Technology, Electronic
Engineering Technology, Laser and Optics Technology and Robotics/Automation
Technology). A system of curricular and co-curricular activities will provide
additional support for the scholars. These activities focus on existing,
enhanced, and new activities that show promise in fostering student success, as
documented in the research literature, supported by prior experience and lessons
learned, and underscored by institutional commitment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities include intensive faculty mentoring/advising,
professional development for faculty, peer mentoring, training for peer mentors,
a first-year seminar series for scholarship recipients, college and career
guidance, and summer experiences. The overarching goal of the proposed effort is
to increase the successful attainment of education and career goals of low-
income community college students with academic potential and interest in STEM.
The project will advance knowledge by evaluating the influence of academic
advising/mentoring provided by faculty mentors, participation in a first year
seminar, and peer mentoring (as mentees and mentors) on college and career
outcomes for academically talented, low-income students pursuing associate
degrees in STEM. The project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.