* 2130583
* HCC: Small: Designing Autonomy Â­Preserving Interactions in Intelligent Assistants for Older Adults
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Davide Bolchini, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 10/31/2024
* USD 498,904.00

The growing availability of intelligent assistants (IAs) such as Siri and Alexa
has prompted exploration of how such devices can assist older adults with daily
care tasks. Yet, the potential convenience of IAs notwithstanding, current
approaches are limited in part because they fail to provide users with enough
sense of control over their data and interactions. The lack of agency is
particularly problematic for carrying out health information tasks; older adults
find it challenging both to understand the data returned by the IA and to
determine who has access to the critical personal and health data they share.
This project will advance our understanding of how to design IAs that positively
influence older adults' sense of autonomy when using them to carry out health
information tasks at home. To this end, the research team will leverage existing
partnerships with senior organizations and informal caregivers in the
Indianapolis community to ascertain specifics about their existing interactions
and challenges with IAs; these findings will then be used to establish and
evaluate novel design principles that can support more transparent
conversational IA interactions for health information management. Project
outcomes have the potential to transform IA design and development from black
boxes that provide information services to more transparent conversational
partners that are able to garner trusted human-AI relationships. Additional
broad impact will derive from involvement and mentoring of undergraduate and
graduate students, including women and minorities, in the research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will involve two main thrusts. The
first will identify the important values that shape the help-seeking beliefs of
older adults in existing informal caregiver relationships and settings; based on
those findings, the team will engage older adults to collaboratively design new
IA interaction strategies aligned to their needs and expectations during health
information tasks. In the second thrust, system prototyping and user-centered
evaluation activities will identify the potential and limitations of the
resulting design strategies in addressing human autonomy needs and IA acceptance
among older adults, examples to include a heightened focus on providing
alternative information sources and answers as a response to users' questions,
and providing pathways to access privacy settings and personal data sharing
preferences during interactions with the IA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.