* 2130083
* An Integrated Approach to Designing and Fabricating Engineered Dielectric Metamaterials for Energy Harvesting Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Bart Raeymaekers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2024
* USD 498,661.00

This grant supports research into fundamental knowledge to design and fabricate
macroscale dielectric metamaterials with engineered thermal radiative properties
for energy harvesting applications. Dielectric metamaterials are composite
structures that comprise nano- or microscale dielectric particles embedded in a
matrix material, such as polymer, and they display unusual properties that do
not occur in conventional materials. By varying the adjustable parameters of the
metamaterial design, including the dielectric nanoparticle material, shape,
size, size distribution, orientation, arrangement, and volume fraction and the
matrix material, it is possible to engineer metamaterials with unique thermal
radiative properties, such as thermal sources with laser-like emission in the
infrared wavelength. However, no methodology exists to determine the
microstructure of a dielectric metamaterial with the desired thermal radiative
properties nor its fabrication at the macroscale. This project derives the
fundamental theory to calculate the metamaterial microstructure required to
achieve user-specified thermal radiative properties and implements a scalable
manufacturing process, based on ultrasound directed self-assembly, to fabricate
macroscale dielectric metamaterials. Dielectric metamaterials with engineered
thermal radiative properties can play a critical role in energy harvesting, such
as recycling low-temperature waste heat from computers and cell phones. This
research promotes the participation of undergraduate and graduate students,
especially under-represented minorities, in research, and fosters research
experiences for women in engineering via summer camps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this award is to formulate and validate an integrated
approach to designing and manufacturing macroscale dielectric metamaterials with
user-specified thermal radiative properties. To accomplish this objective, the
relationship between the microstructure of dielectric metamaterials and their
thermal radiative properties are established via a numerically exact framework
based on the stochastic Maxwell equations. The research is driven by inverse
method approaches, which involve constrained optimization and the boundary
element method. An inverse method is implemented to determine the metamaterial
microstructure required to create the desired thermal radiative properties.
Macroscale dielectric metamaterials, designed for harvesting low-temperature
waste heat, consist of dielectric nanoparticles in a polymer medium that are
fabricated using a scalable ultrasound directed self-assembly technique, which
involves pinning nanoparticles at ultrasound nodes in three-dimensions. An
inverse method computes the ultrasound transducer parameters that establish the
wave field required to assemble a user-defined pattern of nanoparticles obtained
from the metamaterial design. In particular, the research focuses on forming
engineered metamaterials with large particle loadings, which is a particular
challenge. The new basic science knowledge generated during this project is
packaged in a generalized software-tool that integrates the design and
manufacture of most engineered metamaterials with user-specified
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.