* 2130586
* Ultrafine-grained Magnesium Alloys Manufactured by Multi-axial Forging: Elucidating Mechanisms of Achieving Both High Strength and High Ductility
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Devesh Misra, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2025
* USD 442,403.00

Magnesium alloys exhibit a number of attractive properties including high
specific strength and specific stiffness, good damping and shock absorbing
capacity, and high thermal conductivity, etc., appealing for the use in
automobile, aerospace, and packaging industries. However, thermo-mechanical
processing of high-strength magnesium alloys is a challenge because of the
inherent atomic-scale structure, which makes them difficult to plastically
deform into high performance products at normal temperatures. This award
addresses the challenge in processing of advanced high-strength magnesium-based
alloys by fundamental research of the multi-axial forging process at high
temperatures to attain scientific understanding of the process-structure-
property relationship in complex metal deforming behaviors. The research has a
potential to accelerate the pace of deployment of magnesium alloys and to
promote cost-effective lightweight structure manufacture, allowing, for example,
thinner sections or components to achieve better fuel economy in the
transportation sector. In this project, graduate and undergraduate students will
be trained in advanced manufacturing science and the processing concepts will
also be integrated in the existing manufacturing curriculum. Furthermore,
hosting of advanced manufacturing open house on the Engineering Day and Career
Days on campus will foster awareness of advanced manufacturing career pathways
in middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective
of this project is to understand advanced processing concepts associated with
multi-axial forging, in a sequential manner, in fabricating lightweight
magnesium alloys with ultrafine grains that are characterized by a combination
of very high strength in conjunction with high ductility. The process-structure-
property study of multi-axial forging, by changing the strain per pass, will
address the critical issue of texture-related anisotropy in magnesium alloys
through elucidating the relationship between the orientation dependence of
grains and the grain boundary character distribution that affect the mechanical
properties and deformation mechanisms. In addition, the mechanistic basis of
high ductility in high strength magnesium alloys will be unraveled through the
discovery of quantitative relationship between the orientation distribution of
grains and the plasticity mechanisms in a relatively wide grain-structure
spectrum from ultrafine-grained to coarse-grained structures. This will be
accomplished by studying the dependence of strains per pass on the formability
of magnesium alloy by combining nanoindentation experiments with electron back
scattered diffraction and post-mortem electron microscopy of deformed grains.
Moreover, a machine learning approach for a quantitative relationship between
the orientation distribution of grains and the ductility as a function of the
strain per pass is envisaged to accelerate the processing of magnesium-based
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.