* 2130235
* Future Tech Scholars: An Information Systems Technology Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Peter Carswell, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Columbus State Community College in central Ohio. Over its six-year
duration, this project will establish the Future Tech Scholars program to fund
scholarships for 90 unique full-time and part-time students who are pursuing
associate degrees in Information Science Technology (IST). These students will
receive scholarships for up to two years. Three goals will guide the Future Tech
Scholars program. First is to increase the recruitment, retention, completion,
and transfer/employment of low-income, academically talented students. Second is
to recruit and enroll a diverse group of 90 students into the program. Third is
to contribute to the assessment, implementation, and sustainability of evidence-
based curricular and co-curricular support strategies that lead to increased
student success. The project will develop and disseminate information on support
strategies that contribute to academic success and professional preparation for
low-income aspiring STEM students. Intensive supports for scholars will increase
completion of IST major programs producing highly qualified professionals ready
to enter the central Ohio technology workforce or transfer to a four-year
institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a great need to produce qualified
IST technicians and provide support services to underserved students. The
technology sector is a strong contributor to the economic health of the central
Ohio region, which establishes a strong interest in recruiting students that
will graduate with the skills needed to enter the workforce or transfer to a
four-year degree program. Through intense student support services that
encourage retention and completion, the Future Tech Scholars program will fill
the gap of qualified IST technicians. The project will be carried out with a
comprehensive plan to collect evidence and evaluate the claims regarding the
impact of the Future Tech Scholars program on student performance, persistence,
and completion. The project will disseminate best practices, project activities,
publications, and research findings to audiences locally, statewide, and
nationally. This project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.