* 2130239
* Promoting Early Retention of STEM Students: Achieving Change in our Communities through Equity and Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Jutta Heller, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,499,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Washington (UW) Tacoma. UW Tacoma is an Asian
American, Native American, and Pacific Islander-serving institution (AANAPISI).
Over its seven-year duration, this project will fund scholarships 48 unique
full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Mathematics,
Environmental Science, Biomedical Sciences, Information Technology, Computer
Science and Systems, Computer Engineering and Systems, Electrical Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, or Civil Engineering. First-time college students and
first-year transfer students will receive full scholarships for their first two
years and partial scholarships for their third and fourth years. The project
will include a summer mathematics preparation program that aims to enhance entry
into STEM disciplines. Participants will be invited to engage in a research
experience or project-based Introduction to Design course in their first year.
Coupled with an optional on-campus STEM living learning community and required
individual faculty mentoring, the quarterly Success in STEM seminar course aims
to support scholars in the formation of a cohesive community through group
mentoring. Programming also aims to support students in their professional
development. This project is distinguished by its focus on pre-STEM majors in
their first and second years on campus, and includes mentorship training for
approximately 40 faculty who will be teaching and mentoring diverse student
populations. The University of Washington, Tacoma has a large population of
students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM; this project aims to
further research on how best to support first- and second-year undergraduate
students as they enter STEM majors. Through increased recruitment and retention
in the critical first two years, the project endeavors to support diverse
students, supporting the entry of talented and skilled professionals into the
local workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion among low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The specific objectives are to i) recruit
talented, low-income students to STEM majors at the University of Washington
Tacoma, ii) retain these students in STEM through student support mechanisms in
the critical first two years, iii) improve student success and progress via
intensive mentoring, early-entry math preparation, first-year research
experience and design courses, and the Success in STEM seminar, and iv) broaden
participation to promote equity and inclusion in STEM. Mentoring, early research
and design experiences, and strong learning communities have been demonstrated
to affect psychosocial factors such as academic motivation, STEM identity, self-
efficacy, interest/awareness of bias and barriers to STEM access, and health and
well-being, thereby increasing student persistence in STEM. Less is known,
however, about how these factors affect first- and second-year students at
minority-serving institutions, particularly for AANAPISI institutions. The PI
Team hypothesizes that by providing math preparation, early research and design
courses, strong learning communities, and intensive faculty mentorship,
participants will experience increases in academic success, retention and
academic motivation, STEM identity, self-efficacy, as compared with a
representative control group. This project has the potential to advance
understanding of the effectiveness of mentoring by incorporating an equity lens,
coupled with community-engaged early research and design experiences to support
the success of low-income students in STEM. A mixed-methods approach combining
quantitative data from yearly surveys with qualitative interviews will be used
to assess project outcomes. Results of this project will be made available on
the team's SSTEM project webpage and social media, and presented at conferences
including the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education Research and
AAC&amp;U Transforming STEM Education, and published in journals such as the
Journal of Diversity in Higher Education and the Understanding Interventions
Journal. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.