* 2130302
* Promoting Student Success through Expectancy-Value Theory-Informed Supports: Mentoring, Cohort-building, and Scholarships at a Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Emily Reed, Merced College
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2028
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Merced Community College District (Merced), a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
32 unique scholars, comprised of 20 full time and 12 part time students who are
pursuing associate’s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science,
engineering, mathematics, and physics. First year students attending full time
will receive two-year scholarships, and those attending part time will receive
four-year scholarships. Project activities include faculty and peer mentoring,
cohort-building activities, and career exploration and networking. These are
designed to increase motivation to pursue and persist in STEM fields, increase
academic success, and improve time to graduation in the STEM disciplines. The
project will be informed by expectancy-value theory (EVT), examining student
perceptions of the costs of pursuing a STEM degree and the factors that motivate
them to accept those costs to access the perceived values associated with it. By
improving existing student supports and creating new programming using student
feedback through EVT, all Merced students will benefit. The project will also
provide a replicable model to be shared with other institutions, broadening the
impact of EVT to additional underrepresented, first-generation, rural, and
community college students interested in pursuing careers in STEM. Project
scholars and their communities may also benefit from the higher wages available
to those with STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Project goals and specific aims
include increased transfer rates to four-year institutions in STEM fields;
increased graduation rates of scholar cohorts; reduction in graduation times;
increased enrollment of women in engineering, physics, and computer science
majors; and wide dissemination of results of the study of Expectancy-Value
Theory (EVT)-based supports and their impact on STEM majors at an HSI community
college. EVT posits that motivation to engage in a program is informed by a
student’s value and competence beliefs. Perceptions of cost are also important
in EVT, and in a STEM education context can include time spent, tuition, and
family sacrifices, among others. Existing research literature lacks assessments
of EVT when applied to all components of students’ perceived costs of attending
college, which extend far beyond the price of tuition and supplies. There are
also gaps in knowledge of EVT factors specific to STEM education among women and
community college students. The project will investigate the research questions,
“What is the effect of a continuous Expectancy-Value approach to student
recruitment, support, and career exploration on the academic success and
persistence of STEM students to graduation or transfer in STEM majors?” and
“What impact does the Merced S-STEM project have on the rate of graduates
seeking a career in a STEM field?” Focus groups and surveys will help identify
different costs associated with pursuing STEM programs and the project team will
adapt programming and activities to best address those costs and student needs.
A case study approach will provide formative and summative assessment and
findings from multiple data sources will be triangulated to build a coherent
understanding of program intervention and impact. Key data sources will include:
1) student motivation surveys, 2) focus groups with students, 3) faculty
interviews, 4) academic success metrics including performance, attainment of
learning objectives in STEM courses, GPAs, graduation rates, post-graduation
career plans, and placement in STEM fields. Knowledge generated will contribute
to increased persistence, timely graduation, 4- year college transfers, and
careers in STEM by developing and identifying best practices for this student
population. The project will provide a model that can be replicated to benefit
students at other two- and four-year institutions, with results disseminated
through workshops, conferences, and scholarly articles. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.