* 2130125
* NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: Reinforcement Learning for Real-time Wireless Scheduling and Edge Caching: Theory and Algorithm Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Junshan Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 01/31/2022
* USD 415,000.00

Recent years have witnessed a tremendous growth in real-time applications in
wirelessly networked systems, such as connected cars and multi-user augmented
reality (AR). Wireless edge caching is another emerging application requiring
high bandwidth, where optimal caching decisions would depend on the cache
contents and dynamic user demand profiles. To meet the explosive demand, 5G and
Beyond (B5G) technology promises to offer enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) and
ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC) services. Meeting URLLC
requirements is very challenging in wireless networks, and requires massive
modifications to the current wireless system design. Deadline-aware wireless
scheduling of real-time traffic has been a long-standing open problem. This
collaborative project makes a paradigm shift to tackle these challenges thus
spurring a new line of thinking for QoS guarantee in terms of ultra-low latency
and high bandwidth in a variety of IoT applications, including B5G, autonomous
driving, augmented reality, smart health and smart city, benefiting both the US
and Finland. The proposed research will also be integrated with education
activities at the PIs' institutions for graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students via curriculum development, research experiences, and outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages recent advances on offline
reinforcement learning (RL) to study two important problems in B5G, namely 1)
deadline-aware wireless scheduling to guarantee low latency and 2) edge caching
to achieve high bandwidth content delivery. In Thrust 1, physics-aided offline
RL will be devised to train deadline-aware scheduling policies. Specifically,
the Actor-Critic (A-C) method will be used for offline training of scheduling
policies, consisting of two phases: 1) initialization of Actor structure via
behavioral cloning and 2) policy improvement via the physics-aided A-C method.
With a good model-based scheduling algorithm as the initial actor structure, the
A-C method can be leveraged to yield a better scheduling policy, thanks to its
nature of policy improvement. Further, innovative algorithms will be devised to
address the outstanding problems in the A-C method, namely overestimation bias
and high variance, and Meta-RL will be used for adaptation to distribution shift
in nonstationary network dynamics. Thrust 2 focuses on wireless edge caching, an
application where the storage capacities at both the network edge and user
devices are harnessed to alleviate the need of high-bandwidth communications
over long distances. The combinatorial nature of joint communication and caching
optimization herein, with the uncertainties of system dynamics, calls for non-
trivial design of machine learning algorithms. The PIs will leverage RL to
investigate wireless edge caching thoroughly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.