* 2130352
* Implementing and Examining the Impact of an Enhanced Transfer Scholars Program for Inclusive Computing and Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* L.D. Timmie Topoleski, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2027
* USD 788,625.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC). UMBC is a minority
serving institution with high transfer enrollment, including transfer students
from six key Maryland community colleges who will serve as partners in this
project. Over its five year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 28
unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in five technical
majors: Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, Computer Engineering,
Information Systems, and Mechanical Engineering. Transfer Scholars will receive
two-year scholarships in addition to a holistic model of support including a new
scholars retreat; faculty, peer, and industry mentoring; academic and
professional development activities; and a transfer student seminar in their
first semester. This project advances the importance of understanding and
applying transfer success frameworks in STEM fields that have seen the least
traction in broadening participation efforts (computing and engineering). This
project develops students’ capacity for self-awareness and practical strategies
to act as allies to their peers and mitigate issues of bias and exclusion in
computing and engineering. It also enhances the infrastructure to improve
learning, retention, and success of transfer students in computing and
engineering majors and serves as a model for other regions to consider adapting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. It will achieve the following specific aims: 1. Apply and
enhance the evidence-based Center for Women in Technology (CWIT) program model
at UMBC to support academic and social integration, retention, graduation, and
post-baccalaureate success of transfer students in computing and engineering
majors with financial need. 2. Deepen and expand collaborations with campus
partners (i.e. in both Academic Affairs and Student Affairs) and community
college partners to better address pre- and post- transfer needs in computing
and engineering across the 2- to 4-year pathway. 3. Examine the impact of the
enhanced CWIT program model and transfer success supports on the academic and
social integration of transfer students in computing and engineering majors. It
will also address the following research question: What is the impact of the
enhanced CWIT program model and transfer success supports on the academic and
social integration of transfer students in computing and engineering majors? The
project will employ quasi-experimental research methods and include a matched
samples analysis. The investigators anticipate that this research will produce
evidence of which, when, and why academic and social interventions matter, as
well as feedback on how to refine and improve them for future student success.
An external evaluation will be conducted, centered on the project aims and
activities, and will include formative and summative components. Results of this
project will be made available by presentations and publications to the
computing and engineering education and educational research communities. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.