* 2130113
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Will climate change lead to system shifts on tropical mountains?: the interplay of epiphyte losses on host tree function, microclimate, and hydrology
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Lauren Lowman, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 08/31/2025
* USD 330,717.00

Tropical Montane Cloud Forests (TMCFs) are important ecosystems to study and
conserve due to their exceedingly high biodiversity as well as the critical
roles these forests play in local and regional water cycling. Deforestation in
lowland regions and increases in global sea surface temperatures indirectly
threaten these forests due to the lifting of the cloud base and an increase in
drought conditions. Epiphytes, i.e. plants that live on the surfaces of other
plants, cover nearly all tree surfaces in the TMCF and contribute substantially
to ecosystem function due to their high capacity to capture and temporarily
store water. Unfortunately, these plants are the most vulnerable ecosystem
components to projected changes in climate. A loss of epiphytes in the TMCF
would lead to substantial biodiversity loss as well as a destabilization of
water resources for human populations. This work aims to fill an important gap
in the understanding of feedbacks among epiphytes and forest functions in the
TMCF, and will provide important data for land-use and conservation workers as
well as natural resource managers and governments in tropical montane regions
concerned with long-term water security. A number of local and US-based workers
and students will be trained in field and lab-based techniques and regular
training events and exchanges will take place amongst all the participants.
Epiphyte gardens and accompanying curriculum will be created and placed in local
schools to increase understanding and awareness of the connectivity between
epiphytes and water cycling in the cloud forest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical
Montane Cloud Forests (TMCFs) are under threat due to rapid changes in climate
and in fact, recent work suggests that this ecosystem is predicted to contract
substantially in the coming decades. This proposal addresses the question: How
will a loss of the diverse and abundant epiphyte communities in the TMCF impact
tree health, energy balance and hydrologic function? The investigators propose
to conduct the first large-scale epiphyte removal experiment, in which trees in
forest and pasture will be stripped of their entire epiphyte community. Changes
in crown-level microclimate (air temperature, relative humidity, leaf wetness,
wind speed, solar radiation) as well as growth, water relations (water
potential, sap flow, stomatal traits, carbon isotopes) and ecohydrological
parameters (soil moisture, throughfall, stemflow) will be measured in and under
the trees stripped of their epiphytes and compared with paired trees with intact
epiphyte communities. Direct field-based measurements will be coupled with
remotely sensed parameters (NDVI, Air Temperature, Leaf Water Content) using a
high-precision drone outfitted with an integrated multispectral imaging system.
A numerical model of epiphyte-host tree water relations will be developed and
coupled to a land-surface hydrology model to scale up the field-based
measurements and predict the effect of epiphyte loss on regional energy budgets
and canopy water cycling. Field work will take place in five locations in the
Monteverde Region of Central Costa Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.