* 2130162
* RUI: Biochemical and genetic analysis of conserved molecular scaffold Tudor complex required for germ cell specification in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alexey Arkov, Murray State University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 07/31/2024
* USD 822,418.00

Cellular organization is critically dependent on the self-assembly of various
membraneless organelles inside the cell. However, the principles and molecular
mechanisms that drive and regulate the assembly of these organelles and define
their functions are poorly understood. This project integrates cutting-edge
genetics and molecular quantitative approaches to provide major insights into
the mechanisms responsible for the assembly and function of evolutionarily
conserved membraneless organelles assembled in germ cells of model organism
Drosophila (germ granules). These cells give rise to egg and sperm cells, and
therefore, are responsible for continuity of life. This research will be
integrated into several cell and genetics undergraduate courses and will
directly engage undergraduate and graduate students in quantitative cell and
molecular biology training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Germ granules show the
properties of soft condensed matter and they often change their morphology
during developmental transitions. Recent research identified an evolutionarily
conserved germ granule multisubunit complex assembled on the large scaffold
Tudor protein. Tudor scaffold has 11 protein-protein interaction modules (Tudor
domains) and Tudor complex components are required for germ cell specification.
The goal of this project is to provide molecular understanding of how this
multisubunit Tudor scaffold complex is assembled using purified components and
quantitative biochemical approaches. In addition, using super-resolution
microscopy, it will be determined how different components of the complex are
assembled into large germ granules in vivo. Furthermore, to understand the
function of Tudor complex, enzymatic activities of its components upon the
complex assembly will be characterized and the significance of the complex for
germ granule formation, morphology and germ cell specification will be
determined by mutational approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.