* 2130725
* Collaborative Conference: The Road to Glasgow: A Pre-COP Conference for the Youth Environmental Alliance in Higher Education
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Julia Klein, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 114,288.00

Climate change is a complex global problem that demands collaborative
engagement. While students in higher education have long participated in climate
action and some have attended the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC) annual Conference of the Parties (COP) to learn about global
climate negotiations, there has yet to be a coordinated effort to bring those
students together to learn from each other and share their experiences; nor has
there been a concerted effort to train students in how to interact directly with
COP participants. By creating a multicultural and multi-institutional
opportunity for students, the Pre-COP conference will become a launching pad for
climate action and innovations led by youth at their home campuses, as well as
on the global stage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The “Road to Glasgow Pre-COP Student
Conference” (hereafter “Pre-COP”) will take place in Derby, United Kingdom, as
well as virtually, October 28-30, 2021, immediately preceding COP26 in Glasgow,
Scotland. The PIs leading this effort are from the YEAH Network, a
transdisciplinary, multi-institutional, international Research Coordination
Network for Undergraduate Biology Education that focuses on providing real world
experience on environmental negotiations and policy for students in science and
sustainability majors. The Pre-COP will prepare students in science and
sustainability related disciplines to participate actively in, and contribute
to, the COP26. First, students will be introduced to the culture and structure
of international environmental negotiations and the COP processes. Second,
interdisciplinary student teams will generate action plans within broad thematic
topics with the goal of enhancing synergies between youth in higher education
and international policy frameworks. Third, students will be guided to present
these ideas at the COP26 via press conferences and presentations at side events
(e.g., the U.S. country pavilion). Finally, participants will share the ideas
generated at the Pre-COP as well as their firsthand experience at COP26 with
their home campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.