* 2130694
* Collaborative Research: Computational Design of Multi-functional Minimal-Surface Lattice Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Guhaprasanna Manogharan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 255,958.00

Triply periodic minimal-surface (TPMS) lattices are widely present in nature and
are finding increasing viability for use in engineering applications. Their
geometric properties facilitate fabrication via additive manufacturing
techniques, and they exhibit good mechanical and transport properties. However,
an outstanding challenge in the design and use of these lattices is the lack of
consideration for material failure criteria arising from cyclic loading, which
is critical for many potential applications. This award supports fundamental
research to formulate novel computational techniques to efficiently design
multi-functional TPMS lattice structures with regards to strength, durability,
transport, and manufacturability criteria, and to allow for modulation of the
unit cell design within the component. This research has the potential to
substantially increase the viability and range of applications of lightweight
minimal-surface lattices in demanding applications in healthcare, welfare, and
energy efficiency, such as porous orthopedic implants with enhanced bone-loss
prevention, spacers for membrane distillation with high mass transfer efficiency
for desalination and wastewater treatment, and architected battery electrodes
with high power output and energy storage. This award will also support the
development of teaching modules that explore the engineering and aesthetic
aspects of designing artifacts with minimal-surface lattices for undergraduate
industrial design students, K-12 teachers, and engineering graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of formulating
efficient computational techniques to design TPMS lattices fabricated via
additive manufacturing, this project will exploit the mathematical structure of
minimal surfaces and couple tools in the differential geometry of surfaces with
topology optimization techniques to: 1) design thickness-graded lattices that
satisfy strength, permeability and manufacturability requirements; 2)
incorporate mechanical fatigue requirements in the lattice design; and 3)
modulate the design and orientation of the lattice unit cell within the
structural component to render superior performance. Further, design techniques
that systematically vary the local geometry of the unit cell within the
component will be explored. Fabrication via metal additive manufacturing of TPMS
lattices as well as surface morphological analysis, imaging and mechanical
testing will be conducted both to inform geometric limits on the lattice design
dictated by the manufacturing process, and to validate the performance of
lattice designs obtained with the formulated computational
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.