* 2130542
* Financial and Academic Supports for Talented Students to Promote Equitable Participation in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Sumita Singh, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of academically talented, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need at Everett Community College. Over its six-year duration, this
project will provide scholarships to approximately 60 unique students who are
pursuing an associate’s degree in biology, computer science, chemistry,
engineering, environmental science, geology, mathematics and or physics.
Scholars will build community through regular gatherings and will explore
opportunities through project-based learning opportunities, a “transfer
roundtable” seminar series, and visits to industry partners. Central to the
projects efforts is a purposeful offering of faculty and staff development along
with alumni, peer and faculty mentorship of scholars. The project will also
design Academic Excellence Workshops (AEWs) to support student outcomes in early
physics, chemistry, biology, computer science and engineering courses. Already
in place to support students in mathematics courses, AEWs are 1-credit seminars
where scholars will be able to gain extra additional exposure to particularly
challenging topics in parallel with an associated class.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each of the project components will be adapted or newly
designed by a diverse team of faculty and staff to support increased retention,
completion and transfer rates of talented, low-income community college STEM
students. Faculty and staff will engage in professional development designed to
promote collaboration and build a shared understanding of scholars’ experiences,
strengths and needs. Professional development will be organized each year around
a theme selected to encourage deeper consideration of how the project might
promote equity through curriculum design, enhanced advising practices, and other
community-building activities. This shared experience will allow participating
faculty and staff to refine and strengthen key sources of academic, social and
professional support. In addition, career exposure through engagement with
community partners, professional development workshops and activities will give
talented STEM students the skills and support necessary to succeed in a
demanding curriculum and draw them into the excitement of science rooted in
equitable participation for all. Courses, program elements, and support services
created or modified for the purpose of this program will be carefully evaluated
to assess their impact on student recruitment, learning, and either transfer to
a 4-year institution or placement in the workforce. This program will further
investigate how impactful an equity-infused student experience is on a student’s
trajectory in STEM and life choices. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.