* 2130788
* SBIR Phase I:  Connected Livestock: Farm Animal Health Monitoring and Virtual Fencing Internet of Things (IoT) Device
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Frank Wooten, VENCE CORP
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 11/30/2022
* USD 255,754.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable holistic farm management by
assisting ranchers/farmers in making more informed decisions about when and
where to graze their livestock while minimizing negative environmental impacts
through regenerative farming. The innovation enables monitoring of animal health
in real time to assist in disease control and prevention. Poorly managed
livestock systems have resulted in a variety of environmental and health
problems. The project, which includes innovation in the Internet of Things,
sensors, machine learning, and wireless communications, when applied to farming
practices, seeks to alter how ranchers and agricultural businesses manage farms
in terms of animal health, the environment, productivity, and farm economics.
The innovation may have an impact on agricultural efficiency and cost reduction.
Farmers will be able to track and regulate animal movement, classify animal
activity and behavior, and predict and monitor animal health in real time using
data collected by the platform's sensors. Early detection of health impacts
enables preventive or early-stage treatments, as well as disease control and
prevention on a broader scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project seeks to develop an Internet of Things (IoT) platform capable of
tracking a variety of data in real time, including animal movement (e.g.,
location and direction), animal activity (walking, grazing, etc.), animal
behavior, and animal health. These sensor data are ideal for monitoring and
evaluating a range of variables critical to animal health protection. The
proposed animal management system is transformational because it is capable of
gathering precise multi-sensor data while using minimal power, communicating
data wirelessly, and running for an extended period of time. These capabilities
will gather real-time data on the animal's movement, activity, and health,
enabling accurate analysis, characterization, and monitoring of the animals. The
proposed research and development activities will focus on optimizing intertial
measurement unit &lt;br/&gt;(IMU) sensors and other components for efficient
animal control, characterization of animal activity and behavior, and
development of machine learning models for real time monitoring of animal
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.