* 2130675
* RAPID: Tracking the impact of engineered system failures on nearshore nutrient loads and harmful algal blooms using multiple stable isotopes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2024
* Edward Phlips, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 181,121.00

Beaches, bays, and other coastal systems provide valuable recreation
opportunities for swimming, fishing, boating and tourism. Fish, shellfish,
dolphins, and other animals depend on the seagrasses, coral, algae, and other
organisms in these balanced ecosystems to survive. When seagrasses are
unhealthy, the rest of the system can suffer, and these benefits can be lost.
Nutrient loading to these environments can increase due to waste discharge and
other sources, causing an imbalance in the fragile ecosystem. Sometimes the
extra nutrients can cause microscopic phytoplankton to grow rapidly or “bloom”
and smother seagrasses and corals. Some types of algal blooms can produce toxins
that harmful to wildlife and people that are known as harmful algal blooms or
“HABs”. In late March to early April 2021, concerns were raised about the
stability of a reservoir containing wastewater from a defunct fertilizer plant
in Piney Point, Florida. These concerns prompted the release of 215 million
gallons of waste into Tampa Bay to prevent the reservoir from collapsing. The
wastewater contains large concentrations of nutrients that may upset the balance
in the coastal receiving waters, causing algal blooms and possibly HABs. Damage
to this ecosystem is especially concerning because Tampa Bay has been a seagrass
restoration success story since the 1990s. To address these concerns, research
will use advanced scientific tools to specifically track the transport of
nutrients from the wastewater to determine their impact on local seagrasses.
Successful completion of this research will benefit society by helping water
management professionals determine how to mitigate the impacts of excess
nutrient loading and better protect these valuable ecosystems. Additional
benefits will result from increased scientific literacy through outreach with
local estuary monitoring groups to inform residents about the specific ways that
nutrient-rich wastes impact their coastal ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
release of nutrients along the Nation’s coastlines represents a chronic threat
to nearshore ecosystems. Impacts from increased nutrient loading range from
eutrophication, harmful algal blooms, and the production of hypoxic zones.
Discharges from a reservoir containing wastewater from a defunct fertilizer
plant at Piney Point, Florida has garnered national attention as it threatens
estuaries in the Tampa Bay region. The release of 215 million gallons of
nitrogen and phosphorus-rich effluent threatens an ecosystem that has been
considered a seagrass restoration success story. A major concern is that these
discharges may trigger macroalgae and/or phytoplankton blooms, thereby
threatening the ecologically and economically valuable seagrass communities in
the region. The goal of this research is to trace the nutrient inputs from the
Piney Point breach to better understand these threats. This objective will be
achieved using a novel multi-stable isotope approach to: (1) Characterize the
signature of Piney Point effluent; (2) Track the fate of the effluent as it is
transported to the nearshore environment; and (3) Evaluate changes in primary
producers (phytoplankton communities, macroalgae, and seagrasses) within the
region. The research hypothesis is that discharge from Piney Point will result
in a rapid response from phytoplankton and macroalgae, resulting in conditions
that may restrict light availability and negatively impact local seagrass
communities. The ephemeral nature of this event necessitates quick deployment to
obtain samples at the outflow and throughout Tampa Bay. Successful completion of
this research addresses the wider problem of waste discharge from aging and
failing infrastructure, a persistent issue throughout the Nation’s coastlines.
The results of this research will further benefit society by advancing our
understanding of these impacts on fragile coastal
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.