* 2130351
* The Pee Dee Scholars: Forging STEM Transfer Success in the Pee Dee Region of South Carolina
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Susan Henderson, Coker College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,349,732.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Coker University (CU), a four-year private liberal arts institution, and
Florence Darlington Technical College (FDTC), a two-year technical college. Over
a six-year duration, this project plans to fund scholarships to 48 full-time
students pursuing Bachelor’s degrees in biology, computer science, mathematics,
and chemistry at CU or an associate’s degree in general science at FDTC. First-
year students will receive up to four-years of scholarship support at CU and
associate’s and transfer students will receive up to two-year scholarships at
FDTC and CU, respectively. The first two years of the project will feature
collaborative, cross-institutional, and evidence-based activities including a
three-tiered faculty/peer mentoring model, intrusive advising, first-year
experience course, and a STEM symposia series. In addition, to boost science
identity, community, STEM career awareness, persistence in STEM, retention, and
transfer student capital (TSC) in FDTC-based scholars, the project team intends
to create a cross-institutional living learning community. The final two years
will further develop scholars’ scientific identity and belonging, promote career
and research experiences, and prepare scholars for careers or graduate school in
STEM through internships with industry, undergraduate research opportunities,
and student ePortfolios. This project proposes a cross-institutional and
scalable approach to improving retention, graduation, and transfer rates of low-
income students who are underrepresented in STEM, including underrepresented
minorities (URMs), and first generation in their families to attend college.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the project will
pursue several specific aims. First is increased enrollment of domestic, low-
income, academically-talented students in both CU and FDTC STEM majors of focus.
Second is adaptation and implementation of evidence-based curricular and co-
curricular activities to increase retention, persistence, transfer, and
graduation rates for Pee Dee scholars. And third is increased numbers of low-
income, academically talented STEM graduates from the Pee Dee region who enter
the STEM workforce or seek advanced STEM degrees after graduation. Despite the
wealth of data showing the challenges encountered by low-income community
college students who seek to transfer to four-year colleges and earn bachelor’s
degrees, there remains a dearth of information related to the cross-
institutional strategies to support low-income students in the transfer process
and completion of a four-year degree. Very few studies have sought to estimate
the effects of cross-institutional partnerships between a two- and a four-year
college on transfer student bachelor completion rates. This project will advance
understanding of the main factors that influence students’ self-efficacy and
agency to complete a four-year degree in STEM by examining the existing barriers
for low-income community college students. In particular, the project leadership
will be guided by a central research question: "What factors contribute to
success of low-income, transfer students in STEM?" The project investigators
hypothesize that the combination of enhanced financial support coupled with
evidence-based practices and rich cross-institutional engagement supported by
the TSC framework will increase student success including persistence in STEM
majors and overall retention in college. Furthermore, these practices are
expected to lead to greater rates of matriculation into four-year and/or
graduate and professional programs followed by employment in a STEM career. This
project will be evaluated using a mixed methods approach using quantitative and
qualitative data from institutional data, faculty, mentor, and student surveys
and focus groups, pre- and post-tests, and graduation and placement data.
Results of this project will be made available utilizing the "Yes We Must"
Coalition, the South Carolina Advanced Technological Education Center (SCATE)
Center of Excellence, and through presentations at national and regional
conferences, and intended publications through peer-reviewed journals. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.