* 2130447
* Improving Degree Completion and Transfer Rates in Computer Science Through Direct Student Supports and Scholarships
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Kasey Nguyen, Riverside Community College District/Moreno Valley Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Moreno Valley Community College, a Hispanic Serving Institution. Through
the creation of the Computer Science Scholars Program (CSSP), Moreno Valley
Community College will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Moreno Valley College.
Over its six-year duration, CSSP will provide scholarships to 60 low-income
undergraduate students who are pursuing an associate degree or intend to
transfer to a university to complete a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science or
Computer Information Systems. Students will receive up to three years of
scholarship support. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM
fields by linking scholarships with effective support activities, including
mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, internships, transfer and career
preparation, and participation in discipline-specific workshops and activities.
With the help of mentors, scholars will create education plans that outline
their academic and career goals and the necessary steps toward achieving those
goals. Because Moreno Valley College has a large population of low-income
students and students from groups that have been historically underrepresented
in computer science, this project has the potential to broaden participation of
students in computer science and study the impact of faculty mentoring on this
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to improve
the degree completion rate for low-income, high-achieving undergraduates in STEM
fields. There are five specific objectives: 1) increase scholars’ retention
rates and persistence rates; 2) improve student success in advanced mathematics
courses; 3) improve degree completion rates in STEM; 4) improve transfer rates
to a baccalaureate program in STEM; and 5) increase the number of individuals
entering the STEM workforce within 18 months of program completion. This program
is the result of the significant achievement gaps in student enrollment and
success in MVC’s Computer Science and Computer Information Systems programs.
Presently, the program is not graduating or transferring the number of students
necessary to meet workforce needs in this growing field. This project will
investigate the effects of robust student support services and financial
assistance on the success of Computer Science and Computer Information Systems
students. The evaluation of CSSP will investigate the effectiveness of project
activities through formative and summative measures. While the formative
evaluation will focus on process and project fidelity, the summative evaluation
will examine to what extent the project has positively impacted student success
in Computer Science. Results of this project will be made available by the PI
and Co-PI, who will disseminate project results on a local, regional, statewide,
and national level by presenting project findings at meetings and conferences.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need to earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.