* 2130185
* Collaborative Research: Microdiversity drives ecosystem function: SAR11 bacteria as models for oceanic nitrogen loss
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Frank Stewart, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2024
* USD 486,782.00

This project studies how low oxygen availability influences the biodiversity and
ecological role of SAR11 bacteria, one of the most abundant microbial groups in
the ocean. The work involves oceanographic sampling across a range of oxygen and
nutrient levels in the Eastern Tropical North Pacific Ocean. Using a combination
of genomic, microbiological, and biogeochemical methods, the study identifies
the mechanisms by which SAR11 strains diversify into separate niches and species
and contribute biochemically to the ecosystem, likely through removing nitrogen
from seawater. The project equips the next generation of researchers and
educators, notably those from underrepresented minority groups, to use
oceanographic, genomic, and microbiological concepts to meet contemporary
scientific challenges. This goal is met through a combination of bioinformatic
workshops that target undergraduate students from the University System of
Puerto Rico, middle school teacher-training workshops, and middle or high school
teacher internships in the investigatorâ€™s labs. This multifaceted research and
educational agenda fills a gap in our understanding of marine biological
diversity, identifies the contribution of SAR11 bacteria to nutrient and carbon
cycles in low oxygen oceans, and provides lessons and analytical tools to study
microbial processes in other ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
two aims. Aim 1 employs comparative metagenomic and single-cell genomic analyses
to identify metabolic properties that distinguish SAR11 clades from low oxygen
regions and processes of selection or gene flow operating across the clades. Aim
2 combines microbial transcriptomics, incubation experiments with isotope
tracers, and culturing to delimit the oxygen and nutrient conditions that define
the niche space of each SAR11 clade and to correlate SAR11 gene transcription
with community biochemical outcomes, including nitrogen loss through
denitrification. The results of these aims and the informatic methods used to
probe microbial microdiversity are disseminated through genomics-focused
undergraduate workshops, and new teacher-training educational modules, including
lab-based modules focused on the importance of microorganisms under
environmental change in the oceans. Data, manuscripts, and informatics workflows
from this project are made publicly available. The results are critical for
resolving the processes that create and sustain microbial diversity in the
oceans and informing biogeochemical models that predict how diversity influences
ecosystem processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.