* 2130706
* Learning-Enabled Modeling, Monitoring, and Decision Making for Distribution Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Hao Zhu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 350,000.00

This NSF project aims to propel the zero-carbon emission transition of the
electric grid infrastructure by develop a holistic framework for integrating
renewable and flexible resources at grid edge. The project will bring
transformative changes to the real-time monitoring and coordination of these
grid-edge resources in support of the efficiency and safety of their connected
distribution grids. This will be achieved by synthesizing machine learning
advances into the algorithmic developments that can recognize the governing
physics of the underlying systems and address the limitations in cyber
infrastructure in distribution grids. The intellectual merits of the project
include a suite of machine learning enabled solutions to attain an efficient and
safe operation of grid-edge resources under the information constraints due to
limited model knowledge and low observability. The broader impacts of the
project include the acceleration of integrating renewable energy and low-carbon
resources into the electricity infrastructure, and a comprehensive education
plan consisting of updating power engineering curriculum and designing hands-on
demos for pre-college students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this proposal is to establish a learning-enabled framework for operating
distributed energy resources (DERs) with efficiency, adaptivity, and robustness.
To address the status quo of limited sensing and communications in power
distribution grids, we advocate to incorporate the unique features of the
underlying feeder models and data profiles. Our proposed research consists of
three cohesive thrusts: T1) Designing data-driven distribution modeling
approaches under partial observability; T2) Developing monitoring algorithms of
grid-edge resources from heterogeneous data sources; and T3) Developing scalable
and safe DER policies using graph-based and risk-aware learning. These three
tasks will be further integrated to support each other into a holistic framework
as validated by real-world feeder systems and datasets. In a nutshell, our
research agenda will fulfill the dual objectives of enabling distribution system
operations by fully embracing a multitude of data sources, while attaining
timely and safe DER actions to address the information-limited and resource-
constrained scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.