* 2130907
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: CNS: PRATE:  P4 Research enabled by Accelerators in national TestbEds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Michael Zink, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 149,842.00

Scientific research is increasingly performed "in silico", which means
experimentation is performed by a computer instead of using traditional
laboratories. Chemistry, Biology, and Physics are only a small set of examples
of the science domains that heavily rely on scientific computing to make new
discoveries. Many of the computational models these discoveries are based on
need massive amounts of computational, networking, and storage resources. The
goal of this project is to make a new type of processing unit --Field
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA)-- available to the research community to offer
new and efficient ways of computation and data
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project, which brings
together researchers from Northeastern University and the University of
Massachusetts Amherst, will provide tools and tutorials to allow network
researchers to use the P4 programming language in network-attached FPGAs that
are available in the FABRIC, Chameleon, CloudLab, and Open Cloud Testbed
testbeds supported by NSF. Network-attached FPGAs support the disaggregation of
resources such as memory, network and processing, and novel tools will be
investigated to support this more general cloud processing model. Once
established the tools provided by this project will enable innovative research
into i) network security to ensure the security of systems where a user can
generate arbitrary networking traffic; ii) in-network telemetry; iii) in-network
processing; and areas not yet envisioned by the
proposers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific computing has supported many
discoveries in the past decade (e.g., gravitational waves, black holes, protein
folding) and will lead to many more in the future, with many of them having
broad societal impacts. This project will generate tools that will make the use
of network and compute resources more efficient to better support scientific
applications. P4 research projects will be developed as samples to be used by
the broader community. In addition, the project will support two graduate
students who will develop important skills in data center disaggregation and
advanced networking. Tools and tutorials developed as part of this project will
be used in data center and networking classes the principle investigators
teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All tools developed will be open sourced so that any
researcher can use and expand on them. Documentation and tutorials will be
developed and shared to aid widespread adoption. A website with links to code,
tutorials, and results will be hosted on the Open Cloud Testbed website
(https://octestbed.org/). This information will be maintained for a minimum of
three years after the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.