* 2130835
* Collaborative Research: Physics-Based Machine Learning for Sub-Seasonal Climate Forecasting
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Arindam Banerjee, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2023
* USD 241,766.00

While the past few decades have seen major advances in weather forecasting on
time scales of days to about a week, making high quality forecasts of key
climate variables such as temperature and precipitation on sub-seasonal time
scales, the time range between 2 weeks and 2 months, continues to challenge
operational forecasters. Skillful climate forecasts on sub-seasonal time scales
would have immense societal value in areas such as agricultural productivity,
hydrology and water resource management, transportation and aviation systems,
and emergency planning for extreme events such as Atlantic hurricanes and
midwestern tornadoes. In spite of the scientific, societal, and financial
importance of sub-seasonal climate forecasting, progress on the problem has been
limited. The project has initiated a systematic investigation of physics-based
machine learning with specific focus on advancing sub-seasonal climate
forecasting. In particular, this project is developing novel machine learning
(ML) approaches for sub-seasonal forecasting by leveraging both limited
observational data as well as vast amounts of dynamical climate model output
data. Further, the project is focusing on improving the dynamical climate models
themselves based on ML with specific emphasis on learning model
parameterizations suitable for accurate sub-seasonal forecasting. The
principles, models, and methodology for physics-based machine learning being
developed in the project will benefit other scientific domains which rely on
dynamical models. The project is establishing a public repository of a benchmark
dataset for sub-seasonal forecasting to engage the wider data science community
and accelerate progress in this critical area. The project is training a new
generation of interdisciplinary scientists who can cross the traditional
boundaries between computer science, statistics, and climate
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project works with two key sources of data for
sub-seasonal forecasting: limited amounts of observational data and vast amounts
of output data from dynamical model simulations, which capture physical laws and
dynamics based on large coupled systems of partial differential equations
(PDEs). The project is investigating the following central question: what is the
best way to learn simultaneously from limited observational data and imperfect
dynamical models for improving sub-seasonal forecasts? The project is building a
framework for physics-based machine that has two inter-linked components: (1)
deduction, in which ML models are trained on dynamical model outputs as well as
limited observations, and (2) induction, in which ML models are used to improve
dynamical models. Across the two components, the project is making fundamental
advances in learning representations, functional gradient descent, transfer
learning, derivative-free optimization and multi-armed bandits, Monte Carlo tree
search, and block coordinate descent. On the climate side, the project is
building an idealized dynamical climate model and doing an in depth
investigation on learning suitable parameterizations for the dynamical model
with ML methods to improve forecast accuracy in the sub-seasonal time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the National Science Foundation's
Harnessing the Data Revolution (HDR) Big Idea
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.