* 2130997
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Natural Hazard and Disaster Reconnaissance (RAPID) Facility 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Joseph Wartman, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,183,196.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high-performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center,
and Experimental Facilities, including a natural hazards and post-disaster
reconnaissance research facility. Information about NHERI resources is available
at the NHERI web portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). Awards made for NHERI
contribute to NSF's role in the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program
(NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). NHERI
Experimental Facilities will provide access to their experimental resources,
user services, and data management infrastructure for NSF-supported research and
education awards. This award will renew the Natural Hazard and Disaster
Reconnaissance (RAPID) facility of NHERI from September 1, 2021, to September
30, 2025. The University of Washington and its partners (Oregon State
University, University of Florida, and Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University) will continue to maintain, operate, and enhance the RAPID facility
through this award. As underscored in the NHERI Science Plan, modeling and
simulation lie at the center of the natural hazard community's broader goal to
understand, simulate, and predict the performance of built, natural, and social
systems during and after natural hazards events. The RAPID facility's principal
scientific goal is to inform natural hazards computational simulation models,
infrastructure design and performance assessment methods, and social impact
analysis by supporting the collection, development, and evaluation of high-
quality disaster data sets. By enabling the prompt collection of high-resolution
data sets, advanced reconnaissance instrumentation plays a central role in
providing the academic, research, and professional communities with an
unprecedented volume of high-quality, open-source, engineering, geophysical,
social, and behavioral data. Field data generated by the RAPID facility will be
archived in the NHERI DesignSafe web portal. The RAPID facility's outreach
programs include training workshops that provide researchers with the practical
knowledge required to take RAPID instrumentation into the field and successfully
collect data that advance their research and initiatives to engage undergraduate
and graduate students in natural hazards-related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RAPID facility portfolio includes over 100
unique field instruments, including technologies to collect three-dimensional,
image-based, advanced survey data to serve multiple disciplines. Among such
technologies are terrestrial lidar systems capable of scanning ranges up to 2.4
km for landscape-scale mapping and smaller, highly portable systems for mapping
at a local site scale in as little as two minutes. Other geomatics technologies
include various uncrewed aircraft systems with real-time kinematic positioning
systems to enable high accuracy surveying, small fixed-wing aircraft with long
flight times and the ability to map large regions, and an aerial lidar platform.
Additional instruments include portable, vehicle-mounted "street view"-type
imaging systems; seismometer and accelerometer arrays; ground investigation
equipment, including a wireless multi-channel analysis of surface wave system;
an autonomous hydrographic survey vessel for acquiring bathymetry; and water
level gauges and flow velocity meters. The RAPID facility has developed and
maintains the reconnaissance mobile software application RApp ("RAPID
application"), which integrates the collection of field data such as complex
questionnaires, photos, video, audio, and metadata associated with RAPID
instrumentation data collection. The RAPID facility also hosts high-performance
computing resources to expedite the processing and visualization of field data
and provides data processing support to facility users after they return from
deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.