* 2130512
* Developing an Inclusive National Model to Support the Success of Low-Income Graduate Students in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Sergey Grigorian, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,910.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley, which is a Hispanic Serving
Institution. Over the 5-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 60
unique full-time students who are pursuing graduate degrees in Mathematics or
Physics. Incoming graduate students will receive up to two years of scholarship
support. This project will provide pathways to graduate study in mathematics or
physics to a broad set of students, including those with strong quantitative
skills in STEM from other disciplines that may not have majored in mathematics
or physics. To build a level playing field for all project scholars independent
of their prior access or support, a bridge program from an undergraduate to a
doctoral degree will be established. This will build student skills through
suggested course sequences and intensive mentoring, bridging the gap in
preparation, confidence, and resilience, without increasing time to graduation.
This project will support Masters’ students, who are interested in doctoral
studies and who will be among the top of their class in terms of academic
preparation. Because the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley has a very high
proportion of Hispanic students, this project has the potential to significantly
broaden participation in STEM fields and to learn how amalgamated evidence-based
student support and mentoring techniques support progression through graduate
school and graduation with advanced mathematics or physics degrees in this
student population. Another important broader impact is the project's strong
potential to increase the number of domestic low-income students in doctoral
programs, who in turn could become the faculty of the future in Physics and
Mathematics - an urgent national need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project will provide a
strong foundation in mathematics and physics for students that includes positive
culture, resources, and preparation needed for graduate study in mathematics or
physics. This project will emphasize best practices in mentoring, including both
high expectations and academic support, integrated with holistic, non-dyadic
mentoring, a strong psychosocial component, community-building activities, and
career preparation. The project will study the effectiveness of these approaches
in a cohort that will involve the current population of students at the
institution. This project will investigate the impact that the academic programs
and the resulting learning communities have on student retention, timely
progression through graduate programs, self-efficacy and confidence, positive
perception of their mentorship partnerships, and confidence in their own
mentoring abilities. Overall, this project will advance the understanding of
best mentoring practices in a geographic area serving a Hispanic majority.
Results of this project will be disseminated via presentations at local and
national conferences as well as publications in math and physics education
journals and a website and newsletters featuring cohort activities and student
research. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.