* 2130070
* Boosting Access to Data Science Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Michelle Trim, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will provide scholarships to 40 unique full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Informatics or Computer Science in the College of
Information and Computer Sciences (CICS). First-year students will receive four
years of scholarship support and transfer students will receive two-year
scholarships. This project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields
by linking scholarships with evidence-based supports, including faculty and
near-peer mentoring, faculty led advising, mentored research experiences,
graduate school and career preparation, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences. Scholars will work with faculty and near-peer mentors to develop
individual academic plans outlining their areas of interest and steps toward
achieving their goals. The project will also support curriculum improvements
aimed at increasing first-year student retention and decreasing time to
completion in STEM. The data science focus of the informatics major at UMass
Amherst and the diverse population of students served by the institution will
contribute to broadening participation in a critical workforce area. The project
also has the potential to increase understanding about the impact that an
applied educational emphasis within computing can have on the recruitment,
retention, and time to completion for this student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. There are three specific aims: expand access to high quality
data science career and research pathways; improve the retention rate of first-
year students; and decrease time to completion for community college transfer
students. External pressures such as financial stress coupled with psycho-social
factors such as imposter phenomenon, stereotype threat, and lack of role models
have all been documented to impact student success in STEM. Less is known about
the impact of an applied educational focus coupled with discipline-specific
student success supports on the retention and persistence of students who are
first-generation and from populations underrepresented in STEM. Through
interviews and other qualitative methods, the ongoing evaluation of the project
will advance understanding of the student scholars’ perceived efficacy of the
discipline specific support services and the significance of pursuing an applied
educational focus. These results will be compared to existing reports such as
the NSSE (National Study of Student Engagement) and to the results of the annual
UMass Amherst Senior Survey. Additionally, evaluating student success efforts
across the parallel cohorts of community college transfer and 4-year students
will enable project leaders to recognize and report areas where the met and
unmet needs of the two populations diverge. Lessons learned will be disseminated
to the broader STEM and computer science education community. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.