* 2130058
* Retaining Students in STEM on a Commuter Campus with Efficient High Impact Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Daniel Lawson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,439,824.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the recruitment,
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at University of Michigan-Dearborn. The project aims
to adapt high impact practices and support services, that have been proven to
benefit students on residential campuses, to a 100% commuter population composed
of a diverse group of students in metro-Detroit. Over its duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 56 unique first year, full time students pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in the Biological Sciences, Biochemistry, Computer and
Information Science, Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Industrial and Systems
Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Computer Engineering, Mathematics,
Environmental Science, Bioengineering, and Chemistry (ACS Certified). Selected
first year students will receive four-year scholarships along with academic and
social support, research opportunities, and professional development. These
interventions are specifically designed to accommodate the schedules of commuter
students, who typically live at home and have commitments that prevent them from
participating in high impact practices. The scholars will be placed in 2-3
common classes during their first year to build a cohort community, receiving
direct and intentional peer support in their math and chemistry classes.
Dedicated mentoring by faculty and professional advising by a trained project
coordinator will be provided, while support services that are delivered either
remotely or at convenient times, will be available to the scholars throughout
their four years on campus. A new, paid undergraduate research experience called
“Research Rotations” intended to broaden exposure to research in various
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields and to foster a
sense of belonging will allow students the opportunity to work closely with
faculty on a part-time basis, investigating multiple research projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase degree
completion in STEM disciplines for low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The specific objectives include: maintaining a
first to second year retention rate of 85%, attaining a 50% four-year graduation
rate, and adapting existing, proven interventions for commuter students who have
limited time due to outside responsibilities. Cohort building, peer mentoring,
active learning, and research experiences have all proven to be effective
strategies for increasing retention and graduation rates on traditional,
residential campuses. For commuter students, especially those with low income,
many of these interventions are inaccessible because of constraints on their
time due to financial, work, or family obligations. This project aims to adapt
these support structures, introducing more flexible time commitments or remote
access, and will study the effectiveness of these adaptations on persistence,
student learning, and retention and graduation rates in STEM. An external
evaluator will measure the success of the project, determining which
interventions and what frequency of participation is correlated with meeting the
objectives. The project has the potential to advance understanding of effective
and efficient retention strategies for students on commuter campuses, including
community colleges. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the educational
experiences of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about best
practices for academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.