* 2130192
* Probing Cellular Dynamic Mechanobiology Using Human Cardiomyocytes on a Stimuli-Responsive Nano-Topographic Substrate
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* James Henderson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 10/31/2024
* USD 406,551.00

This grant will support a multidisciplinary research that will enable new
approaches in dynamic cell mechanobiology and smart biomaterials. Traditionally,
cell mechanobiology is studied using static culture systems. Though useful,
these systems provide little knowledge as to how the cells respond to a dynamic
changing microenvironment, such as in the body. This project aims to develop in
vitro models and approaches that include time-dependent mechano-structural cues
to cells. These physical cues are important to regulating of cellular morphology
(shape), differentiation (what cells become), and function at each phase of
tissue development or healing. The knowledge gained through this project will
have a broad impact and various applications in the scientific fields related to
developmental cell biology and cardiac pathophysiology. This project is also
designed to integrate research, education, and diversity with an emphasis on
strengthening research exposure and opportunities at different education levels.
The educational component of this project aims to help raise the awareness and
familiarity of high-school students and undergraduate students with
interdisciplinary, emerging and socially compelling directions within biomedical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the present research is to use an
in vitro shape-memory polymer (SMP) platform to investigate how dynamic
topographic structural cues affect cellular mechanobiology, with a particular
emphasis on the focal adhesion dynamics of human cardiomyocytes. The combination
of dynamic biomaterial substrates, hiPSC technology and genome editing will
provide a great potential to establish new analytical tools and in vitro model
systems for broadly studying time-dependent mechano-structural cues in dynamic
cell mechanobiology. This dynamic platform will allow us to test our hypothesis
that extracellular topographic changes will dictate the different dynamic
responses of both periphery focal adhesions and sarcomere-linked costameres of
cardiomyocytes, thereby reorganizing myofibril structures and controlling
contractile functions. This project aims to study how dynamic structural cues
would regulate periphery focal adhesions (Objective 1) and cardiac-specific
sarcomere-linked costameres (Objective 2), and how mechanotransduction signaling
pathways (FAK and YAP/TAZ) are involved in these cellular developmental
processes (Objective 3).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.