* 2130501
* Recognizing Science Scholars' Potential through Access and Engagement
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2027
* Thomas Bruflat, Saint Paul College-A community & Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low- income students with demonstrated financial
need at Saint Paul College, an urban community and technical college with a
large population of students from populations traditionally underrepresented in
STEM. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
approximately 80 unique full and part time students who are pursuing associates
degrees primarily in Science and Engineering Technology. Students will be
awarded up to $16,000 over up to eight semesters, including summer. The “Science
Scholar” students participate in relationship-building co-curricular activities:
faculty and peer mentoring, science-related campus events and service-learning
activities, and a semester long undergraduate research project. The Science and
Engineering Technology A.S. program encourages transfer or entrance to the
workforce, so students can work while continuing towards their B.S, degree. The
educational research on the effect of the project on student success,
experience, and career choice will help inform science education and co-
curricular engagement at many two-year schools with a diverse student
pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The first major objective is to recruit and award scholarships
to these students, using internal recruitment strategies and partnerships with
area high schools. The project will also increase participation of students from
groups underrepresented in STEM due to the diversity in the pool of potential
students. The recruitment events at partner high schools will expose high school
students to STEM career opportunities and solidify a pipeline of students coming
to the two-year institution. The scholarship amount is approximately the cost of
tuition and fees for a full-time student, so the first expected outcome is the
scholarships will increase the number of students completing an A.S. degree. The
second objective is to add the relationship-building, co-curricular, high impact
practices (HIPs) to the scholarship program. Previous research, mainly performed
at universities, suggests scholarships combined with support services increased
student success and promote access. Hence, an expected second outcome is an
increase in retention and student success. The third objective is to perform and
disseminate educational research on the effectiveness of the scholarship/HIPs on
student success (course success, retention, and graduation/transfer), science
attitudes, and career choice. A mixed- methods approach will link survey
responses to student records, and the focus groups will give context to the
quantitative data. Further, there is a notable gap of applied science education
research coming from two-year institutions. The dissemination of the project
findings, the third project outcome, will play a small role in closing this gap.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.