* 2130651
* SEPCORPS Model - SEParating CORtical and SPinal -level motor control responses using transcranial direct current stimulation and transcutaneous electrical stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Albert Titus, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 11/30/2024
* USD 304,932.00

This project designs computer representations of the brain and spinal cord in
order to better understand how humans move. The software is also built to
duplicate how brain and spinal cord systems adapt to change, such as through
injury. The researchers will use this software as part of an experimental study
that explores medical technology used in brain stimulation and muscle
stimulation to improve how it is used in healthcare. The computer
representations will then be used to understand the interactions of these
biological systems in human movement. The specific intents of this study will
look at the brain’s adaptation in relation to the spinal cord’s role in
modifying movement behavior based on the information it receives from the body’s
natural sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our overarching goal for this project is
to develop the first corticospinal model that can capture cortical and spinal-
level motor contributions modified by neurostimulation. The researchers will
accomplish this by first building the model around healthy subjects performing a
volitional cursor movement task on an in-house built human-machine interface.
The motions will be perturbed with transcutaneous neuromuscular stimulation,
allowing spinal-level stimulus-response behaviors to be modeled. Then, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)-based systems analysis will be applied to implement
mappings of the cortical controller to define the brain-muscle pathway in motor
execution. These subject-specific tuned models will support the same cursor
movement task experiments, but with perturbations being applied at both cortical
and spinal levels using neurostimulation (non-invasive brain stimulation +
neuromuscular stimulation). The measured effect will be leveraged by the
computational model to separate cortical and spinal-level contributions, along
with the inherent sensory-motor responses. This model is hypothesized to have
translational application in the optimization of neurostimulation strategies and
their related rehabilitation outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.