* 2130259
* AIM Scholars Program– Accomplish-Innovate-Motivate
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2027
* Hamza Raheel, Bismarck State College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,368,264.00

The project, AIM Scholars – Accomplish-Innovate-Motivate, will contribute to
meeting the national need for well-educated scientists, engineers, and
technicians in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) at
Bismarck State College. Bismarck State College in North Dakota will award
scholarships to 138 unique scholars/250 scholarships to academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need, who are pursuing associate and
baccalaureate degrees in Applied Science. Both full-time and part-time students
are eligible to apply for scholarships. In addition, the project will foster an
ecosystem of academic activities and co-curricular student supports that
scaffold student success. The project builds on a prior successful S-STEM award
and the research literature by leveraging existing student-centered
institutional infrastructure and developing and implementing additional
activities and supports based on lessons learned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall purpose of the project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need.
Specifically, the project’s goals are to (1) recruit, enroll, and award
scholarships to low-income, talented students into STEM programs; (2) provide
student support services to increase retention and graduation rate of AIM
Scholars to degree achievement; and (3) build relationships with industry to
enhance experiential learning and internship opportunities for AIM Scholars.
Activities include pre-enrollment assessment; advising, counseling, and career
development; individualized action plans; faculty and peer mentoring;
internships; a one-credit student success course; and training and professional
development for faculty and peer mentors. These activities will create a system
of curricular and co-curricular supports for students in applied science fields,
a majority of which are focused on STEM-oriented technician areas. Academic and
career pathways will be facilitated by established articulation agreements
between Bismarck and other four-year programs at colleges and universities in
North Dakota. Importantly, the knowledge generating component of the effort will
investigate the relationship between project components and expected outcomes,
such as student outcomes (e.g., retention and graduation, time to completion,
and grade point average) and institutional outcomes (e.g., institutional
commitment to continuing successful project activities). This project is funded
by NSF/s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.