* 2130157
* Humanitarian Engineering and Science Ambassadors (HESA): Leveraging Funds of Knowledge for Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2027
* Jeffrey Shragge, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,432,999.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Colorado School of Mines. Mines is a public university focused on
science and engineering. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships for at least 43 unique full-time students who are pursuing graduate
degrees in Humanitarian Engineering and Science (with specialties in
Environmental Engineering, Geophysics, Geological Engineering) as well as
students in these partner disciplines who are doing humanitarian engineering and
science projects. Students are expected to complete their degrees within two
years. Those enrolled in the project will receive a $10,000 scholarship per
year. In the Humanitarian Engineering and Science master’s program, students
integrate knowledge from engineering, geoscience, and social science to solve
contemporary challenges alongside the communities they seek to serve. Students
enrolled in the project will have opportunities to participate in mentorship and
professional development activities that connect their STEM learning with their
funds of knowledge, or the skills and knowledge that people develop through
their daily work and family lives but are infrequently recognized as knowledge
in formal classroom settings. This project will: 1) mentor students to view
their funds of knowledge as assets in their STEM learning and career development
and 2) mentor faculty to make their classes and advising practice more inclusive
of the funds of knowledge of low-income students. The proposed project aims to
advance understanding of best practices for using the funds of knowledge
framework to support low-income students pursuing graduate STEM degrees.
Master’s level training is vital because it will allow high-achieving, low-
income students to build their knowledge base through advanced coursework, to
gain proficiency in independent research and community-based projects, to access
jobs that offer more leadership and higher pay, and/or to transition into PhD
programs. Finally, the unique focus of humanitarian engineering and science
training means that students will tackle key societal problems that impact
under-served communities, such as air and groundwater pollution, food
(in)security, geohazards, and access to clean water and affordable
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the Humanitarian Engineering and
Science Ambassadors (HESA) project will provide scholarships and mentoring
opportunities to low-income graduate students whose thesis research or non-
thesis practicum combines a disciplinary specialty in environmental engineering,
geological engineering or geophysics, and others, with social scientific
coursework in sustainable community development. The role of students’ “funds of
knowledge” in their academic success will be investigated. HESA will provide a
formal platform for low-income students to learn and practice connecting skills
at the graduate level. Students will have an opportunity to map their own funds
of knowledge and connect them with their STEM learning and professional
development. A mixed methods (interviews and surveys) approach will be used to
study whether those practices enhance students’ confidence, interest in STEM,
and sense of graduation certainty. This will allow us to investigate: 1) whether
“connecting” skills can be developed through mentorship; 2) whether connecting
skills enhance low-income students’ self-efficacy, STEM identities, and
persistence beliefs; and 3) the role of funds of knowledge in graduate training
and career transitions. Results of this project will be disseminated through
webinars, peer-reviewed journal publications, workshops, and presentations at
conferences such as the American Society of Engineering Education. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.