* 2130101
* Democratizing Access to the Emerging Interdisciplinary Tech Workforce for Low-Income Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Kelly McGinn, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,323,467.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students in the College of Science and
Technology (CST) at Temple University. In particular the project intends to
provide 96 scholarships to support 32 unique scholarship recipients to support
the completion of STEM degrees in chemistry, biology, physics, mathematics, and
earth and environmental sciences coupled with a minor in information science.
The driving force behind the project team's efforts is to democratize access to
economic opportunities in the technology-focused STEM workforce for high-
achieving, low-income students. Lack of knowledge and skills in information
sciences can be a barrier to workforce competitiveness and to economic mobility
for low-income students. To overcome this barrier, the project leaders have
identified intentional, multidisciplinary academic pathways that provide high-
achieving, low-income students with the ability to focus on their chosen primary
STEM major, such as biology or earth science, in combination with specialized
study in information science. Such integrated academic pathways align with
emerging needs for scientists to have more knowledge and skills in information
science to collect, represent, analyze, and discover meaningful models by
applying computational solutions to large data sets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project hypothesizes that providing financial support to explore pathways for
integrated study of STEM and information science, supported through cohort-based
curricular and co-curricular activities, can ultimately lead to higher STEM
degree attainment and workforce entry among low-income students. Through this
project, researchers will develop and implement a model program that supports
students from low-income backgrounds to complete academic degree programs with
clearly identified academic pathways that promote degree attainment for
undergraduate STEM majors and add value through integrated study of information
science. The approach builds on evidence-based practices that have been shown to
positively impact individual student outcomes; program elements are designed to
emphasize connections across disciplines, integrate socially relevant
applications of content knowledge, connect to professional practices, and
develop identity and community through service-learning projects. Additionally,
the program is also designed to broaden participation of underrepresented groups
in computing, with program elements that implement evidence-based approaches for
diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM education. The project will advance
knowledge about the perceptions of STEM majors in choosing to pursue integrated
academic pathways, as well as the impact on academic and workforce preparation
for STEM students who complete such pathways. This project is funded by NSF's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.