* 2130073
* Gateway to success: combining financial, academic and psychosocial supports to promote academic success of low-income STEM majors
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2027
* Neil Fitzgerald, Marist College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,480,254.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Marist College. Marist College is a comprehensive, independent
institution that emphasizes the liberal arts. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund 23 unique full-time students pursuing undergraduate degrees in
biology, biochemistry, chemistry, and environmental science. First year students
will receive up to four years of scholarship support. The project aims to
improve retention and graduation rates in STEM fields by combining financial,
academic, and co-curricular support structures. Support activities include
holistic academic advising, an academic cohort model, career planning, and
science-oriented programming in designated residence hall communities.
Supplemental peer instruction in introductory or ‘gateway’ science courses aims
to improve academic performance, as gateway courses often present barriers to
persistence in STEM fields. The number of low-income college students is
increasing nationally; therefore, increasing the success in STEM majors has the
potential to broaden entry into STEM fields. This project aims to add to body of
research on how the roles of financial support, mentoring, career advising, and
supplemental instruction in gateway courses affect the retention and graduation
of low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to increase STEM degree completion among low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. In particular, there are four
specific aims: 1) reduce financial need in order to allow students to focus on
academic success, 2) improve performance in gateway STEM courses, 3) provide
strong mentoring and career planning support, and 4) foster a sense of belonging
to both the campus and community while adding to the professional formation of
students’ science identities. Socioeconomic factors, performance in gateway
courses, and psychosocial factors are known to affect persistence of low-income
students. In the context of a private comprehensive institution, less is known
about how targeted interventions can improve the experience of low-income
students and their academic persistence. By providing financial support through
scholarships and academic support through robust programming, it is expected
students will experience academic success and higher rates of graduation.
Participation in the program is expected to increase students' academic
persistence and decrease students' withdrawal from gateway courses; it also aims
to increase retention rates overall. This project has the potential to advance
understanding of the programmatic aspects that are most important for retaining
low-income students in STEM. The project will be evaluated with quantitative and
qualitative data from institutional data, grade reports, and surveys which will
be triangulated with qualitative data from focus groups and interviews. The
results of the project will be made available via conference presentations,
publications, and professional development workshops. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.