* 2130262
* Enhancing Underrepresented Participation ​in Mathematics &amp; Statistics: Mentoring From Junior to Master’s
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Farshid Hajir, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,499,774.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at The University of Massachusetts Amherst. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full time students who are pursuing
a bachelor’s degree in Mathematics and a master’s degree in Statistics or
Applied Mathematics in a single plus-one year. Third year undergraduate students
will receive up to three years of scholarships. This project aims to increase
recruitment into and persistence in Mathematics by combining financial support
and comprehensive structured mentoring from faculty and peers in the form of
regular meetings and aligned coursework. In addition to scholarships, students
are provided summer research stipends as well as a tuition waiver and half-time
teaching assistantship during the final year. A key focus of the project will be
career preparation through collaborations with several industry partners. The
project will contribute to our understanding of common barriers to success in
the mathematical sciences for undergraduate students from underrepresented and
historically excluded populations, both through research conducted by the
project team and through extensive training for faculty through the Center for
Minorities in the Mathematical Sciences. If implemented, the project will
contribute to the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce
by adding highly skilled graduates with bachelor’s degrees in Mathematics and
master’s degrees in Applied Mathematics or Statistics. The project also has the
potential to advance knowledge of best practices for increasing the number of
low-income, underrepresented, and historically excluded recipients of bachelor’s
degrees in Mathematics and master’s degrees in Applied Mathematics and
Statistics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Existing research across fields suggests that
persistence and achievement in pursuing undergraduate and graduate degrees is
influenced by students’ self-efficacy, which refers to their belief in their own
capabilities, their participation in goal setting activities, and their outcome
expectations. However, little is known about how well this existing research
applies to students in the mathematical sciences, especially those who are also
from underrepresented and historically excluded populations. This project will
investigate how self-efficacy is impacted by participation in the proposed
activities, how goal setting impacts successful completion of a plus-one
master’s program in Applied Mathematics or Statistics, and how outcome
expectations vary and change throughout three years of participation in the
proposed activities. Results of this project will be made available through
peer-reviewed articles and through presentations at conferences. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.