* 2130816
* AF: Small: Hardness of Approximation: Classical and New
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Subhash Khot, New York University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2024
* USD 350,000.00

Theory of Computation (ToC) studies the fundamental nature of computation with
its roots going back to logic and computability theory pioneered by Godel,
Church, and Turing. In its modern form, ToC has two complementary aspects: to
design efficient algorithms to solve computational problems (understanding the
power of computation) and to show limitations, if any, on the efficiency that
may be achieved (understanding the limits of computation). The latter aspect is
called computational complexity; it aims at demonstrating that certain
computational problems cannot be solved efficiently. While computational
complexity sounds like a bearer of pessimism, it does lead to deep insights into
nature of computation and sometimes having computationally hard problems is
actually useful and necessary (e.g., to build cryptographic systems). A central
phenomenon in computational complexity is "NP-completeness", whereby researchers
strongly believe that a class of computational problems called the "NP-complete
problems" have no efficient algorithms. A well-known example is the Traveling
Salesperson (TSP) problem, where the input is a set of cities and all pairwise
distances between them and the goal is to compute a tour that visits all the
cities and traverses the minimum total distance. It turns out that a host of
problems arising in practice are NP-complete and since these do need to be
solved in practice, a natural approach is to seek efficient algorithms that
compute approximate solutions. The study of approximation gives rise to a
further phenomenon known as "hardness of approximation", namely that many such
problems turn out to be hard even to approximate. This project aims to deepen
the understanding of hardness of approximation and related mathematical tools.
The project topic forms a bridge between algorithms and complexity, and also as
a bridge between computer science and mathematics, especially combinatorics,
analysis, and geometry. The research aspect of the project will be integrated
with education (teaching courses and advising students at both undergraduate and
graduate levels) and dissemination activities (research talks, writing surveys,
etc.). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Starting with the foundational Probabilistically
Checkable Proofs (PCP) Theorem in the early 1990s, there are numerous
influential results in Hardness of Approximation, including the recent proof of
the 2-to-2 Games Conjecture (by the investigator and collaborators). The project
focuses on further questions in hardness of approximation and analytic tools
needed to answer these questions. It considers the classical setting of
polynomial-time approximability as well as the new settings of fixed parameter
tractability and fine-grained complexity. In the classical setting, the main
focus of the project is to characterize approximability of Constraint
Satisfaction Problems (CSPs) on satisfiable instances and developing analytic
tools towards such a characterization. To elaborate, one notes that given a
satisfiable instance of a "three-satisfiability" (3SAT) problem, it is known how
to efficiently find an assignment that satisfies 7/8 fraction of its clauses and
moreover, that it is NP-complete to do better. The project will focus on proving
analogous results for every CSP. In recent years, researchers have been making
progress in neighboring areas of fixed parameter tractability and fine-grained
complexity. In fixed parameter tractability, one typically considers a problem
that is known to be NP-complete (e.g. Vertex Cover) and seeks an algorithm whose
running time is a (fixed) polynomial in the size of the input (e.g. the graph)
and an arbitrary function of a designated parameter (e.g. the vertex cover
size). In fine-grained complexity, one considers a problem that is known to have
a polynomial-time algorithm, and the concern is the precise exponent of the
polynomial. In both settings, it is natural to consider approximations as well
as exact solutions. In the fixed parameter setting, the project will focus on
proving the analogue of the classical PCP Theorem. In the fine-grained setting,
the focus will be on some geometric problems such as Closest Pair, Farthest
Pair, Diameter, and Edit Distance. The project will also study analytic
questions that are not necessarily related to hardness of approximation, but are
among investigator's long-term goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.