* 2130298
* Florida Information Technology Graduation Attainment Pathways
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2026
* Michael Georgiopoulos, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,679,888.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Florida International University (FIU), University of Central Florida
(UCF) and the University of South Florida (USF). Over its 5-year duration, this
project will provide scholarships to 150 students who are pursuing degrees in
Computer Science, Information Technology, Computer Engineering, and
Cybersecurity. Undergraduate students will receive up to two-years of
scholarship support and graduate students will receive up to two-years of
scholarship support. The project’s focus is on (1) creating a hybrid (physical-
virtual) learning community that spans the three institutions, and (2) offering
professional pathway experiences (research, internship, entrepreneurship) to
each of its scholars, reflecting the scholar’s interest to pursue graduate
studies, work for industry/government, or work for a small company/start own
business, upon graduation. The project will inform efforts to increase
persistence and graduation of low-income students in the computing fields,
addressing a national priority, and offering professional pathway opportunities
to each scholar that will provide them with comprehensive educational
experiences that will help them to identify (or verify) the desired professional
pathway that they can pursue upon graduation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
has three research goals. First is to investigate the factors that impact low-
income and underrepresented students’ perception of the value and cost of future
pathways including graduate school. Second is to study the impact of the Flit-
GAP hybrid learning community and planned programming on students’ belonging,
persistence, and pathways. Third is to determine the enacted nature of the
hybrid learning community for formative improvement and translating to other
contexts. The knowledge generation component will involve three qualitative and
quantitative components in parallel for a mixed methods convergent and holistic
triangulation design, with primary and complementary methods to emphasize both
generalizability and authenticity of context. First, a primarily qualitative
interview study investigates Flit-GAP students' experiential learning
experiences and perceptions of future pathways. Second, a primarily quantitative
longitudinal cohort study investigates paired Flit-GAP and non-Flit-GAP students
to look for significant differences in persistence, graduation, and future
pathway perceptions. Third, a primarily ethnographic study observes the many
planned interactions in the hybrid virtual/in-person cross institutional
learning community and examines the nuanced context that supports the Flit-GAP
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.