* 2130328
* Collaborative Research: Improving Access to Career and Educational Development for Talented, Low-Income Students through the Flexible Internships-Research-Education Model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Sherri Frizell, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2027
* USD 954,605.00

The project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Rice University, Texas Southern University, Prairie View A&amp;M
University, and Jackson State University. Across all four partner institutions,
the project will support roughly 220 academically talented domestic students
from low-income backgrounds with demonstrated financial need to pursue and
complete master's degrees in engineering, computer science, mathematics and data
science. Students will select from among disciplines in one of three technical
tracks: biotechnology; sustainability and resilience; and digital twinning. (The
latter refers to the use of a virtual model of a system that is updated with
real-time data and used to support simulations and decision making.) The core of
the project is a carefully crafted combination of scholarships, academic and
career development, mentoring, and cohort development based on preliminary
student data and the literature on scholar success and workforce development.
The programmatic elements are structured to remove barriers and to foster
students’ successful matriculation, graduation, and entry into the workforce.
Rather than focus on traditional education models that often set up a dichotomy
between research experiences and internships that lead to singular career paths,
the Flexible Internships-Research-Education (FIRE) model employed here is
designed to give students experiences that integrate both research and
internships, facilitated by workforce partners, at both the undergraduate and
graduate level. Towards this end an important component of the project is a
partnership with the Engineer Research and Development Center, a major employer
specializing in civil and military engineering, geospatial sciences, water
resources, and environmental sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project are to: (1) increase the number of domestic low-income academically
talented students with demonstrated financial need obtaining master’s degrees
and entering the US STEM workforce in areas of critical need; (2) implement and
evaluate the impact of the FIRE model on student success; and (3) implement,
study, and disseminate a multiteam systems model for collaboration toward career
and educational development. Scholars will be part of multi-disciplinary, multi-
institutional cohorts based on their year of matriculation as well as their
chosen technical tracks and will be mentored by faculty and practitioners. The
project’s mixed-method research plan is guided by three principal research
questions centered on better understanding how multi-institutional teams
function. First, how do the varied norms, values, and priorities of individuals
in different disciplines/organizations manifest in teamwork issues such as
communication and work style differences? Second, how does the overall
organizational culture interact with that from each discipline or team within
the multiteam system, and how does the blended culture impact conflict
resolution? Finally, how do leadership structures and institutional or team-
level conditions support collaboration and progress towards team goals, in this
case successful academic outcomes for scholars? Major data sources include
interviews, surveys of scholars and leadership team members, and measures of
student success. Project materials, findings and outcomes will be disseminated
widely to the STEM education community. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.