* 2130075
* Accelerating STEM Success through Experiences for Transfer and Third-Year Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Jeffrey Olimpo, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,483,492.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP). Designated as a Doctoral
University with Very High Research Activity (Carnegie Classification), UTEP
serves 24,879 students (~85% undergraduates), 83% of whom self-identify as
Hispanic and 49% of whom self-identify as the first in their families to attend
college. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 50
unique full-time students who are pursuing Bachelor’s degrees in one of more
than ten fields (e.g., biological sciences, geological sciences, mathematics)
represented in UTEP’s College of Science. This will include equal numbers of
native UTEP juniors and students transferring to UTEP from El Paso Community
College, who will each receive two-year scholarships. Project participants will
be involved in a suite of curricular and co-curricular activities to include an
interdisciplinary course-based undergraduate research experience (CURE),
leadership and community engagement course, faculty-mentored research
experiences, and professional development workshops. In addition to
participating in such high impact practices, scholars will also have an
opportunity to disseminate the findings of their research at local and national
conferences and will create an ePortfolio documenting their accomplishments
during their time at the university. The project aims to establish close
partnerships with a diversity of academic and non-academic stakeholders who
contribute to a broadening understanding of how to best support STEM majors in
achieving their personal and professional ambitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. While
student engagement in high-impact practices such as those mentioned above has
been shown to foster student success, these opportunities are not always
accessible to all student populations, nor do all students necessarily
participate equally in such experiences. To address this disparity and to better
understand the relative impact of high-impact practices on the cognitive,
affective, and psychosocial outcomes of students in this population, a research
component has been designed using mixed methods approaches. Data from previously
validated survey measures and semi-structured/focus group interviews aim to shed
light on how the projects' activities influence scholars’ science identity,
leadership skills development, researcher self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and
academic self-concept. Social network analyses will be performed to examine how
scholars’ personal and professional networks evolve, if at all, over the course
of their participation in the project, especially with respect to the types of
capital that they acquire and access. This project aims to contribute new
knowledge regarding the efficacy and impact of various curricular and co-
curricular interventions on student-level outcomes, and will also address the
contextual features that ultimately contribute to the broader goal of increasing
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Results of this project, including products
generated by both the research team and project scholars, will be made available
through peer-reviewed publications and presentations and will be highlighted on
UTEP’s website. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.