* 2130681
* EAGER: Epidemic Spread Modeling Using Hard Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Evgenia Smirni, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 205,708.00

Data-driven prediction models of the spread of COVID-19 are critical for guiding
public health policy. &lt;br/&gt;Epidemiological models that use as input data
in aggregated form can be used for prediction but the &lt;br/&gt;granularity of
input can limit model usability. Models that are individual-centric are a lot
more flexible but require as input the time series of every person's movement
within a population: the exact location of each individual, the duration of the
individual's stay at the location, and the transition to the next location. Due
to privacy issues, accurate data of such granularity are not publicly available.
The focus of this project is on the development of a prediction ecosystem that
is individual-centric &lt;br/&gt;and can be used to foresee the spread of a
highly contagious disease within a population that is active within an urban
area. Such a model can be used to develop what-if scenarios to mitigate the
spread of the disease and can become an indispensable tool for guiding policy
decisions in future pandemics. This project will provide a flexible tool for
epidemic modeling of COVID-19 and future pandemics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project advocates the usage of agent-based models as an alternative to machine-
learning &lt;br/&gt;for accurate prediction of the spread of contagious
diseases. The aim is to create a prediction ecosystem for evaluating detailed
scenarios: geographical restrictions of mobility, work from home
orders/advisories, school closures (and partial openings under different
conditions), points of interest operating under various capacities, time in
quarantine, and vaccination priority, among others. The above scenarios can be
modeled at various levels of detail with the aim to keep the model input small,
compact, and flexible, but without compromising its prediction ability. Analysis
of the above within the agent-based model setting identifies the most effective
yet feasible input abstractions, similar to identifying the importance of
feature selection in machine learning models. This tool, driven by anonymized
cell-phone data will provide a robust modeling ecosystem that captures the
effect of mitigation measures of contagious diseases using stochastic models
that are complementary to machine-learning ones. Through this project,
undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the art of applied data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.