* 2130884
* Collaborative Research: BBSRC-NSF/BIO: An autonomous registry system for plant microRNAs
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Michael Axtell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 11/30/2024
* USD 124,309.00

MicroRNAs are short RNA molecules (~20 to 24 nucleotides) that function to
regulate levels of gene expression in animals and plants. The targets of
microRNAs function in many key cellular processes, including development, biotic
and abiotic stress responses. In crop plants, microRNAs have demonstrated roles
supporting phenotypes important for fertility and yield, and thus contribute to
food security and the agricultural economy. As with all features of genomes,
cataloging and tracking microRNA genes consistently and across genomes using
appropriate gene names is crucial. This requires uniform and rigorous assignment
of identifiers, periodic reassessment and screening using the latest criteria,
and community input. It is crucial that different publications and databases use
the same name for a particular microRNA, and homologs in different species
should ideally receive consistent names. A single, central registry for microRNA
nomenclature and quality control has existed since 2004 to name and catalogue
microRNAs: miRBase. miRBase faces challenges in the current era of 'big data'.
In particular, registration of new microRNAs currently relies on time-consuming,
manual curation. Inexpensive sequencing of genomes and small RNAs has massively
increased the discovery rate of microRNAs, exceeding the capacity of miRBase for
manual curation of new entries. Yet the need for a single trusted resource is
more acute than ever, for rapid registration of new microRNAs, and to assess
both existing annotations and new. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project between the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center and Pennsylvania State
University in the US and the University of Manchester in the UK will develop an
autonomous and automated microRNA registry system for miRbase. This will be
integrated with miRBase naming protocols and adding additional quality controls.
The project will resolve a critical problem for the continued growth of the
small RNA field, particularly in plants. By automating submission, curation, and
release of new annotations, this project will eliminate the current reliance on
time-consuming manual annotations to maintain miRBase. This will allow miRBase
to continue to catalyze fundamental discoveries in all areas of biology. The
project will thus build on existing tools to annotate high-confidence microRNAs
from plant small RNA deep sequencing datasets. The project will develop a
pipeline to automatically assign consistent gene names to novel plant microRNA
annotations generated by users from these deep datasets. And the project will
incorporate new interfaces into the miRBase infrastructure to accept and display
user submissions of novel microRNA data, and to expand options for users to
visualize data. An output of the project is training researchers in the analysis
of biological big data and full stack web development -- skill sets in high
demand across the sciences and beyond. The project will also integrate research
with undergraduate education, and it will build on programs to broaden
participation by under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.