* 2130103
* A multi-institutional partnership supporting timely associate and bachelor's degree completion in science and mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Olivia Carducci, East Stroudsburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 11/30/2026
* USD 4,982,181.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at County College of Morris, Lehigh Carbon Community College, Luzerne
County Community College, Northampton Community College, and East Stroudsburg
University. This project is a partnership between 4 regional community colleges
and East Stroudsburg University, a member of the Pennsylvania State System of
Higher Education. Over its 5-year duration, the project will fund scholarships
to 135 unique full-time and part-time students who are pursuing associate and
bachelor’s degrees in 11 STEM fields including biology, biochemistry,
biotechnology, chemical biotechnology, chemistry, computer science, computer
security, environmental science, marine science, mathematics, and physics.
Scholars will receive two-year scholarships to attend a partner community
college and, post-transfer, an additional two years of scholarship support to
attend East Stroudsburg University. The central tenet of the project is scholar
success; addressing student needs is the priority. The project provides a model
program to foster change and broaden student success through support including
scholarships, proactive developmental advocacy holistic advising, cohort
activities, peer mentoring and tutoring, and mentor mediated online education
that fosters development of attitudes and behaviors associated with academic
success. The team will identify and understand success predictors that affect
student retention and degree completion. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Through project
programing and intervention greater than 90% of project scholars will earn an
associate degree and bachelor’s degree with a minimum 2.8 GPA. The project will
reduce the transfer deficit (prerequisite courses missing at the time of
transfer from community college to a 4-year institution), shortening the time to
graduation and thus reducing student debt. The project will also increase
students from underrepresented populations by enacting proven methods that focus
on the student needs and support diverse populations. The project will create
tested, sharable, scalable, and sustainable products that will ensure student
success at the participating institutions and can be applied elsewhere. A
faculty development advising training program among all partner institutions and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania will be established and widely shared
throughout the academic community and the nation. The project will establish how
program practices result in improvements in scholar retention, in GPA, and in
time to graduation. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.