* 2130062
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Non-state Service Provision in the Context of Multiple Extreme Events
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Herschel Thomas, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 04/30/2023
* USD 44,661.00

This research concerns government and non-state actors' capacity to respond to
simultaneous crises involving major disasters. In response to major disaster,
the disaster state often delegates authority and encourages non-state service
provision. Often, response capacity depends on service provision by self-
directed groups and businesses that are not electorally accountable. Little is
known about how the reliance of governments on non-state actors shapes the
ability of the disaster state to respond to compounding crises. Using the state
of Texas response to both COVID 19 and Winter Storm Uri as the compounding
crises of interests, the PIs consider 1) the role of non-state actors in
supplementing state capacity; 2) the implications of reliance on non-state
actors for resource allocation and service provision across differing
communities; and 3) the implications of this reliance for democratic
accountability. Methodologically, the PIs use a longitudinal three wave survey
of local health agencies, emergency management departments, and non-profits
operating in Texas. The PIs focus on the moments of crisis to allow for test of
hypotheses about the role of non-state actors and democratic accountability. The
gathering of baseline data in relatively close proximity to the dual events is
an essential component of this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
provide a baseline for the study of the disaster state. The PIs use a
theoretical framework of state capacity to examine the disaster state and to
integrate scholarship on American governance with literature on non-state
service provision in the field of comparative politics. The PIs contribute to
literature on state strength, distribution of non-state services and democratic
accountability. The PIs conduct three state-wide survey waves in Texas in the
aftermath of COVID 19 and Winter Storm Uri. In addition, the PIs conduct semi-
structured interviews with representatives of government agencies and with
representatives of non-state actors. Surveys will be implemented using the
Qualtrics platform. Respondents for the initial survey will be recruited from
Texasâ€™s 161 local health departments, public health districts, and local health
units. With this survey data, the PIs test three research hypotheses related to
state capacity, public/private interaction, and compounding crises. The PIs will
generate basic scientific advances that may be applied by scholars seeking to
understand and prepare for future multiple hazard situations. This research
includes graduate student training and findings from the study will be shared
with public officials and practitioners through a research and practice
integration workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.