* 2130131
* I-Corps: Peptoid microsphere-coated surfaces for use in treatment of wound healing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Shannon Servoss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an artificial extracellular matrix (aECM) for the treatment of
traumatic injuries and wound healing. The proposed material may lead to more
effective scaffolds and may be crafted to attach to any given substrate. Complex
aECM microspheres may be inserted into a hydrogel-type design or attached to a
larger structure, depending on the application. This proposed technology may
reduce permanent secondary injuries commonly caused by traumatic injuries by
providing stability to the damaged region. In addition, the use of an aECM in
tandem with cell transplantation may encourage cell-to-cell interactions and
ensure that the cell death that occurs post primary impact is minimized. If
successful, the proposed materials may decrease patient recovery time and
decrease cognitive loss in neuronal applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of peptoid microspheres to create an
artificial extracellular matrix (aECM) to support growth of cells. A peptoid
design with alternating charged and aromatic side chains allows for the self-
assembly of microspheres via pi-stacking with diameters ranging from 1.5-3.5
microns in size. The microspheres are resistant to proteolysis making them more
durable in vivo than peptide counterparts. Peptoid microspheres are suitable for
use in aseptic conditions, as the spheres form in an 80% ethanol solution and
sustain no structural deformities when exposed to ultraviolet-sterilization. The
microspheres have been tested for toxicity with multiple cell types and have
proven to be nontoxic. In addition, in previous studies the topographical
features have influenced the differentiation of neural stem cells to neurons and
it was observed that cells arrange differently when the spheres are present in
media. The versatility of this structure and promising initial results suggest
that these microspheres incorporated into an artificial extracellular matrix may
have applications in traumatic injury repair and wound
healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.