* 2130405
* Enhancing Pathways to the PhD in the Mathematical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Joseph Watkins, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 01/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at University of Arizona; University of Texas, Rio Grande Valley; and
California State Polytechnic University, Pomona. The three schools are all
Hispanic-Serving Institutions in the Southwest and span the spectrum of Very
High Research, High Research, and Large Masters institutions. The combined group
contains established Bridge-to-PhD, Masters, and PhD programs. The focus is on
two important transitions: the transition from undergraduate to graduate study
and success in the first two years of PhD study. An intentional, collaborative
planning procedure will enable the team to develop deeper connections to tackle
the most significant obstacles for low-income students to get admitted and
complete PhDs in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Research
shows that students from underrepresented minority groups, women, and students
with economic hardship are at risk of not applying to the appropriate programs,
not being accepted at top programs, and not succeeding in programs they enter.
This project will investigate the best possible environments leading to success
in graduate study, especially toward completion of PhD and job placement
afterwards. The primary goal is to study the effectiveness of institutional
intervention and to investigate conditions under which low-income students
persist and succeed in the mathematical sciences at the graduate level. The
current scope of the project as limited to these three schools will be used to
plan a project with a goal to form a community of mentors and programmatic
structures that advance the best possible environment for success in graduate
study in Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, Statistics, and Data Science. This
project is funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.