* 2130176
* Supporting Student Success: Improving Retention in STEM Fields by Implementing a Workforce Development Research Methods Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2027
* Judith Cebra-Thomas, Millersville University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,499,560.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Millersville University, a regional public institution of
approximately 6500 undergraduate students. Over its 6-year duration, this
project will provide renewable scholarships to 30 distinct full-time, high-
achieving, low-income students (3 cohorts with 10 students each) who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science, earth
science, mathematics, physics, or robotics. In addition to receiving financial
support, scholars will be part of a multi-facet academic and co-curricular
support program. In particular, the project will produce cohorts of well-trained
students who will be prepared to the STEM workforce throughout the region.
Collaborative support networks of local industry, content experts, University
support services, and trained peer/career mentors, will be in place during, and
sustained past, the project's lifetime. In connection with this, the project
will build a Community Building Retention Program (CoBRA) and will include a
partnership with Chincoteague Bay Field Station at Wallops Island, Virginia,
through which an interdisciplinary Workforce Development Program for S-STEM
Scholars will feature informative seminars, mini-research projects, and cohort-
building activities to help prepare students for their STEM careers. Project
investigators will disseminate outcomes and findings related to project
challenges and successes, especially to other public regional institutions
striving to support low-income STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need, the project will pursue several goals. First is to
recruit a diverse set of 30 scholars in 3 cohorts and to implement and analyze a
comprehensive program of academic and co-curricular activities to support,
retain, and graduate these scholars in myriad STEM disciplines. Second is to
implement strategies for building student knowledge and systematically
supporting student academic and career pathways in STEM, including workforce
preparation. Third is to contribute to the knowledge base through project
evaluation by employing qualitative and quantitative techniques to analyze and
gain insights regarding which aspects of the project's support activities, or
combination of activities, are most effective for retention, engagement,
academic performance, workforce preparation, and overall success of students.
And fourth is to yield a sustainable and replicable model, and disseminate
outcomes and findings with respect to this model, to inform other higher-
education professionals and regional institutions seeking to support low-income,
highly talented STEM students. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.