* 2130804
* Hydrogen evolution reaction of microwave-synthesized pristine and metal-doped molybdenum carbides: Insights from electrochemical modeling and in situ visualization
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Jung-Kun Lee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2024
* USD 494,254.00

Increasing energy demands, combined with urgency to decrease greenhouse gas
emissions, has spurred research and development of sustainable chemical and
fuels technologies. Hydrogen is an essential component of many fuels and
chemicals. Catalysts play a central role in the sustainable production of
hydrogen by facilitating hydrogen generation via electrochemical splitting of
water molecules, by a process known as the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction (HER).
Over the past few years, rapid progress has been made in catalyzing hydrogen
evolution using low-cost molybdenum carbide materials, with recently reported
activities rivaling those of the optimum, but precious, platinum catalysts. The
project will continue to advance research and development of molybdenum carbide
catalysts through a coordinated theoretical and experimental approach supported
by advanced characterization techniques. Specific goals include 1) deeper
mechanistic understanding of the surface-catalyzed hydrogen evolution reaction
as promoted by both pure and metal-doped metal carbide materials, 2) elucidation
of catalyst surface structure and composition under reaction conditions, and 3)
identification of catalyst structures and compositions that demonstrate
exceptional stability and durability with time-in-service. Project outcomes will
extend beyond the hydrogen evolution reaction to uncover broader governing
principles that can be used to understand a wide variety of electrochemical
transformations related to applications such as battery technology and fuel
cells. The project will promote training of new generations of scientists and
engineers by offering opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students
- particularly for those from underrepresented groups - to participate in
“green” energy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molybdenum carbide nanoparticles
of various stoichiometry (i.e., Mo(y)C) will be synthesized using a microwave
reaction and sol-gel process. The electrochemical performance with and without
metal dopants will be systematically examined. Transmission electron microscopy
imaging, diffraction, and spectroscopy - energy-dispersive X-ray (EDS) and
electron energy-loss (EELS) - will be employed to elucidate the reactivity-
structure relationships of the catalysts down to the atomic scale. Environmental
transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) will enable these structural dynamics to
be studied in real-time under relevant reaction conditions. Ambient-pressure
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AP­XPS) and Raman spectroscopy will be
utilized to establish a correlation between surface chemistry and reactivity. In
situ characterization will be closely coordinated with kinetic measurements, and
experimental conditions for lowering the anodic overpotential of the water
electrolysis reaction. This will provide critical input for density functional
theory (DFT) electrochemical simulations employing constrained thermodynamics to
determine the surface composition/structure of the catalyst under the HER
conditions including thermodynamic/kinetic limitations. Furthermore, the theory
will complement the experiments by elucidating the HER mechanisms, active sites,
and rate-limiting steps, which will guide the design of catalysts for water
electrolysis. The research will be integrated into educational efforts via
development of new course components and novel education modules that emphasize
the importance of integrated theoretical and experimental efforts to design new
materials tailored for the sustainable manufacturing of fuels and
chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.