* 2130666
* Statistical tools for learning about trait evolution across species
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Michael DeGiorgio, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 596,571.00

Research on evolutionary biology has been centered on understanding trait
variation across species and its contribution to the extraordinary biodiversity
observed on Earth. However, this venture is complicated by a deficiency in
computational tools that can effectively navigate evolutionary relationships
among species or incorporate large and diverse trait datasets generated by
modern experimental studies. Hence, the objective of this project is to expand
existing toolkit through the design of a suite of novel statistical and machine
learning methods for studying trait evolution across species. These tools will
be thoroughly tested through computer simulations, compared to alternative
state-of-the-art approaches, and applied to publicly available datasets to
address specific evolutionary problems. All tools and datasets generated by the
project will be freely and widely disseminated to the scientific community,
providing researchers with a powerful framework in which to answer a variety of
exciting questions about trait evolution across the tree of life. The project
will also advance the participation of underrepresented groups in science and
engineering through recruitment of female Hispanic high school and undergraduate
students to the research team. Additionally, the project leaders will design and
teach hands-on courses in evolutionary genomics and bioinformatics for retired
senior citizens in the local community and for Native American communities
across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elucidating the processes underlying
trait variation across species is a fundamental problem in evolutionary biology,
and one for which existing tools lag far behind modern datasets. The current
project will address this issue through the design of statistical and supervised
machine learning approaches for robustly and accurately predicting the general
and specific evolutionary mechanisms by which traits evolve across species. In
particular, the tools developed will properly account for species phylogenetic
relationships, integrate diverse omics and other trait data, and create new
avenues for testing specialized evolutionary hypotheses. Availability of these
methods will facilitate studies of associations between traits related by a
phylogeny, processes and forces driving the evolution of such traits, and
adaptive trait evolution arising from different types of structural variations.
Moreover, findings from applications of these tools to empirical datasets will
illuminate connections across different levels of biological organization and
diverse biological systems. Finally, the developed tools will be applicable to a
wide range of ever-increasing genomic, transcriptomic, and other modern omics
and trait data, promoting future research in the processes shaping the
distribution of traits across species and their roles in evolutionary
innovation. Results from the project will be available at
http://assisgroup.fau.edu/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.