* 2130102
* Exploring STEM Identity through a Science Learning Interdisciplinary Community Expansion Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Olivia Long, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,499,259.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Pittsburgh at Greensburg (Pitt-Greensburg). Pitt-
Greensburg is a regional campus of the University of Pittsburgh that serves a
high percentage of students from rural areas of Pennsylvania. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 48 unique full-time students
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, or Applied
Mathematics. Both traditional and transfer students will receive scholarships to
aid in their education. They will have opportunities to work in cohorts within
and outside their majors during first-year orientation, first-year seminar, and
science learning communities. Early connections made in these experiences offer
students enhanced support systems to work through more challenging upper-level
courses, as do workshops, research projects, and presentation of research to the
public, which will also be encouraged and assisted by the grant. The project
will also support curriculum improvements aimed at improving first-year student
retention in STEM. This project is designed to engage members from local rural
communities- either traditional or transfer students- to advance through their
education with additional support structures in place. Ultimately, this program
will evaluate how students perceive their ties to their discipline and how that
informs their on- and off-campus engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projectâ€™s
primary goal is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The Exploring STEM Identity
through a Science Learning Interdisciplinary Community Expansion (SLICE) project
will enhance student skill sets and create community connections by pursuing
several objectives. First is to utilize cohorts and other supports to remove
barriers and to develop authentic peer connections on campus. Second is to
expand SLICE Scholars' scientific literacy, communication, and self-efficacy.
Third is to encourage SLICE Scholars' career exploration and foster positive
professional identity exploration in off-campus settings. Fourth is to nurture
SLICE Scholars' ability to develop, analyze, and effectively communicate
research findings through senior capstone research experiences. And fifth, to
increase SLICE Scholars' time management abilities, decision making, strategic
planning, and problem-solving skills. Primary research interests for this
project center around the construction of interdisciplinary learning communities
and the investigation of their influence on students' perceptions of their
identities within the scientific community, the development of authentic
connections with peers and faculty and how that impacts STEM identity, and how
students develop expertise both within and outside of their fields. Prior
studies have found positive gains on student retention by reducing the cognitive
dissonance experienced upon initial transfer to a new location. This study aims
to see if these methods will be effective in engaging students from rural
communities, a student population not currently well-reported on in the
literature. Evaluation of the project will be conducted using two major methods:
(a) evaluating student retention and graduation rates, and (b) using quasi-
experimental design methods to qualitatively and quantitatively code student
evaluations and surveys of project programming. Dissemination of results will
follow best practices and use a combination of website presence, annual STEM
faculty meetings with local community colleges, presentation at local and
regional conferences, as well as eventual publication in peer-reviewed journals.
This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.