* 2130924
* Collaborative Proposal: Early Career Engineers' Views of Ethics and Social Responsibility: Trends, Influences, and Contexts
* SBE,SMA
* 03/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Stephanie Claussen, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 07/31/2024
* USD 191,532.00

Collaborative Proposal: Early Career Engineers' Views of Ethics and Social
Responsibility: Trends, Influences, and Contexts&lt;br/&gt;Public
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Responding to frequent concerns about a
lack of attention to ethics in engineering education and professional practice,
a variety of formal course-based interventions and informal or extracurricular
programs have been created and assessed to improve the social and ethical
commitments of engineering graduates. Additionally, many employers offer or
require training in ethics, compliance, and related topics. Most prior research
into the impacts of such experiences has focused on engineering students,
especially undergraduates. There have been very few studies that have tracked
these students as they enter the workforce in order to study the impacts of
these experiences early in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how
early career engineers’ perceptions of ethics and social responsibility change
in the transition from undergraduate engineering degree programs to the
workplace (or graduate studies) and how those perceptions are shaped or
influenced. It also asks how those perceptions vary depending on an individual’s
engineering discipline, background, and current professional
setting.&lt;br/&gt;Specific priority is given to investigating differences in
perceptions and experiences among underrepresented groups. In addition to
contributing to the literature and impacting practices in engineering education
and professional ethics, the findings from this project have implications for
workforce development by revealing how employers can better align onboarding
programs, professional development opportunities, and organizational climate
with the views and perceptions of young professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
study uses both survey (quantitative) and interview (qualitative) research
methods. Data is being gathered in two phases. The first study phase will begin
by surveying and interviewing participants from a prior study who are now early
career professionals and/or pursuing graduate degrees. The responses of
participants in these surveys and interviews can be compared to their prior
responses as engineering students, making visible how their perceptions have
changed over time and across the transition from school to professional
practice. In the second phase of the study, a new group of participants will be
surveyed and interviewed, which will allow for a larger and more diverse
participant pool. Appropriate statistical techniques will be used to investigate
longitudinal changes and group-level results in the survey data set, while
thematic and phenomenographic approaches will be used to analyze the interview
data. This analysis will shed light on how young career engineers’ perceptions
of social and ethical responsibility are shaped by their experiences in their
undergraduate studies and their current contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal was funded through the ER2 program by the CISE
directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.