* 2130252
* Scholarships to Accelerate Engineering Leadership and Identity in Graduate Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Raymond Laoulache, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,498,020.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, a nationally ranked research
university that facilitates academic success and upward mobility of low-income,
academically talented students. Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 90 unique full-time students who are pursuing accelerated
graduate B.S./M.S. degrees in engineering. Students will receive one-year
scholarships in the master’s year of study. The program leverages established
accelerated B.S/M.S. programs and research efforts in the college of engineering
that support the maritime economy. It is designed to provide a coordinated
program for high-achieving, low-income undergraduate student recruitment, and
workforce development strategies to prepare and graduate M.S.-level students to
address challenges in marine biotechnology, marine renewable energy, marine
artificial intelligence and robotics, marine restoration, and water resources
and protection. The project will provide scholarships to students to allow them
to participate in activities that are intended to foster improved self-efficacy
and engineering identity development. The intellectual merit of the project will
be knowledge generation on the role of self-efficacy and engineering identity
among undergraduate students who continue to pursue engineering through graduate
degree attainment. The broader impact will be the implementation and
sustainability of effective evidence-based curricular and co-curricular
activities, including professional development practices, for high-achieving,
low-income students pursuing master’s degrees so they are prepared for entry
into the workforce or graduate Ph.D. programs in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving graduate students
with demonstrated financial need. The program addresses the following three
critical needs: (1) promotion of graduate degree attainment by high-achieving,
low-income students to address demands for a workforce with master’s-level
preparation in engineering, (2) implementation of evidence-based academic and
student support activities that foster non-cognitive factors such as improved
self-efficacy and engineering identity development and help undergraduate
students make the transition to graduate degree programs, and (3) graduation of
leaders skilled in technology, entrepreneurship and innovation to build and
support the economy of the South Coast of New England, a diverse, post-
industrial region characterized by high poverty. The specific aims for the
program are to (1) double the application and recruitment of students with
demonstrated financial need to accelerated B.S./M.S. programs in engineering,
(2) double the participation, student success, and graduation of engineering
M.S. students, (3) advance the research, leadership and entrepreneurship skills
of engineering graduate students, and (4) generate and disseminate knowledge on
engineering identity and self-efficacy, and evidence-based curricular and co-
curricular activities that affect student recruitment, persistence, and M.S.
degree attainment. Research has shown that students who persist in engineering
tend to exhibit high levels of self-efficacy and identify themselves as
belonging to an engineering community. While there have been studies on the role
of engineering identity on the transition from K-12 to post-secondary education,
few studies on either engineering identity or challenges related to self-
efficacy have investigated the transition from undergraduate to graduate-level
programs. Furthermore, there have been few studies of the impact of
institutional support during these transitional years on recruitment and
persistence of engineering graduate students, and the role of engineering
identity and self-efficacy development in this process. Research questions will
include: (1) To what extent do the project’s curricular and co-curricular
activities increase the number of low-income, academically talented students
entering graduate programs in engineering? (2) What cognitive and non-cognitive
aspects of students’ experiences with curricular and co-curricular activities
support engineering identity and self-efficacy among LIAT students? and (3) To
what extent do positive engineering identity and self-efficacy serve as factors
in participation and persistence of low-income academically talented students in
engineering graduate degrees? Research questions will be addressed using student
recruitment and retention data, program surveys, and interviews. An external
evaluator will work with the project team to provide formative and summative
assessments of yearly program outcomes. Overall, the project is expected to fill
the gap in knowledge generation on the role of self-efficacy and engineering
identity among undergraduate students who continue to pursue engineering through
graduate degree attainment. Project findings will be presented to the STEM
education and engineering communities and contribute to the knowledge base about
what works for whom in retention, student success, and graduation in graduate-
level engineering programs. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.