* 2130314
* Supporting the growth of STEM professionals through community, mentorship, and interdisciplinary inquiry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Jonathan White, Longwood University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,981.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Longwood University. The project's multidimensional recruiting plan will
focus on rural southern Virginia - a region of critical need for increased STEM
degree attainment in higher education, and will yield a diverse pool of
prospective students in biology, chemistry, environmental science, and physics.
In line with this, the project will include partnerships with rural southern
Virginia high schools and STEM professionals across the nation. The Longwood
program will engage forty-five (45) scholars over a duration of six years to
address unmet financial need with scholarships as well as to provide a system of
student-support services, including student cohorts, structured faculty
mentoring, an issues-focused summer bridge program, an innovative curriculum,
and a four-year arc of career preparation programming. Through embedded
research, the project will pursue questions focused on the influence of
students’ social networks, faculty mentoring, and growth-mindset programming on
student success. Through broad dissemination efforts, the program will
contribute to the STEM community’s understanding of how best to support the
success of low-income, academically talented STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need this project will
pursue four goals. First is to recruit domestic, academically talented, low-
income scholars pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, environmental
science, and physics and reduce their unmet financial need. Second is to adapt,
implement, and sustain evidence-based student-support and academic practices to
ensure on-time graduation. Third is to test new strategies for systematically
supporting student success and career preparation. And fourth is to disseminate
the project's findings about effective means to increase success of low-income
students. In addition to insights from a rigorous evaluation by Virginia
Commonwealth University’s Metropolitan Educational Research Consortium, the
project team will take a discipline-based educational research approach to
generate new knowledge on adaptations of high-impact practices. In particular,
the team will map and analyze social networks of socio-emotional and
academic/career support; explore types of conversations (e.g., “feelings” vs.
“fix-it”) between faculty mentors and their student mentees; and integrate
growth-mindset programming into the student experience and mentor efforts. These
three lines of inquiry will address gaps in the literature and inform other
higher-education professionals seeking to support at-risk students with holistic
support services, most notably faculty mentoring. Through intentional
dissemination efforts, the project will provide its insights on improving
success for low-income, academically talented students and on the implementation
of high-impact practices to strengthen learning environments and promote
diverse, equitable, and inclusive participation in STEM. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.