* 2130429
* Project Synergy: Developing Connections at the Interface of Chemistry, Physics, Engineering, and Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2027
* Joseph Kozminski, Lewis University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,490,929.00

This project will address the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Lewis University in Romeoville, Illinois. Lewis University is a
Catholic, comprehensive, emergent Hispanic-serving, commuter-majority university
with a high proportion of first-generation students. Over its five-year
duration, Project Synergy will provide four years of scholarship support to 23
unique full-time undergraduate students pursuing bachelor’s degrees in five
science and engineering majors: physics, chemistry, biochemistry, computer
engineering, and data science. Students will be prepared for modern careers in
science and engineering by activities in research methods, collaborative work,
and interdisciplinary approaches. Cohort-building strategies include: a two-week
boot camp for incoming scholars, living-learning communities for residential
students, shared course experiences, immersion in interdisciplinary
collaborative research projects, career preparation through sustained faculty
mentoring, interaction with visiting speakers, internships, and career
workshops. Scholarship students will be recruited from areas whose students are
minoritized in STEM, including school districts in inner-city Chicago and in
rural Illinois. By monitoring the progress of its scholars, Project Synergy will
study the effectiveness of its interventions on persistence, retention, and the
development of STEM identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific objectives include:
(1) provide four years of scholarship support for 23 undergraduate students in
five STEM majors; (2) achieve first-to-second year retention rates of at least
83% and four-year graduation rates of at least 74% among Synergy Scholars; (3)
place 94% of graduated scholars in STEM employment or graduate programs; and (4)
prepare students for contemporary careers in science and engineering. It is well
known that development of interdisciplinary perspectives and collaborative
skills are most effectively realized in the context of sustained mentorship and
shared scientific experiences. For this reason, mentorship, undergraduate
research, internships, and cohort-building are priorities of Project Synergy’s
planned interventions. The expected representation of commuter, first-
generation, and demographically minoritized students among the Synergy Scholars
provides a unique opportunity to advance understanding of the impact specific
interventions have on the these demographic groups. In addition to retention and
career-trajectory data to evaluate project outcomes, the team plans to interview
scholars to monitor development of STEM identity, attitudes toward science, and
a professional mindset. These data will be disaggregated to determine any
differential impact on residential versus commuter students and will be compared
with parallel surveys of non-scholars in the same majors. Project outcomes will
be disseminated widely to the STEM education community using social media,
formal presentations at local and national meetings, and publication of journal
articles. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.