* 2130277
* Leveraging Technology: Providing a Comprehensive, Active Learning, Online Support Network for STEM Students Attending a Small, Rural, and Remote Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2028
* Derek Lerch, FEATHER RIVER COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2028
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high- achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Feather River College (FRC), which is one of the smallest, most rural
and remote community colleges within the California Community College System.
Over its six year duration, this project will fund scholarships up to 43
community college students who are pursuing associate’s degrees in Biology,
Chemistry, Environmental Science, or Physical Sciences. Full-time STEM students
will receive up to 6 semesters of scholarships and part-time students (enrolled
for at least 6 semester units) will receive up to 8 semesters of scholarships
based on financial need. FRC is a small community college in rural and remote
north-eastern California. The project aims to increase the parity of rural STEM
students with their urban peers, as they enter and graduate from FRC’s Associate
of Science programs in order to transfer vertically in STEM or to join
governmental organizations or industry in a STEM capacity. Importantly, rural
community colleges are the fastest growing sector of U.S. community colleges and
thus represent one of the greatest future opportunities to impact STEM workforce
development. This project, structured by the Guided Pathways Model, aims to
leverage technology in order to build a STEM identity that reaches outside the
county without the need to travel, and to more fully support students as they
enter the rural STEM pipeline. As a small, rural and geographically remote
community college, this project has significant potential to become a model to
advance understanding of how to effectively and efficiently support rural STEM
students as they navigate the rural STEM pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
scope of this project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with the following three objectives and interventions: (1)
Recruit, retain and support FRC STEM Students with an institutional STEM Task
Force. (2) Boost STEM identity and ongoing participation in STEM with an online
STEM success and enrichment course that will bring STEM scientists and their
science to FRC in an effective and efficient way. Both these objectives will be
supported by STEM online active learning office Hours that will (3) allow
students to increase student engagement and learning in a time-flexible setting.
An important goal of this project, supported by an embedded educational
researcher, is to increase understanding about the barriers rural STEM students
face and how to mitigate such barriers to increase retention in the rural STEM
pipeline and thus positively impact STEM workforce development. In addition, a
robust, iterative project evaluation approach will ensure that project
objectives are met and modified as needed to address the barrier that affect the
success and retention of rural STEM students. The implementation and outcomes of
this project should be of interest to a variety of post-secondary education
stakeholders interested in rural communities and STEM workforce development.
Dissemination will target a wide audience including, but not limited to,
education researchers, policymakers, and transfer institutions, in order to
maximize the visibility of this project. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.