* 2130106
* Bridging the STEM Gap in Appalachia: Engaging with students to iteratively improve faculty practices in support of student success
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2028
* Jojo Joseph, Fairmont State University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 01/31/2028
* USD 749,693.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Fairmont State University (FSU) in West Virginia. The project will
support students through a combination of financial assistance and curricular
and co-curricular support. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to eighteen (18) unique high-achieving, low-income undergraduate
majors in the STEM disciplines at the University. Additional support will
include a STEM bootcamp for incoming students, a first-year STEM seminar course,
opportunities for research experiences, STEM living and learning community
availability, and regular interactions with faculty and peer mentors. Career
placement initiatives will be incorporated and will include networking seminars
with local and regional industries. A professional development program will be
put in place for faculty and peer mentors. Recruiting efforts will include a
focus on a 15-county region in Appalachia that will be accompanied by an
innovative and flexible two-tier selection process to allow for the
identification of low-income, highly-talented STEM students who might not have
met traditional metrics related to high school success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
increase retention and STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the project will pursue several
goals. First is to adapt and implement evidence-based curricular and co-
curricular strategies for systematically supporting student academic and career
pathways to success. Second is to implement, test, and study through project
evaluation an innovative model for recruiting and selecting highly-talented STEM
students who might otherwise go unnoticed based on traditional metrics for high
school success. Third is to contribute to the knowledge base to help guide other
colleges to implement similar programs successfully. Fourth is to integrate the
project with local industries to improve career preparation and job placement,
directly filling needs in the region. And fifth is to incorporate a networking
process with industry, high schools, and other colleges to disseminate outcomes
and findings related to project challenges and successes, in particular to other
institutions working to support low-income STEM students. Insights and outcomes
from a mixed methods evaluation will generate new knowledge on which aspects of
the project's support interventions, or combination of interventions, are most
effective for retention, engagement, academic performance, and overall success
of students. The lines of investigation will address gaps in the literature and
inform other higher-education professionals seeking to support students with a
combination of curricular and co-curricular interventions, especially for
students from rural regions who are underrepresented in STEM. This project is
funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.