* 2130671
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Scaling Correct-by-Construction Code Generation for Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Adam Chlipala, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2025
* USD 516,000.00

Cryptography secures communication in many parts of the modern world, from
online shopping to private text messaging. Bugs in cryptographic software lead
to information leakage and opportunities for bad actors to have undue influence
on computer systems. Prior work by this research team began the Fiat
Cryptography project, which generates fast and secure cryptographic code for
intricate arithmetic algorithms, which previously had been painstakingly
handcoded by experts. The new code-generation method has a rigorous mathematical
proof of correctness (in a theorem-proving software package called Coq), which
contrasts with the fallibility of the humans who had written similar code
before. Today that tooling is used by all major web browsers. This project
develops extensions to allow for even more real-world adoption, by covering more
kinds of cryptographic code and improving performance and
trustworthiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned work has two main thrusts:
expanding scope to higher-level code and lowering the system's guarantees to
assembly instead of C. The first thrust involves moving beyond Fiat
Cryptography's original specialization to straightline code, adding support for
loops, function calls, precomputed tables, and mutable data structures. The
intent is to retain the quality of starting from whiteboard-level purely
functional programs and deriving fast imperative code from them automatically.
However, recognizing the likely lack of a "one-size-fits-all" approach for such
a wider range of programs, an extensible proof-generating compiler will be
built, to which new code-derivation rules can be added if they are proved in
Coq. The second project thrust studies how formal guarantees may be lowered to
assembly code instead of C. Many important optimizations have been beyond the
ability of compilers like GCC to apply automatically, but it is still desirable
to establish correctness of those optimizations formally. To that end, a
formally verified equivalence checker will be built, to certify that assembly
programs compute the same mathematical functions as C-level programs generated
by Fiat Cryptography. A collaboration with experts in genetic search should
allow Fiat Cryptography to retain its push-button nature while still producing
performance-competitive assembly code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.