* 2130060
* An Acoustic Array At Axial Seamount for Geodesy and Autonomous Vehicle Support
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2026
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 11/30/2026
* USD 748,372.00

Studies of all kinds of volcanoes are important to understand how volcanoes work
and improve the ability to forecast eruptions. Axial Seamount is a submarine
volcano that lies 300 miles off the coast of Oregon that has been studied for
nearly four decades. The volcano rises about 3000 ft above the surrounding
seafloor and its summit is characterized by a 5-mile by 2-mile caldera that is
300 ft deep. The volcano erupted in 1998, 2011 and 2015, with the last eruption
captured by a cabled observatory that is part of the Ocean Observatories
Initiative. The observatory includes a seismic network that detects earthquakes
and seafloor pressure sensors that show that the caldera floor rises slowly
between eruptions as magma moves into the volcano and sinks rapidly during
eruptions when magma is released. Some of the up and down movement of the
seafloor occurs by slip on faults that underlie the caldera and some occurs
because the volcano inflates and deflates like a balloon. Which mechanism is
most important and whether this changes with time as the volcano nears an
eruption is unknown. This project will install a 10-year 4-station network of
acoustic transponders that will monitor the time for sound waves to travel
between stations to measure changes in the horizontal distance between stations.
One station will be connected to the cabled observatory so that measurements
will be obtained in real time. These measurements will constrain the relative
roles of fault motions and magma chamber inflation and deflation. The acoustic
network will also support experiments to learn how to control submarine robots
with acoustic commands and compare a calibrated pressure sensor built by a
commercial company with two academic calibrated pressure instruments that are
already on the observatory. The project will train a graduate student and at
least one undergraduate intern from an underrepresented group. In the future,
the techniques developed for this project can be applied in other settings such
as subduction zones and unstable submarine slopes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efforts
to advance our understanding of volcanoes and eruption forecasting are best
served by studying volcanism in a wide variety of settings. Indeed, mid-ocean
ridge volcanoes may represent some of the most tractable systems to understand
because they have shallow magmatic systems, relatively uniform petrology, and
known crustal thickness. Axial Seamount is one of the most extensively studied
sites on the global network of mid-ocean ridges. Three eruptions have been
observed in 1998, 2011 and 2015, with the most recent recorded by the seismic
network and bottom pressure and tilt instruments on the Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) Regional Cabled Array (RCA). There is a near continuous 20-year
record from calibrated seafloor pressure sensors recording cycles of inflation
and rapid syn-eruptive deflation that are consistent with the hypothesis that
the eruptions are inflation predictable. However, the vertical geodetic
observations cannot fully discriminate between broadly distributed inflation and
uplift of the caldera that is accommodated by movement on the buried outward-
dipping faults that underlie the east and west walls of the Axial caldera. This
project will install a 10-year 4-station acoustic network at Axial Seamount that
will range between each pair of transponders and include a pressure gauge,
temperature sensor and velocimeter on each transponder. One station will be
connected to the OOI-RCA enabling real time data acquisition and control of the
transponder array. Understanding the dynamics of calderas and the role of ring
faults in accommodating strain and modulating eruptions is an important topic in
volcano research. The horizontal strain measurements enabled by the acoustic
network will, in conjunction with ongoing vertical geodesy from seafloor
pressure observations and repeat AUV mapping, determine the relative roles of
magma chamber inflation and deflation and motion on the buried outward dipping
faults that lie beneath the east and west caldera walls. These observations will
be used to determine whether the outward dipping faults are locked early in the
reinflation cycle when earthquake rates are low or whether they slip
aseismically. The seismic catalog can then be used to infer whether the level of
coupling varies during the eruptive cycle. The horizontal ranging will also
contribute data to support more detailed models of magma chamber inflation than
have been obtained to date and will constrain the width of dikes that propagate
across the acoustic baselines. A secondary objective is to provide an acoustic
network that can support efforts to demonstrate and optimize remote
communication and navigation of AUVs, an essential step toward the deployment of
remotely operated AUVs that can capture future
eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.