* 2130254
* Integrating the Teaching of Mathematics, Physics, and Engineering Courses to Improve Retention of Engineering Students at Penn State Abington
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Zafer Hatahet, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 09/30/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Pennsylvania State University (PSU) Abington, located near Philadelphia.
The project will support students through a combination of financial assistance
and curricular and co-curricular support. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund two-year scholarships to four unique cohorts of twelve (12)
high-achieving, low-income undergraduate majors in engineering disciplines at
the university to reduce their need to work outside of their regular academic
pursuits. Additional support will include enrolling the cohorts in special block
scheduling for STEM Freshman Interest Groups and creating pairs of integrated
courses (mathematics with physics and physics with engineering) to catalyze
transitioning of students from solely content-oriented courses to those
emphasizing problem solving. An enhanced advising, career counseling, and peer
tutoring/mentoring program will be in place. In line with this, the project will
partner with industry to provide the students with opportunities for
internships, professional mentors, networking, and a special speaker program.
The project will incorporate a networking process with industry partners, high
school counselors, and other colleges to disseminate outcomes and findings
related to project challenges and successes, in particular to other
institutions, including other PSU campuses, working to support low-income STEM
students. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To increase retention and STEM degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving engineering undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need, the project will pursue several goals. First is to
adapt and implement evidence-based curricular and co-curricular strategies for
systematically supporting student academic and career pathways to success.
Second is to implement, test, and study through project evaluation an innovative
model for preparing highly-talented STEM students to transition from learning
content to applying material and principles learned to problem solving
scenarios, especially in the contexts of physics and engineering. Third is to
contribute to the knowledge base to help guide other colleges to implement
similar programs successfully. Fourth is to integrate the project with local
industries to enhance and sustain student interest as well as to improve career
preparation and job placement, directly supporting needs in the region. Insights
and outcomes from qualitative and quantitative evaluation methods will generate
new knowledge on which aspects of the project's support interventions, or
combination of interventions, are most effective for retention, engagement,
academic performance, and overall success of students. The lines of
investigation will address gaps in the literature and inform other higher-
education professionals seeking to support students with a combination of
curricular and co-curricular interventions, especially from urban regions
containing a significant population of students who are underrepresented in
STEM. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.