* 2130386
* Diversity and Excellence in Food, Environment and Natural-resource Disciplines (DEFEND)
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2026
* Wubishet Tadesse, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 11/30/2026
* USD 1,381,015.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Alabama A&amp;M University. Alabama A&amp;M University is a Historically
Black College and University (HBCU) located in Huntsville, AL. Over its five (5)
year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 30 unique full-time
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in food science, environmental
science and natural resource disciplines. First year students at Alabama A&amp;M
University and Transfer students from Lawson State University and Calhoun
Community College will receive 4-year scholarships. The project aims to increase
student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective
supporting activities, including mentoring, service learning, advising,
tutoring, financial counseling, undergraduate research experiences, and
participation in discipline-specific conferences. The project will also support
curriculum improvements to improve first-year student retention in STEM. Because
Alabama A&amp;M University has a high population of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields and to learn how impactful mentoring and individual
development plans support retention and graduation of this student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims: to increase degree
attainment by low-income students enrolled in BS programs within the College of
Agricultural and Natural Sciences (CALNS); offer curricular and co-curricular
activities to increase student success by engaging them in evidence-based
enrichment activities; and use technology for intentional evaluation and
assessment. The intervention outlined in this DEFEND program combines financial
resources with rigorous mentoring and tutorial support to thwart attrition
throughout the degree program and compare relative effectiveness of post-high
school summer support and tuition support among students transferring from
community colleges in motivating and retaining African American students. This
project compares the overall success rate of high school students directly
entering AAMU to community college transfers and also compares the success rate
of these DEFEND scholars with other students within CALNS. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of which interventions are most effective for
motivating and retaining African American and students from other groups
underrepresented in STEM. Additionally, this project will increase the number of
underrepresented students who are globally and competitively trained and
subsequently diversify the STEM workforce. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.