* 2130406
* Advancing Computer Science Transfers for Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Marcelo Sztainberg, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Northeastern Illinois University (NEIU). NEIU is a Hispanic Serving
Institution with 42% of the undergraduate population identifying as Hispanics.
Over the six-year duration of this project, 45 community college transfer
students, who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in CS, will receive scholarships.
The project personnel will recruit transfer students from Wilbur Wright, Harry
Truman and Oakton Community Colleges. These students will receive two-year
scholarships. The project personnel will enhance the CS curriculum by adding the
use of industry standard tools and methodologies into the teaching of entry
level courses. Of significance is the introduction of mentors from faculty,
alumni, and industry partners that will support the scholars as they advance in
their degree and prepare them during their transition into the workforce, or a
graduate program, upon completion. Due to the high representation of minority
students among CS majors at NEIU, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in CS careers and to learn how a curriculum aligned with industry
practices and mentoring activities support retention and graduation of these
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. Student attrition at the low-level introductory CS
courses is historically high among low-income students. This project will
investigate the effects of incorporating industry standard tools and
methodologies into curricular and non-curricular activities, while actively
mentoring students. Researchers will also advance the understanding of which
type of curricular improvements and active interventions have a positive impact
in student success. Expected outcomes include increasing the scholar’s
commitment to CS careers and increasing satisfaction with the program in
general. This will translate to an increase of student retention, graduation,
and career placement rates overall. This evaluation of this project will include
analyzing surveys and conducting interviews with scholars and faculty involved.
Course data, retention, graduation, and career placement information will be
used to evaluate the effectiveness of the changes and strategies implemented.
Results of this project will be disseminated in relevant conferences (ACM
Special Interest Group in Computer Science Education, Great Minds in STEM),
journals (Journal of Educational Computing Research, Journal for STEM Education
Research), and in meetings of the Computing Alliance of Hispanic Serving
Institutions (CAHSI). This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income, academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.