* 2130556
* Mechanisms linking bacterial chemotaxis signaling to nitrogen fixation in beneficial plant-associated bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gladys Alexandre, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 950,000.00

Bacterial inoculants can enhance crop yields and reduce reliance on expensive
and environmentally harmful chemical fertilizers which are needed to meet the
demand for food of the expected global population of 9.7 billion by 2050. To be
useful in the field, bacterial inoculants must not only express plant growth
beneficial traits but must also be able to colonize plant roots. Further, many
bacteria selected in the laboratory as bio-inoculants fail to consistently
produce plant growth enhancements once applied in greenhouses or in the fields .
This highlights shortcomings in our understanding of the behavior and physiology
of beneficial bacteria in the rhizosphere. This project aims to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms by which bio-inoculant bacteria coordinate expression of
plant growth beneficial traits (nitrogen fixation) with functions that are
critical for competitiveness in the rhizosphere and colonization of plant roots
(chemotaxis). The knowledge gained from this research will contribute toward
better predictive models to guide strategies to select and/or design beneficial
diazotrophs for bio-inoculation applications, to improve crop management with
benefits to society. In addition to addressing challenges related to sustainable
agriculture through basic research, the project will engage a diverse community
of participants in developing future solutions to these challenges. The project
will provide research opportunities for high school and undergraduate students,
including members from underrepresented groups, with those students included as
co-authors in publications, when appropriate. The principal investigator will
also continue engagement of deaf-and-hard-of-hearing undergraduate students in
research experiences. The project will also provide graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow with opportunities to mentor undergraduate students and to
apply their research communication skills in a breadth of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary data suggest that bacterial
chemotaxis signaling proteins regulate the expression of nitrogen fixation in
the beneficial plant-colonizing and bio-inoculant diazotroph, Azospirillum
brasilense. The investigators aim to determine the molecular mechanisms by which
bacterial chemotaxis signaling proteins coordinate the induction of nitrogen
fixation in diazotroph soil bacteria used as biofertilizers worldwide, and the
role of this coupling in the rhizosphere, using genetics, live cell fluorescence
microscopy and biochemical approaches. They will also explore the mechanism of
an apparent similar coupling between metabolism and chemotaxis signaling in the
pea symbiont, Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. viciae. Objective 1 will establish the
mechanism(s) of chemotaxis signaling control of nitrogen metabolism in A.
brasilense and specifically test the hypothesis that chemotaxis signaling
proteins interact with an energy-responsive protein(s) to affect the expression
of a transcriptional regulator of nitrogen fixation, RpoN. The spatio-temporal
pattern of nitrogen fixation expression in the wheat rhizosphere and how
chemotaxis affects this activity will also be determined. Objective 2 will
decipher how a subset of chemoreceptors adjust chemotaxis signaling to support
A. brasilense nitrogen fixation in the wheat rhizosphere. The role of oxygen-
and energy-sensing chemoreceptors in affecting chemotaxis sensory specificity,
nitrogen fixation and root colonization will be characterized. In addition, the
role of one of these chemoreceptors in maintaining chemotaxis signaling arrays
structural integrity will be elucidated. Objective 3 will explore how chemotaxis
signaling array composition, which is affected by nutrient starvation, regulates
nitrogen-fixing nodulation in R. leguminosarum. Together, the results obtained
will provide insight into how distinct molecular functions (chemotaxis and
nitrogen metabolism) evolved to become integrated within cells. These findings
will also produce strategies to improve the performance of diazotroph
bioinoculants by elucidating general design principles for the control of traits
that contribute to rhizosphere plant-growth promoting competence. The research
will employ genetically tractable model systems relevant to modern agriculture
to address pressing environmental issues and sustainable agricultural practices.
The results of this research will contribute toward better predictive models to
guide strategies to select and/or design beneficial diazotrophs for bio-
inoculation applications. This award is being co-funded by the Cellular Dynamics
and Function cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
along with the Plant Biotic Interactions program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.