* 2130427
* Force-modulated FRET for resolving biomolecular motion and bonding
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Shoujun Xu, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 08/31/2024
* USD 519,045.00

The project will develop a new technique to measure the strength of
macromolecular interactions in biology with higher precision than current
methods. The new tool consists of a unique combination of using ultrasound to
rupture the interactions and fluorescence microscopy for detection of the
rupture. For example, one process that will be monitored in unparalleled detail
is that of protein synthesis by the ribosome. The ribosome is a complex
macromolecular machine that "reads" information transcribed from DNA and
manufactures its product accordingly. Yet just how it steps along the "message"
to read the instructions, and sometime slips out of frame to manufacture an
alternate product, are not fully understood. A dynamic picture of the process,
combined with what we now know about the structure of the machine, will greatly
enhance our understanding how this machine functions, and misfunctions. Further
applications to understand how proteins distinguish among cells surfaces to
recognize a distinct target are envisioned. The research activities will
generate a wealth of training opportunities for graduate students, undergraduate
students, and high school students. In particular, students in underrepresented
groups will be encouraged to participate. In addition, the research will enhance
education via the development of a new course at the graduate level that focuses
on modern physical, chemical, and biological
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique imaging technique, termed as force-
modulated fluorescent resonance energy transfer (fmFRET) microscopy, will
provide sub-nanometer motion resolution for nucleic acids and sub-piconewton
force resolution for non-covalent bonds. The fmFRET technique will integrate the
concept of force spectroscopy with FRET detection for the first time: by
applying acoustic radiation force with sub-piconewton resolution, the
macromolecular interactions will be precisely resolved based on their
dissociation forces and detected as fluorescence signal. Because nucleic acid
duplexes of different lengths can be resolved by their dissociation forces, this
technique will be able to precisely distinguish the positions of nucleic acids
in functioning macromolecular complexes with sub-nucleotide resolution, which
cannot be achieved by any other techniques. From the point of view of force
spectroscopy, fluorescence detection will be faster, more sensitive, and easier
to implement than magnetic detection. Furthermore, the new technique will be
more precise and robust than optical imaging of microparticles that relies
solely on software fitting methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is funded by
Molecular Biophysics (Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, BIO) and Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CHE) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.