* 2130281
* Enhancing a Transfer Pathway to Improve STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2025
* William MacDonald, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,444,207.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at The Ohio State University at Newark. Ohio State Newark is a small,
regional, diverse, affordable, mainly commuter, open-access entry point for
students seeking a degree at The Ohio State University. Over its four-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 45 unique full-time students
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in any of the almost 40 available S-STEM
eligible disciplines offered at Ohio State. Three cohorts of 15 first-year
students will receive up to two years of scholarship funding, STEM enrichment
activities, and supportive services on the Newark campus, then transition to the
Columbus campus for degree completion. Project activities and services include:
a short immersive research retreat at an active field station to launch each
cohort; an academic year learning community with extra- and co-curricular
opportunities in diverse STEM fields; and optional summer internships providing
professional and career experiences. Scholarships and cohort activities will be
scaffolded with individualized faculty mentoring, early and ongoing research
experiences, direct interaction with academic scientists, industry scientists,
and engineers, and multiple academic, social, and personal support services to
keep scholars on track for campus transition and degree completion. The
intellectual merit of this project is the generation of new knowledge about how
student support activities affect student success in making a transition to a
four-year program. Project results will be published and presented to
national/international interest groups. Ohio State Newark will become an
important pathway for a diverse demographic of low-income students to complete
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics degrees at an R1 university
they may previously have thought was beyond their
reach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Specific aims are to: recruit and retain eligible students;
provide these students with academic and other support; facilitate transition to
Ohio State Columbus campus eligible STEM departments; and disseminate lessons
learned. The project design adapts successful evidence-based practices from
traditional college settings to the environment of regional and community
colleges. Investigations will examine efficacy of recruitment messaging, impact
of performance-based STEM-focused financial aid on entry and retention, and
patterns of success across gender, income level, race/ethnicity, and first-
generation college student status. Project-level expected outcomes include
successful transition from students’ first to second year, successful transition
between campuses for their third year, and degree completion. Broader impacts
include a better understanding of the campus-transition experience for students
in STEM majors and adoption of successful program components by other public-
university regional campuses to reduce attrition of similar students nationwide.
Project evaluation will include focus groups, interviews, and analyses of
student data. Evaluation results will be disseminated nationally and regionally
through academic conferences, journals, higher-education organizations, and
campus publications and events to reach more than 5000 faculty of Ohio State’s
six campuses. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.