* 2130457
* Improving Educational Outcomes at Two-Year Colleges through Mentorship, Support Services, and Equitable Classroom Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Patricia Foley, College of the Canyons
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,493,379.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at College of the Canyons. As a two-year, Hispanic Serving Institution
(HSI) located in Southern California, the College seeks to increase enrollment
and graduation rates among STEM majors within student populations that are
underrepresented in their participation in STEM fields of study, including
Black, Latinx, female, first-generation, English language learner, and low-
income groups. Over its six-year duration, the project will fund scholarships to
100 unique full-time students pursuing associate degrees in Biology, Biological
Sciences, Computer Science, Engineering, Environmental Science, Mathematics, and
Physics. Academically talented STEM students who complete scholarship
applications and demonstrate financial need will receive two-year scholarships.
The project builds upon the College’s successful Mathematics, Engineering, and
Science Achievement (MESA) program to provide STEM students with access to
academic, social, and cultural capital. One of this project’s distinguishing
features is well-defined mentoring relationships between students and faculty
aimed to increase student engagement in STEM coursework and career exploration.
Faculty will also engage in activities designed to help them create inclusive
learning environments that lead to culturally responsive and equitable STEM
classrooms. The project team hypothesizes that these additional supports will
promote the development of positive STEM-related identities among students and
thereby improve retention, transfer, and success rates. This project has the
potential to broaden STEM participation among College of the Canyons’ large
underrepresented and disadvantaged student population. To enhance retention,
transfer, and success rates in STEM among underrepresented populations, this
project will explore the impact of meaningful student-faculty mentorships and
culturally responsive classrooms in two-year institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The project will create and embed a framework for enabling
meaningful faculty-student mentorships within the context of a two-year
institution, and empower faculty to incorporate equitable and culturally-
responsive teaching elements into their STEM classrooms. The project will
investigate the impact campus-wide of these interventions on the retention and
success of students who remain underrepresented in STEM. The knowledge gained
will advance the understanding of how to successfully apply these concepts
within the scope of a two-year college setting while emphasizing diversity,
equity, and inclusion. The anticipated outcomes include an increase in retention
rates of STEM students from underrepresented backgrounds, higher rates of
graduation and transfer of STEM students to four-year institutions, the
inclusion of more equitable and supportive educational practices, and the
upscaling of student support services by coordinating with MESA and other
programs. College of the Canyons will use both qualitative and quantitative
measures to evaluate and monitor persistence, retention, graduation, and
transfer rates for scholarship recipients and the general STEM student body. The
College seeks to disseminate the project’s findings to other institutions
through the What Works Clearinghouse and other media including electronic news
media, journals, news articles, STEM industry publications, social media, print
publications, and conference presentations. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.