* 2130775
* Collaborative Research: Magnetically-Controlled Modules with Reconfigurable Self-Assembly and Disassembly
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* MinJun Kim, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 12/31/2024
* USD 343,225.00

Small scale manufacturing in real-time faces unique challenges. Components must
be assembled inside or in close proximity to existing structures, such as inside
the vasculature of an animal, inside a microfluidic system, or around soldered
semiconductor components. This project will develop a new small-scale
manufacturing method with the precision of modules, the reusability of Legos,
and the self-assembly of DNA â€“ but one that is controllable by an external
magnetic field. Existing reconfigurable modular systems either use complex
intelligent subunits, or are slow, usually only actuating a small number of
modules at a time. There is an urgent need for robust, controllable, and
efficient methods to overcome the existing issues regarding modular robotics and
controllable self-reconfiguration. This award will design an innovative
reconfigurable modular robotic system that uses actuatable subcomponents that
can be actively assembled or disassembled on command. The modular subunits
contain permanent magnets and are actuated using external magnetic fields
generated by an electromagnetic system. The subunits can be moved in different
motion modes that evolve dynamically as subunits assemble into complex modular
structures. The issues addressed by this project are at the interface of small-
scale robotics, control theory, design &amp; manufacturing, and materials
science, and hold exciting prospects for fundamental research with the potential
for diverse applications. The project will provide tools and guidelines that
will help advance current and future modular robotic systems. If successful,
these robots can be used to perform targeted drug delivery, improve several
healthcare procedures that utilize stents, and broaden microscale manufacturing
prospects to produce more complex and dynamic systems. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research program integrates theoretical and experimental work
with the following objectives: (1: Control) Fabricate scalable and magnetically
controllable modular subunits through high resolution 3D printing techniques and
embed bipolar permanent magnets to enable programmable spatial variation of
magnetic properties to create heterogeneous behavior among subunits under a
single global control input; design control techniques for steering components
and assemblies; controllers for disassembly, (2: Applications) Manipulate
modular subunits to assemble plugs, encapsulate objects, approximate shapes, and
build scaffolds. (3: Multiplex) Advance algorithms for building factories that
greatly speed up the assembly rate of modules into desired shapes and
configurations. (4: Hardware) Fabricate an operational small-scale manipulation
prototypical system that will integrate the other objectives' results and
demonstrate a 3D small-scale fabrication system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the cross-directorate Foundational Research in Robotics
program, jointly managed and funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG)
and Computer and Information Science and Engineering
(CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.