* 2130342
* Building Exceptional Talent in Engineering and Computing in the Utah Valley
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Ehsan Rohani, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,988.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Utah Valley University (UVU). Over its 6-year duration, this project
will provide scholarships to 36 students who are pursuing degrees in Electrical
Engineering, Computer Engineering, Computer Science, and Software Engineering.
The Building Exceptional Talent in Engineering &amp; Computing (BE-TEC) program
will advance Utah’s Engineering and Computer Science Initiative, contribute to a
high-quality STEM workforce, and strengthen STEM programs at a large, open-
admissions university. The project will promote student success and degree
completion by providing scholarships to low-income, academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need for up to four years, beginning in
their freshman year. Scholarship recipients will be supported by evidence-based
high impact activities, including intentional faculty mentoring, professional
internships, collaborative design projects, leadership opportunities, and senior
capstone projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BE-TEC is enhancing the capability of
an open-enrollment university with a markedly different student population from
those at research-focused institutions to attract, retain, and graduate students
in engineering and computing and prepare them to contribute to their STEM
professions. The project aims to ameliorate several institutionally identified
attrition points in the STEM educational pipeline, including excessive time to
completion, excessive part-time work, a high dropout rate, and low participation
and completion rates of women, minorities, and first-generation students. The
project will recruit broadly through UVU’s extensive, state-supported, dual-
enrollment programs and its low-income serving summer-bridge programs. Enrolled
undergraduates in the "I Am First" and TRIO Student Support Services (SSS – for
low-income and first-generation students) programs will also be targets for
recruitment. The synergy of planned BE-TEC activities has the potential of
facilitating transformative experiences for individual students and of helping
prepare a talented workforce with the technical and soft skills to meet regional
and national needs. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.