* 2130384
* Supporting Student Success and Higher Degree Attainment in Engineering: A Scholarship-Based, Comprehensive Strategy for Talented Low-Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Fazeel Khan, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,499,238.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Miami University in Ohio. Miami University is a predominantly
undergraduate public university with approximately 19,900 main campus students
and 4,600 regional campus students, and degrees ranging from the Associate to
the Master’s level. Over its 6 year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 132 unique full-time students who are pursuing associate,
bachelor’s, and master’s level degrees in Engineering, Computer Information
Technology, Mechanical Engineering Technology, and Mechanical and Manufacturing
Engineering (MME). The size of the institute, broad cross-section of programs,
and physical presence within an industry manufacturing intensive region are all
factors that endorse the development of this project at Miami. The curricular
plan of this project can enable a graduating high school student to progress
from the Associate degree to the Master’s level. To ensure a high level of
student success, multiple project activities will create a framework that
monitors, supports, and guides student progress from selection to graduation.
This multi-tiered approach is a distinguishing feature of the project: The
scholarship addresses financial need while the additional activities create
tools such as bridge modules and a mentoring program, all of which will reduce
time to graduation and encourage the attainment of higher degrees. The broader
impacts of this project emerge from the transformation of the practices used to
improve the recruitment, retention, and graduation of students, especially women
and those from groups underrepresented in STEM. It is focused on enabling the
attainment of higher-level degrees, and the transformative approaches presented
here are anticipated to have a broad impact because they, i) create a curricular
framework that enables greater mobility, and, ii) develop instructional models
tailored to specific cohorts. The success of the project can be replicated at
other institutions as specific bridge modules may be used directly. The project
establishes its intellectual merit by demonstrating innovation in a scholarship
program by building a sense of community and identity as a vehicle for academic
advancement. By purposefully connecting scholarship recipients to mentors and a
cohort of peers, the proposed project provides a pathway to greater retention
and development of a skilled workforce. The project will also provide initial
data to inform the conceptual model in which identity can be clarified through a
learning community, mentoring, and seminar experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The need
for more advanced education for individuals entering the workforce is becoming
increasingly apparent as sectors across industry adopt higher levels of
technology and automation. The emerging gap in the current workforce and
required skill-sets creates the backdrop for the goal of this project. A
significant element of the proposed approach for the attainment of a more
diverse and qualified graduating class in STEM disciplines is cohort
development. This aspect of the project, as supported by pedagogical research,
is designed to create a group dynamic that promotes student learning and can
respond to individual needs, thereby eschewing a one-size-fits-all approach to
degree completion. The project outcomes include the creation of a system to
administer the awarding of 132 scholarships over six years, enable greater
accessibility to higher degrees by creating a range of learning modules, and the
alignment of resources that help sustain student progress. The research team has
created an interwoven assessment plan to enable reflection and data generation
and to guide future S-STEM projects. The evaluation and assessment plans will
elucidate the factors that contribute to or challenge the project’s capacity to
recruit, enroll and retain low-income, academically talented students in the
program. Avenues for the dissemination of the project results include NSF-
organized conferences, reporting of assessment findings, and content of learning
(bridge) modules at professional conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.