* 2130978
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Microarchitectural side channel attacks and defenses in integrated CPU-GPU systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Hoda Naghibijouybari, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2024
* USD 534,595.00

In modern computing systems, Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) are key components
to provide multimedia and computing capabilities. Modern mobile phones, tablets,
laptops, and desktops are heterogeneous, comprised of conventional Central
Processing Units (CPUs), GPUs, and other accelerators that are tightly
integrated on the same chip and share some hardware resources to provide high
performance and energy efficiency. The investigator has discovered that a
malicious application running on a processor (e.g., GPU) within these computing
devices can launch an attack on a victim application running on another
processor (e.g., the CPU), allowing the attacker to gain sensitive information
about the victim applicationâ€™s activities. These attacks, which span different
components in the computing system, are extremely dangerous as they bypass
proposed mitigations that focus on a single component (either the CPU or the
GPU). This project assesses the feasibility of cross-component attacks and
develops defense mechanisms to secure computing systems against these attacks,
which is important for the computer chip industry. The project also includes
activities to broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores and characterizes the
threat model and develops cross-component side-channel attacks that leak
sensitive data through unintended side-effects of program execution observed
through shared microarchitectural resources, such as cache and interconnect in
integrated heterogeneous systems. In addition, the project develops both
hardware and software solutions to mitigate the attacks with emphasis on
security, high performance, and low complexity. Finally, the project
characterizes how modern and evolving web standards to task accelerators can be
used to launch these attacks remotely and proposes approaches to secure them, at
a critical time when these standards are being developed and before they are
widely deployed. The project furthers the knowledge and scope of
microarchitectural attacks beyond the prior focus on CPUs, which is a threat
model increasing in importance as we move increasingly towards heterogeneous
computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.