* 2130479
* Supporting Student Success in Associate Degrees that Prepare Students for Transfer to Baccalaureate Science and Mathematics Degree Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2027
* Steven Fauce, Coast Community College District System Office
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,485,711.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Coast Community College, an open-access community college. Over its six-
year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 75 unique full-time
students who are pursuing associate’s degrees designed to prepare students for
transfer into Biology, Geology, Mathematics, and Physics four-year programs.
First-year students will receive up to two and a half years of scholarships,
along with support to maximize their success. The over-arching goal of this
project is to build and evaluate the effects of a cohesive scientific community
that establishes student support. This community of support will include
dedicated students, faculty, and local professionals. Targeted support designed
to increase retention, graduation rates, and student success will be tailored to
meet the academic and social needs of low-income students. Focus will be on
helping students to build and leverage their confidence and motivation.
Integration of academic support services, faculty and industry mentors, work-
based learning opportunities, and supplemental instruction has been designed to
facilitate transition from community college into STEM four-year degree programs
and careers, thus broadening participation in STEM. Findings will be
disseminated via conference presentations and journal article publications. This
project provides a unique opportunity to contribute to the body of higher
education research regarding methods that promote student success, equity, and
diversity in STEM degree programs at the community college
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tuition and longer time to degree completion are
typical barriers for low-income students, particularly with regard to STEM
degree completion. As such, financial scholarships will help Coastline Community
College to recruit and support a broader group of low-income, underrepresented,
academically promising students by offsetting the cost of college attendance.
Goals of this project include recruiting and supporting low-income, academically
talented students in Coastline’s Associate Science Degree for Transfers through
1) scholarship support; 2) academic support, including supplemental instructors
in STEM courses; 3) use of individualized academic plans crafted jointly through
academic advising and with student scholars; and 4) inquiry-based learning and
research opportunities that lead to increased student success, fall-to-fall
retention, graduation, transfer, and employment rates in the STEM fields. A
clear evaluation plan will examine the impact of community support on community
college student confidence and motivation in associate degree completion.
Findings will be disseminated across other regional community colleges, as well
as through publications and presentations in journals focused on post-secondary
S-STEM student success. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.