* 2130552
* Enhancing Quantum Emissions from Atomically Thin Semiconductors with Metasurfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Xiaoqin Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 351,242.00

Atomically thin semiconductors refer to materials that are only one or a few
unit-cell thick. They can be created by peeling off layers from van der Waals
materials that consist of weakly bound two-dimensional layers or grown using
chemical processes that have already been developed in the semiconductor
industry. Metasurfaces refer to a class of flat optics that include engineered
unit cells smaller than the wavelength of light. Integrating atomically thin
materials with metasurfaces brings exciting new opportunities for quantum
technology. As an example, an array of quantum emitters that generate one photon
at a time can be used for enhancing community security. In this project,
metasurface engineering strategies will be designed and implemented to broadcast
such quantum emitters such as the signal is brighter due to quantum collective
phenomena with better-controlled emission direction and efficiency. The proposed
projects will provide excellent training opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students and prepare a workforce to compete globally in quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;When two atomically thin
van der Waals layers are vertically stacked together, the atomic alignment
between the layers exhibits periodical variations, leading to a new type of in-
plane superlattices known as the moir√© superlattices. They represent one of the
most exciting developments of photonic materials that have just emerged in the
last few years. In this program, the quantum emissions from transition metal
dichalcogenides moire superlattice will be enhanced using various metasurfaces,
charting new territories of hybrid photonic platforms.&lt;br/&gt; Specific goals
include (i) broadcasting an array of quantum emitters hosted in moire
superlattices using nano-antennas; (ii) selective excitation of valley polarized
emitters using chiral metasurfaces; (iii) realizing collective quantum emission
with zero-index metasurfaces. The proposed projects explore new types of quantum
photonic materials with the potential to address long-standing challenges of
solid-state quantum emitters. The program will integrate undergraduate and
graduate education with cutting-edge research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.