* 2130435
* Supporting Undergraduates from Community College to Excel and Succeed in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jen Hamel, Elon University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2023
* USD 142,238.00

This planning project will contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by exploring mechanisms
to support the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need who would transfer from the Early College
Program operating at Alamance Community College (ACC) to Elon University. Over
its 2-year duration, this project will build a pathway for students to transfer
from an early college program at ACC to Elon, a four-year institution, to pursue
bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Engineering,
Environmental Studies, Mathematics, and/or Physics. Key activities include
building collaborative relationships between STEM faculty and administrators, as
well as with the offices of admissions, institutional research, and financial
aid at partner institutions to determine the potential number of eligible
scholarship recipients and scholarship amounts. The project will also support a
robust needs assessment to guide the development, execution, and evaluation of
pilot programming for STEM students and faculty. Such pilot programming includes
a faculty professional development workshop series on inclusive teaching,
inclusive mentoring, and intercultural competence for faculty from each
institution. In addition, a student development workshop series is envisioned to
help students build skills and mindsets for academic success, by covering topics
such as study groups, authentic goal-setting, seeking tutoring, resilience,
self-efficacy, self-advocacy, growth mindset, and stereotype threat. The project
aims to empower students to persist to earn undergraduate STEM degrees and enter
STEM careers. Existing investments in engaged learning and student support
infrastructure will be leveraged to support the project. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of how strategic partnerships can leverage
resources and programming to positively affect the recruitment, retention,
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students who transfer from community
colleges to 4-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree
completion for high-achieving, low-income undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need the project will pursue five goals. First is to build a pathway
for high-achieving, low income students transferring from ACC to Elon by
creating a leadership team of administrators and STEM faculty from the
collaborating institutions. Second is to assess the academic, social, and/or
cognitive needs of faculty and students as well as the financial and programming
structures of the collaborating institutions. Third is to determine the
potential number of eligible scholarship recipients and scholarship amounts.
Fourth is to pilot and evaluate programming for STEM students and faculty that
is informed by the needs assessment. Fifth is to develop a future Track 3 S-STEM
proposal with robust evaluation and dissemination plans. Financial, academic,
and mentoring support are demonstrated strategies to increase student
persistence in STEM. Many 4-year colleges and universities have the resources
and infrastructure to promote student retention and success. However, little is
known about the efficacy of these resources for high-achieving, low-income
students who transfer from community colleges to complete STEM degrees. The
project will investigate if the perceived needs and expectations of STEM
transfer students and STEM faculty align with those documented in the
literature. It will also explore the intersections of STEM faculty and transfer
student perceptions and expectations. The project has the potential to show that
aligning the perceived needs and expectations of STEM faculty and transfer
students can enhance student persistence in STEM. Evaluation methods include
quantitative and qualitative surveys, focus groups, and asset mapping to
characterize needs and expectations as well as quantitative data on students and
faculty from collaborating institutions. Results of this project will be
disseminated at STEM education conferences to advance understanding of factors
that influence broadening participation in STEM fields and to encourage
additional strategic partnerships that leverage resources between 4-year
colleges and universities and community colleges. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.