* 2130042
* Alternate Pathways to Excellence: Engineering a Transfer-Friendly Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Jennifer Holte, University of St. Thomas
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,499,997.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of St. Thomas (UST). Located in the Twin Cities, MN, UST
is a designated "Military Friendly School" as well as a recognized "First-Gen
Forward Institution" and is known for its high rates of retention (87%) and
graduation in four years (68%). Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to 31 unique full-time students, including transfer students,
who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in civil, computer, electrical, or
mechanical engineering. Low-income, academically talented engineering students
who have demonstrated financial need will receive scholarships for up to three
years. The Alternate Pathways to Excellence (APEX) project will increase the
number of engineering transfer graduates by leveraging innovative mentoring
practices, advancing engineering-focused diversity, equity, and inclusion
efforts, and leveraging UST’s partnerships with five local community colleges.
The project team also expects to build strong connections with local employers
to help achieve the project's goals. Support activities for scholars will
include a new summer bridge course, monthly seminars to boost skills, and
faculty, peer, and industry mentoring. Through the APEX project, UST will
accelerate the Engineering Department’s efforts to advance an inclusive culture
by addressing structural limitations that are common in engineering program
curriculum, teaching practices, and recruitment efforts. These strategies will
have significance for engineering education broadly, and for supporting and
retaining transfer students. As a result, the APEX project will produce diverse,
well-qualified engineers who will meaningfully contribute to fueling innovation
in the Twin Cities region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree
completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduate transfer engineering
students, including students traditionally underrepresented in their
participation in STEM courses of study and first-generation students, the
project leadership will pursue three specific aims. First is to partner with
five community colleges to recruit transfer students. Second is to retain 90% of
scholars each year and graduate 90% of all scholars within 3 years. Third is to
support at least 95% of graduates to become employed in engineering or enrolled
in a graduate degree program within 4 months of degree attainment. APEX is
grounded in institutional research and knowledge from prior STEP awards, as well
as an understanding of transfer students’ unique needs for retention support,
including needs to identify scientific mentors and establish a sense of
belonging. Community college engineering students have been shown to benefit
from tailored academic and personal supports that address their unique
challenges. However, more investigation is needed to understand how specific
interventions such as mentoring, a summer bridge course, and enhanced
internships or research can improve engineering transfer student retention. In
addition, there is limited research on the extent to which diversity, equity,
and inclusion programming for engineering faculty and students creates a
scientific community that supports transfer student retention. UST will evaluate
and advance understanding of the extent to which these targeted activities
contribute to retaining transfer students. Results will be disseminated via the
KEEN National Conference and website, ASEE’s two-year college division, and
submissions to peer-reviewed publications such as the Journal of Engineering
Education. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) program, which seeks to increase the number
of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need
who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention,
transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.