* 2130402
* Developing an Ecosystem of STEM Success for Built Environment Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Muhammad Ummy, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,499,481.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at New York City College of Technology (City Tech), an urban, public
Hispanic-serving institution. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to about 60 unique full-time students who are pursuing an associate
or baccalaureate degree in one of the Built-Environment majors. The Built-
Environment majors included in the project are Civil Engineering Technology,
Construction Engineering Technology, Electrical Engineering Technology,
Mechanical Engineering Technology, and Environmental Control Technology.
Associate degree students will receive up to two-years of scholarship support
and baccalaureate degree students will receive up to four-years of scholarship
support. The project will leverage existing student and academic supports to
develop an ecosystem of success. It will implement evidence-based effective
practices and assess the impact of these practices, degree attainment and entry
into the U.S. workforce or graduate programs in STEM. The project will develop a
cohort of faculty and students in the built-environment majors, provide students
with opportunities for internships and undergraduate research, and provide
professional development for faculty and students. The project will increase the
number of low-income STEM students achieving social and economic mobility
through the pursuit and achievement of degrees in the Built-Environment. The
project will produce a better understanding of the key factors that contribute
to the successful transition of low-income academically talented students from
their baccalaureate degree attainment to either graduate degree STEM programs or
to STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project will add to the vitality and the
viability of New York City by increasing opportunities for the overall economic
mobility of the students while promoting a diverse workforce. Project objectives
are 1) To select, retain, and graduate a total of 60 S-STEM Scholars in the
Built Environment majors; 2) To increase the one-year retention rates of
participating Scholars 3) To produce more graduates in the Built Environment
majors; 4) To increase the enrollment and retention of female students in the
Built Environment Majors; 5) To promote S-STEM Scholars’ academic success
through cohort development, faculty mentoring, and engaging Scholars in
activities such as workshops, field trips, research, workforce internships, and
networking sessions; and 6) To identify strategies successful in promoting
academic success of low-income students. While there is a large body of
literature on first-generation college and low-income students’ experiences in
college, their academic support experiences are not well-researched. The project
will advance understanding related to diversity and inclusion in STEM academic
support by performing two distinct studies to determine the impact on low-income
students and female student in the built environment majors. The project will be
evaluated using a social science research approach to collecting both formative
and summative quantitative and qualitative data. Results of this project will be
disseminated at multiple levels: local, regional, and national including, but
not limited to publications in open access journals and participation in
conferences. This project is funded by the NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.