* 2130383
* Promoting Retention by Fostering Identity and Belongingness in Low Income Students Majoring in Scientific Disciplines and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Sheryl Smith, Arcadia University
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2027
* USD 750,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need for well-educated scientists and
mathematicians by improving the retention rates, graduation rates, and career
opportunities of academically talented, low-income students with unmet financial
need at Arcadia University, a small liberal arts school. Despite the
availability of many STEM-related career opportunities, STEM majors at Arcadia,
including those with unmet financial need and from groups underrepresented in
the STEM disciplines, often have lower retention and graduation rates than other
undergraduates. To address the national need for these scholars, an
interdisciplinary program will be created that integrates our STEM departments
(Biology, Chemistry and Physics, Mathematics and Computer Science) to provide
academic and financial support for 21 undergraduate STEM majors ("STEM
Scholars") over six years. STEM Scholars will participate in an
interdisciplinary cohort experience to foster the development of their STEM
identity and sense of belonging to the STEM community, both of which are
correlated with increased student retention in the STEM disciplines. As part of
the cohort experience, students will have opportunities to engage with STEM
faculty, network with other STEM professionals, and use interdisciplinary
problem-solving skills for community-based research projects and other high-
impact activities. These experiences will foster relationships among the STEM
Scholars and STEM faculty, while also helping Scholars develop technical skills
and professional confidence, and so result in increased STEM-degree graduation
rates and continuation to STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Arcadia University will provide four-year scholarships to three cohorts of seven
low-income, academically talented scholars (21) majoring in biology, chemistry,
computer science, math, and actuarial science who have unmet financial need.
This project is informed by institutional data suggesting that STEM Scholars
would benefit from targeted interventions designed to promote increases in (a)
first-year retention to 80% or higher, (b) graduation rates to 60%, or higher,
(c) the retention of underrepresented students in our STEM programs to 80% or
higher. and (d) STEM career placement. Consistent with the strategy's focus on
the student experience and student success, STEM Scholars will engage in
existing as well as evidence-based but new-to-Arcadia curricular and co-
curricular activities and opportunities selected to (1) foster STEM identity,
(2) promote a sense of belonging in the STEM community, and (3) promote a sense
of belonging in the wider non-STEM community using STEM skills to address
inequities within the community. Scholars will be engaged in interdisciplinary
approaches to problem solving and community-based research projects to further
deepen their sense of belonging in STEM- and non-STEM communities and strengthen
their STEM identity. Arcadia will study the effects of high-impact activities on
the development of STEM identity and sense of belonging in STEM and non-STEM
communities among our STEM Scholars, and the effects of these activities on
first-year and overall retention, as well as preparation for the workforce.
Improved retention and graduation in STEM fields and successful pursuit of STEM-
related careers or graduate school will further strengthen the nation's STEM
workforce and help diversify its composition. The project approaches, results,
and conclusions will be broadly disseminated through the published literature
and other channels, allowing other similar institutions to benefit from this
work. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) program, which seeks to increase the number
of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need
who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
STEM workers and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention,
transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.