* 2130889
* PAWR Platform ARA: Wireless Living Lab for Smart and Connected Rural Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2026
* Tommaso Melodia, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Murat Torlak
* 05/31/2026
* USD 6,253,027.00

This award will fund the creation of an at-scale platform for advanced wireless
research to be deployed across the Iowa State University (ISU) campus, City of
Ames (where ISU resides), and surrounding research and producer farms as well as
rural communities in central Iowa, spanning a rural area with diameter over
60km. The platform, called ARA: Wireless Living Lab for Smart and Connected
Rural Communities, will address the rural broadband challenge by enabling the
research and development of rural-focused wireless technologies that provide
affordable, high-capacity connectivity to rural communities and industries such
as agriculture. This project is part of the NSF Platforms for Advanced Wireless
Research (PAWR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ARA aims to deploy advanced
wireless platforms in real-world agriculture and rural settings, capturing the
systems and environmental properties as well as the application and community
contexts of rural broadband. For instance, ARA features the future of precision
agriculture in both crop and livestock farms, involving automated ground
vehicles as well as cameras and sensors. The platform features unique wireless
technologies ranging from low-UHF massive Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO)
antennas to millimeter-Wave wireless access and long-distance backhaul, free-
space optical, and low-earth-orbit (LEO) satellite communications, employing
both software-defined-radio (SDR) and programmable commercial-off-the-shelf
(COTS) platforms, effectively leveraging open-source wireless software platforms
such as OpenAirInterface, srsLTE, and others, with a contiguous coverage of
hundreds of square miles of rural areas, ARA serves as an at-scale, deeply-
programmable infrastructure for rural wireless research in real-world settings.
Transforming the physical infrastructure into a research instrument supporting
rigorous scientific studies and application trials, AraSoft, the software system
of ARA, will enable reproducible, convenient experimentation and facilitates
cross-discipline, cross-community collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team is led by researchers at Iowa State University along with
researchers participating from University of California – Irvine, Ohio State
University and International Computer Science Institute. With oversight from the
Platforms for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) Project Office, this team will
design, deploy, operate, and sustain ARA as a revolutionary experimentation
platform to support advanced research on rural broadband, 5G wireless systems
and beyond. Information on the access to this PAWR platform is available on
https://www.advancedwireless.org. The project is also supported with funding
from the United States Department of Agriculture’s (USDA) National Institute of
Food and Agriculture (NIFA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.