* 2130536
* Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Weak Derandomizations in Time and Space Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Pavan Aduri, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 228,000.00

Certain computational tasks such as network connectivity, sorting, and testing
whether a number is a prime number admit time-efficient algorithms. On the other
hand, many computational tasks, such as the traveling salesperson problem,
integer factoring, and several other optimization problems, are not known to
admit fast algorithms. Why does such computational disparity exist among natural
computational tasks? This is a foundational question that impacts many
scientific areas including mathematics, engineering, economics, optimization,
and communication -- areas beyond computer science. Computational complexity
theory investigates the notion of efficient computation. Typically, efficiency
is measured in terms of computational resources such as time, memory, and
randomness. This project aims to advance the state-of-the-art in computational
complexity theory by investigating the role of randomness and its interplay with
time and memory. Research findings from this project will be published in peer-
reviewed venues as well as in open access venues enabling broad dissemination of
scientific results. Efforts will be taken to integrate research with teaching at
both graduate and undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even though there
is strong scientific evidence that randomized computations can be efficiently
derandomized, establishing unconditional and complete derandomization results is
known to be well beyond the current techniques in the field. In this context,
this project will investigate certain weak but unconditional derandomizations.
This is achieved by exploring (a) pseudodeterministic algorithms -- randomized
algorithms that output a canonical value with high probability, and their
relation to some central topics in complexity theory including completeness,
promise problems, and circuit complexity; and (b) probabilistic space-bounded
computations with multiple access to the random tape, and their relation to
derandomization of time-bounded probabilistic classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.