* 2130211
* Science to Success: supporting STEM achievement in the Bluegrass
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Brian Dietel, Kentucky Community & Technical College System
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,499,876.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Bluegrass Community and Technical College. A total of 45 scholar-
scientists pursuing associate’s degrees in environmental science technology,
biotechnology, industrial engineering technology, mathematics, computer
information technology or computer engineering technology will be receive
scholarships and have access to a suite of services in preparation for transfer
to baccalaureate institutions or entry into high-demand jobs. Scholars will
receive in-depth support from a STEM Coordinator who will oversee cohort-based
academic experiences, arrange tutoring and spotlight instruction, and provide
insights into campus programs and systems that will benefit scholars as they
proceed through their studies. Faculty mentors will engage students in a shared
community of practice focused on scientific inquiry and professional networking.
Mentors will also provide supplementary instruction and share knowledge to
better prepare the scholar-scientists as they advance their careers in their
chosen fields. During their two years in the project, cohorts of scholars will
be provided opportunities to network, pursue research, and deepen their
engagement with course content as they connect with industry and academic
professionals in Central Kentucky and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Low-
income students comprise more than half of the college’s population, and a more
systematic effort is needed to understand student experiences and the barriers
to completing academic requirements. To this end, the project also includes a
rigorous evaluation plan that will assess progress toward goals and generate new
knowledge related to factors that might impede low-income student success in
STEM programs at a community college. Major data sources include interviews,
surveys, and group feedback sessions within the learning community seminars.
Through participation in the project activities, faculty mentors will learn
which practices are most effective in retaining low-income students and will be
encouraged to share this knowledge with colleagues to better embed innovations
in the college’s approach to teaching and learning. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.