* 2130255
* Supporting Talent with Aligned Resources for STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2028
* Hilary Smith Risser,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,091,396.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Salish Kootenai College, University of Montana, Montana Technological
University, and Blackfeet Community College. Salish Kootenai College and
Blackfeet Community College are both Tribal Colleges. Over its six-year
duration, this project will fund scholarships to 105 unique full-time STEM
students who are pursuing associate and/or bachelor degrees in Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Mathematics and Statistics, Physical Sciences, Engineering,
Computer and Information Sciences, and/or Natural Resources and Conservation.
First-year students in Bachelor degree programs will receive four-year
scholarships while transfer students and first-year students in Associate degree
programs will receive two-year scholarships. Students in the project will have
access to a wide variety of supports such as individual mentoring from STEM
faculty members and peers and monthly professional development opportunities
with students from all four institutions. One of the unique features of the
program is the collaboration between four institutions. This increased
partnership between public research institutions and Tribal Colleges will
facilitate a bidirectional sharing of best practices for mentoring, inclusive
instruction, and student support. The partnership will also provide students
with access to peers and faculty members at three other institutions within the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. The aims of this project are to increase the first-year
retention and graduation rates for each student cohort, improve transition after
graduation to either a STEM career or further higher education, and advance
knowledge about issues and factors impacting advancement along the academic
pathway. Montana faces post-secondary persistence challenges with two of its
largest population groups: Native Americans and individuals from extremely rural
areas. Each group faces unique persistence challenges, with some commonalities
(e.g., strong ties to family/land, culture shock, stereotypes). Students with
positive STEM-based identities perform better academically and are more likely
to persist to earn a degree and stay in a STEM field. However, STEM-based
identities can clash with personal identities, especially for students from
marginalized communities. This project will add understanding in how to develop
integrated identities that incorporate STEM identities and personal/cultural
identities. To address the question of integrated identities, the social science
research team will use a mixed-methods design. Findings will be synthesized into
culturally-attuned, place-based knowledge that is useful for teaching,
mentorship, and policy in STEM programs at Tribal and non-Tribal Colleges and
Universities. This project will disseminate research findings, successes, and
lessons learned to appropriate stakeholders via local and community meetings,
presentations at regional and national events, and publications in relevant
journals. These dissemination activities will take place on each campus and
within communities as appropriate (e.g. Tribal Council meetings, community
forums, and contribution to newsletters, websites, and other venues). This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.