* 2130397
* Promoting Psychological Well-Being and Resilience to Increase Retention in High Achieving STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Edwin Barea-Rodriguez, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,393,594.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need in the Honors College of the University of Texas at San Antonio, a four-
year Hispanic-Serving Institution. Over its six- year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 27 unique&lt;br/&gt;full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Mathematics
and Physics and Astronomy. First-year students will receive up to four years of
scholarship support. This project will increase success in high achieving
students by studying and targeting the effects that stress and imposter syndrome
can have on retention. Students will participate in a supportive program which
will help them recognize the impact stress is having in their lives, develop
effective stress management and coping skills, identify and address their social
support needs and prioritize self-care. Learning about the effectiveness of
stress reduction in career achievement will be important in&lt;br/&gt;retaining
high-quality students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Stress and imposter syndrome
are recognized as negative factors in life, but little is known about how great
their impact can be on retention among high achieving college students,
especially among students from underrepresented groups who may be subject to
greater negative effects. This project will investigate whether a program to
increase awareness of stress and training to reduce stress can significantly
increase retention and graduation rates. This project has the potential to
increase the number of highly talented STEM professionals through applying
stress reduction&lt;br/&gt;techniques as part of the scholastic program in STEM
fields. The levels of psychological adaptation will be measured using well
established interview instruments and student success will be measured by
following GPA and graduation rates. Annual evaluation will be accomplished
through an outside firm interviewing participants. Results of this project will
be made available through conference presentations and journal publications.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income students. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.