* 2130350
* Promoting Excellence, Retention, Scholarship in STEM  (PERSIST)
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Moses Ntam, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,499,916.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Tuskegee University, a Historically Black College and University (HBCU).
Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 23 unique full-
time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biology, chemistry, physics
and mathematics. First year students will receive up to 4 years of scholarship
support. The project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by
linking scholarships with effective support activities, including mentoring,
undergraduate research experiences, service learning, outreach projects, and
participation in discipline-specific conferences. With the help of mentors, the
scholars will create Individual Development Plans (IDP) outlining their career
goals and steps toward achieving those goals. The project will also support
curriculum improvements aimed at improving first-year student retention in STEM.
Because Tuskegee University has a high population of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields and to learn how mentoring and individual
development plans support retention and graduation of this student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion for low-income, academically talented undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. There are three specific aims: (1) increase first
year retention rates in biology, chemistry, mathematics, physics and
mathematics, (2) graduate over 80% of scholars who participate in this project,
and (3) investigate factors that promote persistence in STEM disciplines among
low-income students. The research for this project will be focused on college
persistence for low-income students in STEM disciplines. More specifically,
research questions will focus on (1) the extent to which recruited low-income
students continue to persist in and graduate from STEM degrees, (2) the extent
to which low-income students graduating from the Tuskegee PERSIST program differ
from other low-income students in terms of critical skills required to persist
in college, including academic efficacy, study skills, time management,
motivation, social networking, and degree and institutional commitment, and (3)
the relationship between student characteristics, student experiences and
dispositions, campus environment, and engagement in mentoring with the
persistence of low-income students in STEM degree programs. This project has the
potential to advance understanding of persistence in STEM disciplines among low-
income students at HBCU’s. This project will be evaluated using a mixed methods
approach with information from surveys, focus-groups, interviews, and
demographic data. Evaluation questions will be developed based on the project
goals and activities. Results of this project will be made available through NSF
progress reports, presentations at professional conferences, and journal
publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.