* 2130107
* Supporting Biology and Neuroscience Undergraduates with Scholarships and Development of Science Identity, Belonging, and Self-Efficacy
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* David McLetchie, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,493,748.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Kentucky. The University of Kentucky, the
Commonwealth’s flagship institution, is a public land grant university that
serves a diverse group of over 30,000 students. Over its six-year duration, this
project aims to provide scholarships to 45 unique full-time students who are
pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology or Neuroscience. First year students will
receive four years of scholarship support. The project aims to increase student
persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with effective supporting
activities, including mentoring, research experiences, internship opportunities,
career development, workshops, and a capstone experience. Cohort activities will
include a tiered mentoring system, which will provide S-STEM scholars with an
undergraduate peer mentor, a graduate student mentor, and a faculty mentor.
Curricular programming will span the scholarship period, beginning with a
section of the university’s academic orientation designed for S-STEM scholars
and culminating with a capstone experience. Scholars will have the opportunity
to conduct research with a faculty mentor both during their first year and as
upper-level students. Programming includes a partnership with the Career Center
to offer new internship opportunities and alumni mentorship for students
entering the workforce after completion of their bachelor’s degree.
Interventions aimed to increase science identity and self-efficacy will be
embedded throughout the curriculum. Co-curricular activities will build
community, offer networking opportunities among cohort members and mentors, and
support students’ sense of belonging in the larger scientific community. The
S-STEM program has potential to help achieve the mission of the University of
Kentucky by preparing S-STEM scholars for graduate and professional programs or
to enter the workforce. Ultimately, this work is likely to inform expanded
approaches for fostering the success of all students in undergraduate STEM
majors, encouraging retention and degree progression. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The
project has three specific aims: 1) provide scholarships for academically
talented Biology and Neuroscience undergraduates with financial need, 2)
implement evidence-based curricular and co-curricular programming to develop
STEM skills and strengthen science identity, belonging, and self-efficacy, and
3) generate knowledge that will be disseminated to the broader STEM education
community. Psychosocial factors including science identity, belonging, and self-
efficacy are known to affect STEM persistence. Importantly, high impact
practices, especially mentoring and research experiences, have been shown to
positively affect students’ self-beliefs and motivation to engage in STEM
domains, particularly for students who have been historically underrepresented.
This project will study the effectiveness of a number of high-impact educational
practices in promoting science self-efficacy, belonging, and STEM identity. The
project will be evaluated using a combination of quantitative and qualitative
measures including surveys, journals, and interviews to measure STEM identity,
belonging, and self-efficacy. Retention and persistence in STEM fields will also
be tracked. This program has potential to increase the knowledge base of
effective curricular and supportive learning practices and to generate knowledge
about effective recruitment and retention of academically talented low-income
students in STEM disciplines. Knowledge will be disseminated to campus leaders
as well as the broader STEM education community through presentations and
publications. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success,
retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.