* 2130371
* Computer Science Indigenous Community of Learners United to Develop, Excel, and Succeed
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Deborah Moore-Russo, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,498,943.00

Only one Tribal College in the U.S. has a Computer Science BS program, and other
colleges and universities graduate small numbers of indigenous students per year
per school in Computer Science. These numbers fall well short of the needs of
the at least three million tribal members from 574 Tribal Nations in a society
that is increasingly mediated by computing. This project aims to produce
Computer Science graduates who have been nurtured and mentored to support Tribal
Nation building to greatly enhance the technological capabilities of the
Nations. This will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Oklahoma. Over its six-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 23 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Computer Science. The lessons learned during this project
will help the University of Oklahoma institutionalize the structures that should
form sustainable pathways to Computer Science for indigenous
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to attract, recruit,
retain, and graduate students with an interest in Tribal Nation building and
Computer Science at the University of Oklahoma. To accomplish this goal, two
cohorts will be recruited under the guidance of an advisory board, composed of
individuals from organizations that understand and support Indigenous Education.
The advisory board will also help develop a Computer Science program that is
culturally competent and has value for indigenous students, their communities,
and other students interested in supporting indigenous communities. Tribes and
Indian Education Departments will be partners to generate tribal communities’
interest in Computer Science as a discipline and as a means to help with Tribal
Nation building. Students in the program will be provided a weekly Study Hall
where peer mentors will support their academic achievement, and scholars will be
matched with two faculty mentors: one with expertise in Indigenous Education and
one in Computer Science, and group academic advising will be employed to support
a cohort community. A Student Success Advisory Board of staff and faculty will
identify relevant supports and resources needed for the students in the program
and will advise on integrating these programs into academic structures. Students
in the program will be given professional development opportunities including
internships in indigenous communities, service-learning projects to benefit
tribal communities, and undergraduate research projects. This project will be
evaluated by an Indigenous Education researcher with expertise in indigenous
methodologies. Evaluation results and lessons learned will be disseminated
through Engineering Education and Indigenous Higher Education conferences and
journals. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.