* 2130428
* Fostering Adaptive Expertise to Increase Retention and Graduation of Low-Income STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2028
* Susan Metz, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,499,955.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Stevens Institute of Technology. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 50 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in S-STEM eligible disciplines spanning math, science, and
engineering. After their first semester of study at Stevens, low-income students
who meet eligibility requirements will be able to apply for up to seven
semesters of scholarship support. The goal of the ADAPT program is to increase
retention and graduation rates of low-income academically talented STEM
students. Project activities will include the adoption of best practices with
regards to mentoring programs to support the ADAPT Scholars and the development
of targeted enrichment activities focused on fostering the characteristics of
Adaptive Expertise within the Scholars. Additionally, the project team expects
to integrate new programming specifically supporting low-income students with
existing campus supports and to implement modules to increase departmental and
institutional awareness of the challenges faced by low-income students. The
program will contribute to the STEM knowledge base of how academic departments
and universities can better support low-income STEM student persistence through
graduation. Key elements of the program may be replicable by other universities
seeking to better support the success of their low-income STEM students and will
be adaptable to support other underserved and vulnerable STEM student groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Three specific aims of the project are to adapt best practices
to create a supportive and nurturing Scholar environment, to develop activities
focused on fostering the characteristics of Adaptive Expertise within the
Scholars, and to increase departmental and institutional supports for low-income
students. In the learning science literature individuals with Adaptive Expertise
complement the content knowledge of an expert with additional, specific
cognitive dispositions which support the application of this content knowledge
in practice. The project's theory of action is that a well-designed faculty,
peer, and alumni cohort/mentoring program specifically targeting the development
of Adaptive Expertise will increase the sense of resiliency in ADAPT Scholars
and support persistence towards undergraduate degree completion. A targeted
research study will track changes in adaptiveness in the ADAPT Scholars
throughout their studies while indicating which programming elements are most
effective in supporting such student growth. If successful, the proposed effort
could lead to a replicable and scalable national model of how facilitation in
the growth of Adaptive Expertise can support low-income students through
completion of their STEM degrees. An integrated formative and summative
evaluation component will ensure successful completion of project objectives.
Dissemination efforts will share program materials and findings with the larger
STEM educational community seeking to promote diverse and inclusive
participation in STEM fields. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.