* 2130403
* Fostering Future Engineering Faculty Diversity by Building a Pipeline to Graduate Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* James Sherwood, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,495,564.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Massachusetts Lowell, a R2 public research university
with a high percentage of first-generation undergraduate students. Over its
6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 24 unique full-time
students who will be supported for four years from their junior undergraduate
year through the completion of a master's degree or completion of their
qualifying exam within a Ph.D. program. The goal of the project is to create a
diverse and competitive pool of students who could become future faculty
candidates in engineering by aiding them to explore their interest in these
careers and supporting them to prepare and embark on these graduate education
pathways. Project activities include group-based mentoring meetings with
internal and external faculty, safe space cohort building, job shadowing,
individual graduate school application support, positive teaching and research
experiences, a curriculum to cultivate pedagogical and content knowledge, and a
mentorship program (Entering Research Mentoring Program; ERMP) for first- and
second-year graduate students. The project will also employ podcasting as a way
to introduce high school students to STEM careers. This project has the
potential to significantly increase the number of STEM graduates from
traditionally underrepresented populations in engineering at the graduate level,
and strengthen the pipeline of highly qualified diverse candidates entering
careers in higher education. Another important broader impact is the project's
strong potential to foster social justice educators with core personal and
professional beliefs in diversity and inclusion, which help promote inclusive
and equitable environment in higher education to retain a future generation of
engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit goal is to
better understand the factors that motivate low-income, high-achieving,
underrepresented engineering students to persist in the trajectory to
engineering graduate programs and future faculty positions in higher education.
The project plans to employ a variety of evidence-based interventions that have
been used successfully to support students to achieve their career goals. The
project will determine whether group-based mentoring and safe space cohort
building contribute to low income, high achieving analyze the evaluation data
collected from a teaching diverse populations course to advance knowledge about
how to cultivate social justice educators. In addition, the project will explore
the potential of podcasting as a way for scholars to self-express and explore
their interest and confidence in pursuing a faculty career. Lastly, the project
will examine whether participation in ERMP results in positive mentoring
relationships, professional identity, research and academic skills, and
confidence in pursuing faculty careers. Results of this project will be
disseminated via presentations at local and national conferences, publications
in engineering education journals, a website featuring cohort activities, and
podcast episodes targeted to high school students. &lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by NSFâ€™s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.