* 2130831
* Characterizing and Exploiting the Remarkable Surface Redox Chemistry of Ceria and Its Derivatives
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Sossina Haile, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2025
* USD 413,396.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this research to advance the fundamental
understanding of the behavior of the surfaces of ceria (CeO2), a technologically
relevant material for a wide range of industrial processes and devices. These
applications include solid oxide fuel cells, electrolyzers for water splitting,
solar-driven thermochemical fuel production, chemical looping combustion,
automotive 3-way catalysts, photodegradation of organic pollutants, and
supercapacitors. The approach underway in this project combines preparation of
materials with well-defined surface termination with advanced characterization
tools. The insights gained enable deliberate engineering of structures and
selection of appropriate chemistries to achieve exceptional performance.
Students at multiple levels are incorporated into the research and training
goals of this effort via internships for high school and undergraduate students,
as well as doctoral research opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research aims to
dramatically advance the understanding of the surface properties of ceria and
its solid solutions. The PI proposes to acquire fundamental knowledge about the
redox chemistry of both internal and exposed ceria surfaces using well-defined
structures that support exquisite studies by sophisticated characterization
techniques. Efforts include A.C. impedance spectroscopy of thin-film materials
to determine surface activity as a function of termination, cation chemistry,
and strain; angle-resolved X-ray adsorption spectroscopy studies of such films
to determine both Ce oxidation state and local chemical environment about cation
species; impedance studies of individually defined grain boundaries prepared by
fusing film-on-substrate structures; and creation and manipulation of vertically
aligned nanostructures, with potential memristive properties, via substrate
modification. The research leverages the extensive growth and characterization
tools available on campus. Students are engaged at multiple levels. Graduate
students participate in all aspects of this research and develop mentorship
skills by advising undergraduate students in summer research and senior thesis
research. Furthermore, high school students participate in laboratory activities
through the Northwestern Academy, a collaboration between Northwestern
University and Evanston Township High.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.