* 2130365
* EAGER: Multiscale multiplex spatial-omics: Illuminating molecular pathways and architecture in plant cells and tissues
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Kirk Czymmek, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,586.00

This project will develop advanced microscopy techniques for visualizing many
different molecules at the same time within plant cells, thus contributing to
understanding of how plants grow, reproduce and interact with disease causing
microbes. This investment in developing multiplex microscopy will provide novel
plant focused and other non-biomedical applications for the greater scientific
community. This project will be leveraged for training scientists at all ranks
up to principal investigators. Tomorrow’s scientists will be trained through
active participation in the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center (DDPSC) NSF-
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Program, teaching an advanced
imaging short course, recruitment of high school students for imaging projects
and participation in a regional internship program for high school students
called Students and Teachers As Research Scientists (STARS). Additionally, the
highly successful DDPSC Education and Outreach program will host workshops for
teachers and provide interactive mentoring that connects our scientists with
nearby schools including Harris Stowe University, a Historically Black College
and University. In collaboration with The Bio-Analytic Resource for Plant
Biology, this effort will share plant data online, and actively communicate and
disseminate newly developed multiplex techniques through the NSF funded Plant
Cell Atlas initiative, a community resource with the goal to build an integrated
high-resolution molecular map of plant cells. The results from this effort will
be disseminated in peer-reviewed publications, at scientific meetings, in hands-
on/online workshops, training videos and a searchable online
database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One contemporary challenge in biology is to
understand how large numbers of diverse molecules are distributed within cells
and tissues. To address this, spatial-omics techniques are transforming the way
we understand complex organisms. One form, “multiplex” microscopy, has been
applied largely for biomedical applications to understand human disease, but is
virtually unused in plants. This project will develop a transformative and
versatile pipeline for multiscale plant tissue arrays using multiplex
microscopy, probing nucleic acids, proteins and polysaccharides for correlated
light, super-resolution and electron microscopy on the same sample, while
preserving cell ultrastructure. The multiplex technique will be validated on
select plant systems to create high-dimensional multiplex datasets of 1)
cellular/cell wall modifications during abscission, 2) protein, mRNA and sRNA
localization in anthers during small RNA biogenesis, and 3) host-pathogen
interactions at infection sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.