* 2130006
* Improving student success in completing science degrees and entry into the science workforce through collaborative student peer-teaching and improving science identity
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Tracy Caldwell, Dominican University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2028
* USD 746,469.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Dominican University in River Forest, IL. Dominican University is a
liberal arts and sciences university which is also a Hispanic-Serving
Institution (HSI). Over its 6-year duration, this project will fund scholarships
to 16 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in Biology,
Biology-Chemistry, and Chemistry. First-year students will receive four-year
scholarships. The project will include academic support with collaborative
faculty-student teaching, known as Peer-led team learning support, a cohort
experience through common courses, a four-year learning community-style course,
faculty mentoring, and supported research experiences. A unique feature of this
project will be a combination of academic and sociocultural supports, such as
activities designed to improve science identity and feelings of connection and
inclusion in the field of science. Dominican University has a large population
of students who are female, Hispanic/Latinx, and are from low-income families,
and supporting these students will diversify the science workforce. The findings
of this project will be of interest to universities with similarly diverse
student populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. In addition to supporting a cohort of students
in successfully earning STEM degrees, a second project goal is to support entry
of graduating students into the STEM workforce or graduate/professional
programs. Other project goals include increasing knowledge of how interventions
can increase student persistence through academic support, improved science
identity, and improved science efficacy as well as increased institutional
capacity in supporting students with financial need. While there is growing
evidence that certain forms of academic support can improve persistence and
student success, less is known about how academic support combined with
psychosocial interventions can improve science identity, science efficacy, which
in turn can improve degree completion and entry into scientific careers. The
research design and implementation of this project is grounded in constructivist
and sociocultural theories of learning. The expected outcomes, based on theory
and previous empirical results, are that course-based interventions, trained
faculty mentoring, and academic support through Peer-led Team Learning will
improve student persistence by improving those students’ science identity. The
project will be evaluated through several forms of evidence, including analysis
of student transcripts, student career choices, faculty data, and student
interview data. The project results will be disseminated by presentation at
regional and national academic conferences such as the Chicago Math and Science
Symposium series and the Society for the Advancement of Biology Education
Research Annual Conference. Additionally, project results will be published in
science discipline-based education research journals, such as the journal CBE –
Life Sciences Education and The Journal of Microbiology and Biology Education.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.