* 2130734
* Collaborative Research: Learning-Based Scalable Predictive Control Strategies for Heterogeneous Traffic Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Ali Mesbah, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 12/31/2024
* USD 276,684.00

The widespread adoption of connected and automated vehicle technology is likely
to take place over a number of years as the technology becomes more commonly
accepted by the public and approved by regulatory authorities. Until then, it is
essential to develop traffic management strategies that consider the uncertainty
associated with heterogeneities in traffic networks and understand the extent to
which these strategies improve the performance of traffic networks. This
research project aims to develop and validate infrastructure- and vehicle-based
control strategies to enhance heterogeneous traffic networks, addressing human-
driven and automated vehicles, mobility, and energy efficiency. The project
outcomes will be of interest to municipalities and transportation agencies, the
automotive industry, and equipment manufacturers. Specifically, the control
approaches will be of value to transportation agencies in understanding how
infrastructure-based strategies can be exploited to improve energy efficiency
and mobility in mixed traffic environments. Real-time control algorithms
developed for autonomous vehicles can help the automotive industry determine a
set of protocols that address the needs for safe and effective navigation in a
mixed traffic network. Further, the models and techniques developed in this
research are expected to have implications for a wide range of applications
where the system's behavior can be modeled as an uncertain heterogeneous system,
such as aerial and ground mobile robots operating in search and rescue missions.
The educational plan is designed to impact graduate and undergraduate students,
K-12 students, and minority students to prepare and engage a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research aims to develop a
framework for tractable modeling and optimal control of a heterogeneous traffic
network consisting of autonomous and human-driven vehicles. This goal will be
realized by combining data-driven modeling of uncertain systems, stochastic
model predictive control, and distributed optimization. The project defines
three research objectives: (1) development of distributed learning- and
scenario-based model predictive control methods at the upper (macroscopic) level
wherein functional variational Bayesian neural networks will be used to model
the state- and input-dependent uncertainty associated with the heterogeneity in
the traffic network, and distributed optimization algorithms will be used to
enhance the computational efficiencies of the proposed control approach; (2)
development of distributed cautious model predictive control-based approaches
for heterogeneous multi-agent systems at the lower (microscopic) level to ensure
the safety of individual vehicles while tracking the desired reference command
set by the macroscopic-level controller; (3) test the effectiveness of the
hierarchical learning-based control paradigm for both urban and highway traffic
networks using the PTV-VISSIM traffic simulation
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.