* 2130257
* CNS Core: Small: Disentangled System Software
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Lin Zhong, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 10/31/2024
* USD 531,999.00

Today's system software are large and vastly complex. While they are highly
modular, their components are often interdependent and tightly coupled. As a
result, system software, especially operating systems (OSes), have become
difficult to maintain, evolve, update safely, and run reliably. This is
particularly problematic in environments where reliability is necessary, yet
hardware redundancy is expensive or impossible. For example, system software
updates must be painstakingly applied without downtime or lost execution context
in pacemakers and space probes. Even in data centers, where network switches are
replicated for reliability, switch software failures and maintenance updates
still lead to network outages. The key insight of the project is that state
spill between modules is the root cause of entanglement within system software.
State spill happens when one module's state undergoes a lasting change as a
result of interacting with another module. It is both prevalent and deep in
modern system software. By minimizing state spill, this project aims at
disentangled system software in which every component can evolve independently,
ideally at runtime, without the fear of failures in one component jeopardizing
others. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Today's cloud services achieve fault tolerance
and timely evolution with massive redundancy and abundance in warehouse data
centers. This project will help bring these values to computer systems where
redundancy and abundance are a luxury, such as medical implants, embedded
systems, and even edge data centers, substantially improving their availability.
By elevating these computers to the same level as data centers, this project
will encourage more services to be placed outside the cloud, closer to end
users, a radical departure from today's cloud-centric paradigm. This departure
not only has the potential for better user experiences and novel services but
also to democratize computing. The project will also cross-pollinate other
important directions in systems software research by motivating new language
features and suggest more ways to ensure disentanglement statically, and by
allowing incremental specification and verification of large software systems on
a module-by-module basis. The project will provide a platform to engage
undergraduate students and high-school students in computing research,
especially women and underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.