* 2130936
* Storm-environment interactions controlling the probability of supercell tornadogenesis
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthew Parker, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 686,966.00

The goal of this project is to improve our understanding of why some supercells
(rotating thunderstorms) produce tornadoes and others that form in very similar
atmospheric conditions do not. The specific chain of processes that result in
tornado formation (vs. failure) are known to be highly sensitive to seemingly
minor details within the environment and the storm itself. While our community
has made substantial progress at forecasting tornadoes in recent decades, we
have yet to explain why tornadoes so frequently fail to form within seemingly
favorable atmospheric conditions. The specific aim of this research is to
understand better these failure points in tornado formation. Without such
progress, the ability to forecast and produce timely warnings for tornadoes (and
avoid false alarms) is unlikely to further improve. The leading scientists for
this project will involve students from diverse background and weather
forecasters from the National Weather Service in this research. The expected
outcome would improve our basic understanding of how tornadoes form and lead to
improvements in public forecasts and warnings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigators seek to advance our fundamental scientific knowledge of supercells
and tornado formation through hypothesis-driven research. The proposed work will
directly compare the attributes of tornadic and nontornadic supercells with a
hierarchy of computer modeling techniques, including large ensembles of
simulations and incorporating novel techniques to emulate environments that vary
in time. The proposed work will also quantify the roles of environmental
(external to the storm) vs. within-storm processes in supercell tornado
formation. Finally, the proposed work will explain the precursors (prior to
storm formation) responsible for the generation of favorable environmental
conditions for tornadoes (specifically, the atmospheric wind profile very near
the ground).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.