* 2130845
* Integrating Superconducting and Spintronics Devices for Low-Power and High-Speed Operation and Brain-Inspired Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Igor Zutic, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 352,997.00

There is a growing need to address the power consumption in future computer
technologies, beyond the traditional approach of a continued increase in a
number of scaled-down transistors. Superconducting electronics offers promising
energy-efficient alternatives, even after including the cost of cooling. The key
element of superconducting electronics is the Josephson junction, recognized by
the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physics. In this junction two superconductors are
separated by the nonsuperconducting region, but zero-resistance charge current
can still flow across the whole device. However, the lack of suitable memories
remains a key challenge and prevents the integration of superconducting logic
and memory. To overcome this limitation and unlock potential for brain-inspired
computing, it is proposed to integrate advances from the field of spintronics
where information is represented by electron spin and by its proxy, the
direction of magnetization. Ferromagnets such as iron or cobalt have a finite
magnetization, resulting from a spin imbalance: a different number of electron
spins is oriented with or against the magnetization axis. Ideal for memory, this
magnetization persists without an outlet power, just as the magnet is attracted
to the fridge. Unlike magnets, common superconductors have spin balance, they
are characterized by a collection of paired electros with spins of opposite
directions. Bringing a magnet with its spin imbalance next to a superconductor
destroys the spin balance and superconductivity. The proposed research reveals
that by engineering spin-orbit coupling it is possible to transform
superconductors to have paired electrons of equal spins thereby ensuring their
coexistence with magnets for integrating memory with logic. The findings of the
proposed research will be closely integrated with the outreach efforts,
recognizing that a vast majority of public-school students have minimal or no
exposure to physical sciences adversely affecting the subsequent enrolment in
STEM disciplines. Summer Workshops will be organized on: Applications of
Magnetism and Super-conductivity covering topics on spintronics, motors, medical
imaging, Maglev trains, and biomagnetism. As a part of the annual SPIE:
Optics&amp;Photonics Conference, Superconducting Spintronics Symposia will be
organized to bridge the gap between the spintronics and superconducting
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hallmark of Josephson junctions is the
phase-coherence with the corresponding current-phase relations, where
dissipationless charge current can flow even at zero applied bias. Dynamical
operation of Josephson junctions resembles oscillations of a damped pendulum.
Ultrafast oscillations, analogous to the full-circle rotation of a pendulum, can
be switched quickly at ~1 ps, dissipate only 0.1 aJ per switch, while producing
current pulses that travel at 1/3 of the speed of light. The proposed work
reveals how these properties can enable potentially transformative spintronic
devices in which the presence of spin-orbit coupling and magnetic regions would
alter dissipationless currents to also carry spin and provide a seamless
integration of logic and memory. Such Josephson junctions therefore serve both
as an element of logic and of memory: logic is implemented through ultrafast
current pulses, while the memory is encoded through the magnetization
orientation with the readout based on the superconducting phase. The tunability
of current-phase relations with spin-orbit coupling also offers unexplored
opportunities in brain-inspired computing and artificial neural networks,
relying on phase-controlled current pulses. Josephson junction devices will be
examined through comprehensive modeling of their superconducting and magnetic
properties, while the precise form of spin-orbit coupling will be calculated
from the first-principles atomistic studies. These results will be
experimentally verified through collaborations with several groups fabricating
Josephson junctions. The findings of the proposed research will be closely
integrated with the outreach efforts, recognizing that a vast majority of
public-school students have minimal or no exposure to physical sciences
adversely affecting the subsequent enrolment in STEM disciplines. The PI will
organize Summer Workshops: Applications of Magnetism and Super-conductivity
covering topics on spintronics, motors, medical imaging, Maglev trains, and
biomagnetism. As a part of the annual SPIE: Optics+Photonics Conference, the PI
will organize Superconducting Spintronics Symposia to bridge the gap between the
spintronics and superconducting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.