* 2130085
* I-Corps: In-vitro tool that provides multiparametric information in real-time to determine the efficacy and toxicity of a new drug
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Kimberly Stroka, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in improving
the development of more effective drug treatments (e.g., therapeutics or
regenerative medicine approaches) for diseases such as cancer, heart disease,
and stroke. This device provides the necessary information to determine, at an
early stage in the drug development, if the new product will provide sufficient
gain or benefit. It is expected that this technology will simplify data
processing while providing a high quality, cost-effective, and time-efficient
approach. This approach will free material resources and personnel that can be
devoted to the development of new products. The advantages of this new system
will reduce the time for new products to reach the marketplace while helping to
provide higher efficacy treatments for cancer and other diseases with less toxic
side effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will provide a new in
vitro tool with the capability of gathering information on multiple parameters
to determine the efficacy and toxicity of new drugs. This technology provides
the means for collecting data on cell responses to (bio)chemical and physical
stimuli continuously and in real-time. Contrary to many conventional detection
methods that rely on collecting data at the end of the experiment (endpoint),
this system collects data continuously, providing a dynamic account of cell
responses with a reduced number of samples. This technology will also leverage
continuous access to cell behavior data to enable the development of a data
analytics approach for impedance spectroscopy-type measurements. The development
of this research tool into a more automated system will broaden its impact and
acceptance not only in the biopharmaceutical industry but also in academic and
biomedical environments and the biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.