* 2130448
* Equitable Learning to Advance Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2028
* Vicky Murray, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2028
* USD 1,497,591.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need. Recognizing the importance of coupling financial support with an eco-
system of research-based student-centered activities, and faculty/industry
mentoring, Green River Community College, an Asian American and Pacific Islander
Minority Serving Institution, in partnership with Muckleshoot Tribal College
will award scholarships to at least 43 unique low-income academically gifted
students, who are pursuing Associate of Applied Science (AAS) and Bachelor of
Applied Science (BAS) degrees in Natural Resources. Scholarship support is
planned to be available through the completion of the scholars' programs of
study. Scholarship recipients will participate in applied STEM student support
activities, curricular and co-curricular cohort activities, and STEM faculty and
industry mentorships. A planned research study will examine the effectiveness of
these different activities on the retention, academic performance, and
graduation of S-STEM eligible students of diverse background. In addition the
study seeks to determine how best to tailor individual and cohort-based
activities to academically gifted low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
investigate the effectiveness of the project's planned activities, the project
team will conduct a mixed methods study to examine the impact on student
retention and degree attainment of student academic performance, career
preparation, non-cognitive development (e.g., motivation, trust, social
belonging, growth mindset), and student-centered program design. The research
design integrates document analysis, analysis of student record data, project-
tailored surveys, and observational site visits. In addition, the project seeks
to understand the viability of a partnership model in which minority-serving
institutions lead an effort to increase the academic and career success of
academically gifted low-incomes students. In this regard the project aims to
demonstrate how STEM programs can work productively with employers and campus-
based student support services and model how an inter-institutional career
pathway between two minority serving institutions (MSIs) can work for other
institutions of higher education, particularly MSIs. This project is funded by
NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM)
program, which seeks to increase the number of academically talented low-income
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic
career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.