* 2130009
* RAPID: Multiwavelength Imaging and Spectroscopy of the Corona During the 2021 December 4 Total Solar Eclipse
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Shadia Habbal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,926.00

Solar eclipses provide a rare opportunity to learn about the solar corona. This
outer layer of the Sun is a mystery – it is millions of degrees and much hotter
than the photosphere below it. This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will
observe the 2021 December 4 total solar eclipse from a vessel in the Weddell
Sea, northeast of Antarctica. The observations will observe coronal structures.
It will also be a testbed for future eclipse expeditions that can take advantage
of observing from vessels. This is particularly important since 70% of the paths
of totality occur over oceans. Team members will be actively engaged in
outreach, targeting under-represented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
2021 December 4 eclipse will be observed through imaging in white light and the
Fe X 637.4 nm, Fe XI 789.2 nm, and Fe XIV 530.3 nm coronal forbidden lines along
with spectroscopic observations from 340 – 1100 nm. The equipment will be placed
on the deck of a vessel, which will intercept the centerline of totality for
approximately two minutes. Data acquisition with the imagers and spectrometers
will require image stabilization and short exposure times. Corrections will be
made to the instrumentation to account for the vessel’s two dominant motions:
vibrations and high amplitude, low frequency motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.