* 2130169
* Strengthening Pathways for the Domestic Graduate Engineering Workforce and Future Professoriate: Increasing Access to Engineering Master’s Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Tonya Peeples, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention into
graduate school and subsequent graduation of high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at The Pennsylvania State University. Over its
6-year duration, this project will attract and fund scholarships to 45 full-time
students who are pursuing master’s degrees in engineering disciplines. Students
will receive 2-year scholarships and participate in programming designed to
impact academic and social success. Project activities will include intentional
strategies to increase interest, applications, and enrollment in engineering
master’s programs. In addition, retention activities such as mentoring (group
and individual) and professional development programming will be offered for the
two years of the scholars’ programs of study. Finally, the project plans to
build skill in inclusive mentoring for 54 faculty members that will have impact
beyond the duration of this project. By financially supporting the “hidden”
population of low-income graduate students, the project expects to improve
students’ socio-economic mobility. Furthermore, an expanded pool of domestic
engineers with advanced degrees who are more diverse will be poised to take on
greater leadership and mentorship positions within the STEM workforce. The
project will also foster a culture of inclusion and sustained success in the
recruitment and matriculation of underserved graduate students broadly defined,
by educating a critical mass of faculty in inclusive mentorship practices.
Finally, the achievement of a master’s degree in engineering will likely foster
interest in doctoral programs for some of the scholars, thus increasing the
potential pool of future engineering faculty, which is an urgent national need.
These potential new faculty will serve as role models for other low-income
students in the future, and this overall approach has strong potential to be
replicated at other institutions to increase the numbers of domestic faculty in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of the project is based
on examining high-achieving low-income master’s student socialization and
successful program completion through the lens of Expectancy Value, Self-
Efficacy, and Role Identity theories. The broad goals are to facilitate the
professional advancement of engineering master’s students, grow and diversify
the engineering workforce, and sustain an inclusive environment in the
Pennsylvania State University College of Engineering by developing a community
of faculty skilled in inclusive mentoring. Using multifaceted data collection
within a mixed methods study, the project team expects that triangulated
qualitative and quantitative data will yield a rich understanding of master’s
student socialization and successful program completion. Best practices in
graduate student transitions and identity formation will be disseminated. This
project has the potential to extend what we know about exemplary mentoring of
underrepresented minority students to low-income students. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically-talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.