* 2130171
* Improving Engineering Transfer Student Success through Early Advising and Purposeful Community-Building
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Deborah Eakin, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,482,870.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Mississippi State University on both the Starkville and Coast campuses.
Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships for 50 unique
full-time transfer students who are pursuing Bachelor of Science degrees in
computer, electrical, industrial, and mechanical engineering. Students will
receive up to six semesters of scholarship support. This project aims to improve
student outcomes for engineering students by linking scholarships with faculty
and peer mentoring, enhanced advising for the transition to Mississippi State
University, and a new engineering student organization for transfer students. By
increasing interaction between new transfer students, existing transfer
students, and faculty, this project will help students learn how to navigate
academic policies and access student resources. The increased student-to-student
and student-to-faculty interaction will also create a community from which
faculty and administrators can learn about and begin to address institutional
barriers for transfer students. Due to the large population of underrepresented
and first-generation students enrolled in Mississippi community colleges and
transferring to Mississippi State University, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in engineering. The project will generate new knowledge
about how financial support, cohort building, early advising, and a student
organization focused on transfer student success can support retention and
graduation for engineering transfer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. The project
objectives are to 1) provide scholarships, faculty mentoring, and peer mentoring
to eligible low-income students, 2) strengthen advising practices for all
incoming engineering transfer students, and 3) improve belonging and integration
into Mississippi State University student communities. Support for engineering
transfer students will include a new online, self-paced course focused on early-
advising and a new university-registered student organization to help transfer
students transition to the university. Specific known barriers for engineering
transfer students include financial difficulties, being unfamiliar with academic
procedures, difficulty balancing academic and personal responsibilities, and
social isolation. This project will investigate how an online early-advising
course and a registered student organization that is framed by Community of
Practice principles can increase interaction with other students and faculty and
reduce known barriers to success. Additionally, the project will generate new
knowledge about forming and maintaining Communities of Practice to support
engineering transfer students. The project evaluation will assess the impact of
project activities on transfer student success as well as institutional
practices. Student and mentor interviews will be conducted to examine the
effects of the project activities through thematic analysis. Institutional data
on student retention and progress toward graduation will be analyzed to examine
how the project affects student success. Project results will be shared with the
engineering education community via flyers, a project website, social media,
email distribution lists, and presentations at technical meetings. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and educational/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.