* 2130293
* STEM Success through Scholarships, Support and Service (S-5)
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2027
* Christopher Lee, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,414,276.00

The STEM Success through Scholarships, Support and Service (S-5) project will
address the national need for well-educated scientists, engineers, and
technicians in interdisciplinary fields in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). Florida State College at Jacksonville will award
scholarships to at least 30 unique low-income academically talented students (17
part-time; 13 full time) who are pursuing associate degrees in computer
information technology, engineering technology, biotechnology, data science,
environmental science technology and Associates of Arts degrees in STEM that
lead to transfer to a four-year degree in STEM. Building on prior National
Science Foundation support, the project will provide a system of student
curricular and co-curricular supports that include faculty mentoring, student
cohorts, opportunities to participate in service learning activities,
supplemental instruction (on-line study skills and STEM content tutorials),
rigorous guidance from faculty and staff, undergraduate research and industry
internship opportunities, networking with professionals, career develop through
partnering with the FSCJ Career and Internship Center, support for transfer from
a 2-year program to a 4-year program in STEM, and post-graduation support in the
form of an alumni program. A strong dual enrollment program with secondary
schools provides college credit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the program
are to (1) provide scholarships to at least 30 students who demonstrate
financial need and who are academically talented and (2) implement evidence-
based strategies to support student academic and career pathways through
service-learning experiences, STEM internships/undergraduate research
experiences, transfer services, and supplemental instructional resources. While
all students who meet eligibility criteria will be provided an opportunity to
apply for scholarships and participation in project activities, recruitment will
focus on STEM students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines, including first-generation students, veterans, racial minorities
and women. Drawing upon the research and practice literature and taking a mixed
methods approach, the project team will investigate the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;• What is the impact of supplemental instruction on
retention, completion, transfer and degree attainment?&lt;br/&gt;• How does
completion of online study tutorials affect self efficacy?&lt;br/&gt;• How do
career awareness activities impact choice of academic and career
pathways?&lt;br/&gt;• How does the service learning component affect course
completion and program retention?&lt;br/&gt;The project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.