* 2130078
* Connecting Science Identity to STEM Success at a Rural Primarily Undergraduate Institution Propelled by an Evidence-Based First Year Experience
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Matthew Kreitzer, Indiana Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,338,895.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Indiana Wesleyan University. Over its seven-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 24 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, or physics. First year
students will receive four-year scholarships. Students will be intentionally
supported with STEM-oriented best practices to increase first year student
retention and degree completion. The program support begins with a two semester
first year experience (FYE) course to intentionally develop science identity in
first year students through peer mentorship, vision-building industry field
trips, research talks from upperclassmen peers and context-based curriculum
paralleling common conceptual sticking points in a challenging first year course
taken by all STEM majors, General Chemistry. Students will be introduced to
undergraduate research and attend conferences to present their work and engage
the greater research community over four years. Mapping the impact of these best
practices such as mentorship, research, and context-based learning on the
development of science identity at a rural primarily undergraduate institution
has potential to inform future efforts to increase student retention,
graduation, and desire to enter the STEM workforce. Better understanding of
scaffolding that grows science identity in first year students and beyond can be
implemented as a scalable STEM FYE pathway for all undergraduate STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The IWU S-STEM program will recruit and support 24
first year students majoring in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, or physics to
form three STEM scholar cohorts. Best practice student supports will be
implemented to increase student retention and success during the first year on
to degree completion. Transitioning to an undergraduate STEM major results in
the freshman year being the point of highest attrition for STEM majors. A
student’s sense of science identity and feelings of self-efficacy are understood
to predict student retention and success, however the impact of interventions on
these measures merits further study. This project will study the effectiveness
of student interventions on the development of science identity and feelings of
self-efficacy and will advance the understanding of how these measures correlate
with student retention and success in STEM majors. The results of this project
will be shared with the broader STEM education community. This project is funded
by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.