* 2130326
* Fostering Technology Entrepreneurship through a Project‐Based Learning Community
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Wesley Stone, Western Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,495,415.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well‐educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high‐achieving, low‐income students with demonstrated financial
need at Western Carolina University. Over its six‐year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to thirty‐six unique full‐time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in engineering or technology. First year students will
receive four‐year scholarships. Transfer students will receive up to three‐year
scholarships. The project aims to cultivate entrepreneurial thinking among
undergraduates in engineering and technology by involving a cohort of students
across academic years in an intensive learning community to bring their
technology‐oriented product ideas from inception to market. Scholarship
recipients will be linked with campus resources, local industry partners and
experts, faculty mentors, and cohort teaming sessions to propose, critique,
select, develop, and implement commercially viable technology products. The
project will be tightly integrated within a project‐based learning curriculum
that leverages state‐of‐the‐art prototyping facilities and will be augmented to
include training in business case development, product launch and small business
startup. The novel approach to engineering education developed through this
project will serve to enrich the creative potential of new graduates in
technical fields and to expand small business creation and employment, both of
key importance to growth in rural regions like western North Carolina where
there may be fewer large mainstream employers. The project will also include
advance the state of the art in entrepreneurship education by extending
conventional engineering curricula to include business aspects of technology
innovation and commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
project is to increase STEM degree completion of low‐income, high‐achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Toward this goal, the project
will specifically aim to promote entrepreneurial thinking among students, to
increase student engagement with engineering and business training through the
development of entrepreneurial goals, and to increase the diversity of regional
technology entrepreneurs to include a greater presence of native Appalachian
participants. Key qualities, or dimensions, of those who possess an
entrepreneurial mindset will often include the presence of a growth mindset, a
regular practice of creativity, and high personal self‐efficacy. As
entrepreneurism is seen as an enabling force to overcome employment and income
divides between urban and rural job markets, dimensions of entrepreneurship that
are skills‐based, and can be taught, are of high interest. The project will
investigate the impacts of the learning community on learned dimensions of the
entrepreneurial mindset and will examine the effects of program interventions on
entrepreneurism in scholarship recipients as compared with other students in the
host department. The project will significantly advance the state of the art in
entrepreneurship education and pedagogy that integrates business aspects of
entrepreneurism and into engineering and technology curricula. The project will
be evaluated based on both quantitative and qualitative data collected through
surveys, reflection essays, small group interaction summaries, and interviews.
Project efficacy will be drawn from the quality of scholar‐generated outcomes
including reception at pitch events, patent applications, successful product
launches, product evolutions to graduate research, externally funded
partnerships, and employment opportunities. These and other noteworthy events
will be publicized via social and other media. Project investigators will
publish findings through pedagogical research venues such as ASEE, IEEE, and
others. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of
low‐income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who
earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention,
transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low‐income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.