* 2130097
* Increasing Diversity and Inclusion in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math:  Strengthening Belongingness through Targeted Academic and Professional Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Lauren French, Allegheny College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,400,294.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Allegheny College, a four-year liberal arts college in Meadville,
Pennsylvania. Over its six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to
24 full-time students pursuing a Bachelor of Science degrees in Biochemistry,
Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Geology, Mathematics, Neuroscience, and/or
Physics. First-year students will receive up to eight semesters, four academic
years, of scholarship support. The project aims to improve retention rates,
enhance academic performance and engagement in STEM gateway courses, and bolster
career readiness with robust activities centered on academic mentoring, early
research integration, and professional development. Project teams and mentors
will customize activities, plans, and opportunities to address each project
participant’s academic, social, and career goals. These customized components
will strategically develop a sustainable support network that students can
access throughout their STEM education and career. Allegheny College is ranked
among the top colleges and universities based on the number of its graduates who
eventually earn Ph.D.s in STEM fields; thus, this project has the potential to
increase the number of highly capable and diverse future scientists in a wide
range of fields as well as to advance our understanding of how sustained support
of intersecting identities can develop STEM leaders in an increasingly global
and inclusive working environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. There are two specific aims:
first, to improve first-to-second-year retention rates within STEM gateway
courses, and second, to increase STEM capacities that affect personal,
professional, and academic identities. Mentorship by STEM peer leaders and
faculty increases students’ sense of belonging, facilitating improvements in
academic performance and engagement, which ultimately leads to higher
persistence rates. Although several studies address STEM identity correlations,
understanding how holistic academic and career mentoring paired with a
sustainable and long-term support network affects low-income, high-achieving
liberal arts graduates is still lacking. Thus, our project targets the time span
before matriculation and two years after to foster STEM identity development at
a residential liberal arts college. This project has the potential to advance
understanding of the long-term effects of sustainable support networks on STEM
identities and an inclusive workforce. Results of this project will be made
available to regional colleges and the Great Lakes Colleges Association as well
as at national educational conferences. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.