* 2130361
* Scholarships and Co-Curricular Activities Leading to Excellence in the Biotechnology Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Jessica Gullion, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas Woman’s University (TWU). TWU is a Hispanic-Serving Institution
and the nation’s largest predominantly female public institution. Over its six-
year duration, the project will fund scholarships to 56 full-time students who
are pursuing professional science master’s degrees in biotechnology. New
graduate students will receive two years of scholarship support and continuing
students may receive one year of scholarship support. The project seeks to
increase graduate student enrollment, retention, and graduation in biotechnology
through scholarships, co-curricular supports, and research to identify factors
related to participant science identity, leadership identity, and success.
Students will be placed in cohorts and have access to mentoring from peers,
faculty, and industry partners, fostering an inclusive and supportive
educational environment. In addition, leadership training and career guidance
will be emphasized to promote development of authentic personal identities and
science identities. Because TWU has a high student population of women (88% of
the student body) and minorities who are underrepresented in their participation
in STEM fields of study (61% of the student body), this transformative project
has the potential to diversify the STEM workforce and identify factors
supporting retention and graduation of these students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM degree completion of low-
income, high-achieving graduate students with demonstrated financial need. This
will be accomplished through three specific aims. First is to increase
enrollment and alleviate financial stress with scholarships. Second is to
improve retention and graduation rates through co-curricular supports and
activities that include cohort development, mentoring, leadership training, and
career investigation/guidance. Third is to examine factors related to
participant science identity, leadership identity, and success. Evidence
suggests interactions with faculty and/or mentors, career education, and
experiences such as work internships will increase student retention and
graduation. Specifically, for women, financial resources and educational and
social support help with STEM retention and graduation. However, little is known
about the factors that lead to the development of a positive personal identity
as a scientist and/or as a leader. This project will provide scholarships and
co-curricular supports to biotechnology students while examining how the
interventions impact the students’ sense of identity. The project has the
potential to increase retention and graduation rates while identifying the
factors contributing to building a positive science identity. In addition, the
project will not only add to and diversify the STEM workforce, but it will also
produce leaders, many of whom will be women. Measures of performance,
deliverables, and effectiveness as related to goals and objectives will be
assessed based on data collected from tracking participants’ retention,
persistence, graduation, and co-curricular activities. Evaluation will follow
the Context-Input-Process-Product model and will provide an independent
perspective on project effectiveness. The results will be disseminated to the
institutional community and beyond through presentations and publications. This
project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.