* 2130140
* Equipped for Success: Science Identity, Community, and Engagement to Promote STEM Student Persistence
* EDU,DUE
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2027
* Emily Niemeyer, Southwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 10/31/2027
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low -income students with demonstrated financial
need at Southwestern University, a private liberal arts institution. Over its
six-year duration, this project will fund scholarships to 25 unique fulltime
students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biochemistry, biology,
chemistry, computational mathematics, computer science, mathematics, or physics.
The first-year science and math students will receive annual scholarships that
are renewable for up to four years. This project aims to holistically promote
the success of these students and their persistence to degree attainment using
an evidence-based approach. The persistence framework will create a first-year
experience for students that solidifies their science identity while promoting
motivation and confidence. Students will experience active learning in their
introductory science and math courses; become members of a vibrant learning
community through participation in a pre-matriculation bridge program and cohort
enrollment in key courses; and be immersed in early research opportunities.
Curricular and co-curricular high impact educational practices – such as funded
internships, undergraduate research experiences, and support for intercultural
learning – will build upon the foundation created in the first year by
encouraging students to gain knowledge and practical skills while also
practicing integrative and applied learning. Connections between students and
their faculty mentors, peers, and alumni will be cultivated through formal and
informal mentoring opportunities, and student mental health and wellness will be
promoted through regular health education programming. Because Southwestern
University is an emerging Hispanic-Serving Institution enrolling a strong
population of underrepresented students, this project has the potential to
diversify the pool of graduates attaining science and math degrees, an important
step toward promoting an inclusive workforce that will fuel scientific
innovation and research excellence in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to increase STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) degree completion of low-income, high- achieving
undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. Specific project aims include:
recruiting a diverse multidisciplinary community of student Scholars with high
financial need to pursue science and mathematics degrees at Southwestern
University; promoting science identity, motivation, and confidence of Scholars
during their first year using the persistence framework; and providing a
comprehensive multi-year support structure for Scholars through high-impact
educational practices, mentoring, and wellness programming. The efficacy of the
persistence framework will be investigated, and this project will also examine
how programmatic interventions affect student social connections and emotional
wellness. Therefore, this project has the potential to advance understanding of
how particular interventions affect the social connectedness and well-being of
STEM students, and the relationship these factors have on outcomes such as
persistence, science identity, motivation, and confidence. Project evaluation
will be based on a Theory of Change framework and will use information gained
from surveys and interviews with Scholars and a comparison (control) group of
demographically similar students at Southwestern University in pursuit of
science and mathematics degrees. Results of this project will be made available
to the academic community through regional and national conferences (including
general higher education and discipline-specific meetings) as well as timely
publication in multidisciplinary peer-reviewed journals with broad readership.
This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.