* 2130716
* Collaborative Research: A Low-Cost, "Digital" Biosensing Platform with Single Protein Biomarker Sensitivity
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Hongwei Sun, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 245,448.00

Accurate measurements of proteins are critical for modern biomedical research,
particularly for early detection and monitoring of disease, systems biology, and
new drug development. More specifically, sensitive, specific, fast, and low-cost
detection of proteins biomarkers in patient samples is of importance for public
health and a key component of future personalized diagnostics and therapy. To
date, enzyme-linked immune-sorbent assays in all their variants are the most
common sensing techniques employed to detect the presence of protein biomarkers.
However, a number of limitations still exist that greatly diminish their broader
applications due to the low-sensitivity, the requirement of a calibration plot
to elucidate the results, and the need for advanced costly instruments for
ultrasensitive measurement. This proposal aims to address the aforementioned
drawbacks by developing a simple and low-cost, but potentially powerful sensor
based on the integration of a two-level signal amplification sensing mechanism
and machine-learning-enabled reliability. The developed sensing devices are
particularly desirable for early disease detection, ideally capable of
"digitally" (calibration-free) detecting the presence of biomarkers with
excellent portability, adaptability, accuracy, and high throughput. The
knowledge and technology gained from this research will be disseminated to the
scientific community and industry. This project will impact the education of the
graduate, undergraduate and high school students by integrating advanced
biosensing knowledge into their educational and laboratory training, and also
actively interacting with general public and industry
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sensing device will allow
immunoassay to be performed as a low-cost and digital (calibration-free)
detection technique with potential single copy sensitivity through integration
of three key components: 1) a coupled resonance between a piezoelectric
substrate and a replaceable nanoimprinted acoustic wave micropillar resonance
film "sticker", 2) a micron-sized mass amplifier realized through uniform silver
enhancement of mono-dispersed gold nanoparticles conjugated with detection
antibody, and 3) machine learning algorithms to be developed and trained to
analyze the biosensing data in a reliable way, thus allowing more accurate
detection. The number of the particles can be directly correlated to the number
of biomarkers, realizing "digital" sensing. The developed methodology is not
restricted to sandwich-type immunoassays, nor is the assay limited to any
particular protein biomarker and therefore the develop sensor can be generalized
as a universal platform for monitoring any biomolecule of interest such as
protein biomarkers, viruses, and pathogens for assuring public health and
biosafety. The work will revolutionize the acoustic wave-based biosensing
platform if successful.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.