* 2130461
* Scholarship Opportunities for Student Retention and Degree Attainment in Undergraduate Engineering and Computer Science Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2028
* Constantin Ciocanel, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,493,224.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Northern Arizona University. Northern Arizona University (NAU) is a
Hispanic Serving Institution. Over a 6-year duration, this project will fund
scholarships to 36 unique full-time students who are pursuing bachelor’s degrees
in Civil Engineering, Computer Engineering, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering and Computer Science. First-year students and transfer students will
receive four-year and two-year scholarships, respectively. The project will
develop a formal mentoring program for Scholars to provide them with ample
opportunities for peer and faculty mentoring, career and professional
development, networking with engineering program alumni, as well as for
participating in extra- and co-curricular activities that will help sharpen
their skills and broaden their overall engineering experience. The project will
engage in outreach activities in high school districts serving significant
populations underrepresented in their participation in STEM fields of study, and
facilitate academic pathways for pre-engineering majors at community colleges.
The engineering curriculum at NAU is built around an active/experiential
learning philosophy that offers students ample opportunities to acquire in-depth
knowledge and essential engineering skills and to make significant contributions
to society at large. The broader impacts of the project will be enacted by
Scholars returning to and giving back to their communities after graduation,
working toward improving the standard of living of their families and
communities at large. The intellectual merit of the project is in advancing the
understanding of how the planned interventions and co- and extra-curricular
activities will affect the recruitment, retention, success, academic/career
pathways, and graduation of low-income underrepresented students in engineering
and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion of
low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, the
project will pursue four goals. First is to broaden opportunities for university
access to students from underrepresented and financially insecure groups from
the broader Northern Arizona region. Second is to increase student success,
retention, and graduation through student services such as mentoring and career
development for which ample evidence of effectiveness exists. Third is to
facilitate student advancement to relevant employment/career pathways, and
fourth is to foster academic pathways for pre-engineering community college
students to complete B.S. degrees in engineering and computer science at NAU.
Specific objectives for the project team include a) establishing a formal
faculty mentorship program to foster scientific identity and career pathways for
Scholars, b) providing career development training that includes and supports
Scholars in proactively seeking internship opportunities, and c) mentoring pre-
engineering community college students on pathways to engineering BS degrees.
This project will generate knowledge about the impact of specific support
mechanisms and curricular innovations on the retention, academic success, career
development, and graduation rates of underrepresented engineering and computer
science Scholars. The planned educational research will investigate the
suitability of the models chosen for data collection and analysis for the type
of activities and outcomes planned in this project. The evaluation will be
conducted using mixed methods to gather both quantitative and qualitative
information about each component of the project. The results will be used to
improve all aspects of the project, and lessons learned will apply to work
beyond the end of the award period. The outcomes of this project will be
disseminated through internal seminars, journal publications, and conference
presentations. Publications and presentations will document project outcomes,
accomplishments, and lessons learned on best practices to provide students with
learning environments that promote inclusive participation in STEM. This project
is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.