* 2130370
* Building STEM Identity and Persistence Through STEM Pathway Mentorship
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2028
* Victor Donnay, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,493,741.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Bryn Mawr College, a 4-year women’s college. Over its six-year duration,
this project will fund 4-year scholarships to 45 unique full-time students who
are pursuing bachelor’s degrees in biochemistry, biology, physics, chemistry,
mathematics, computer sciences, and geology. In the summer before their first
semester, these students will join the STEMLA Fellows Program (STEM and the
Liberal Arts at Bryn Mawr), a program that supports low-income students
interested in STEM. The project activities aim to enhance persistence of STEMLA
through STEM-career-focused mentoring and additional opportunities leading to
graduation. The effectiveness of a residential STEM summer program that focuses
on the application of foundational STEM skills to real-world problems and
promotes cohort development through shared experiences and near-peer mentorship
will also be studied. Additional project activities designed to promote
retention will continue until graduation and include summer internships,
shadowing opportunities, professional society membership, support for conference
attendance, STEM curricular support and GRE preparation. As part of the STEM
career pathway mentorship provided to participants, the project will also assess
current practices in STEM mentorship and generate guides for effective ways
faculty can cultivate students’ interests in academia and industry, helping them
build a pathway to a successful future in a STEM occupation. Additionally, the
project will build mentorship guidelines for field and laboratory research
experiences that are responsive to the unique needs of low-income students.
Importantly, these guides will be disseminated locally and nationally, via
workshops and publications, and program features will be replicable at other
institutions. The study of how these opportunities affect self-efficacy, STEM
identity, and belonging in STEM will also contribute to the general
understanding of factors that encourage persistence in STEM for low-income
students. Because Bryn Mawr College is a women’s college, this project has the
potential to broaden participation of low-income women in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need. The project will accomplish this goal by increasing
supports that foster STEM identity, self-efficacy, and belonging among low-
income students. The project will (1) test the long-term effectiveness of a
residential summer program for incoming STEMLA Fellows on their decisions to
pursue STEM majors and careers; (2) assess current practices in the mentoring of
STEM majors and promote effective ways faculty can cultivate Fellows’ career
interests inside and outside academia, (3) develop mentorship guidelines on
inclusive practices in bench science and create a faculty training module that
will equip faculty to design and lead safe, inclusive field experiences, and (4)
expand activities that increase retention in STEM majors and help Fellows ideate
pathways to STEM careers. The Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) framework
examines psychosocial factors that influence how individuals, including women
and people from low-income and underrepresented populations, make decisions to
pursue or discontinue STEM education and career pursuits. One key domain
identified by SCCT that influences persistence in STEM is STEM self-efficacy
belief, or an individual’s belief that they can accomplish STEM tasks.
Activities in this project specifically target domains known to enhance self-
efficacy and provide opportunities for students to cultivate a strong sense of
personal identity in STEM. This project will evaluate the effects that STEMLA’s
mentorship supports have on psychosocial determinants of persistence in STEM via
a longitudinal study. Additional evaluation will examine the effects of the
program on academic performance and graduation rate. Outcomes of this project
include academic performance of Fellows that is on-par with their not-low-income
peers, a strong sense of STEM identity, self-efficacy, and belonging, and
persistence in STEM through graduation. Finally, the development of guiding
principles in inclusive strategies in STEM career mentorship, lab mentorship and
field work, in addition to the efficacy data generated by the study of these
interventions, will be disseminated to the K-16 community via workshops, and
publications. Importantly, these outputs will provide a framework for other
colleges and universities to effect institutional transformation that seeks to
empower women and low-income students to belong, thrive, and persist in STEM
careers. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM
workers, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.