* 2130727
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Balancing: Reduced Models and  Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Boris Kramer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 12/31/2024
* USD 359,147.00

Fast and accurate computer simulation of complex engineering systems is required
for real-time control and engineering design. This grant will support research
that will advance balanced truncation model reduction for nonlinear systems, a
mathematical framework to produce reliable, accurate, and computationally
efficient simulators. Despite the theoretical foundations having been laid in
the 1990s, computational implementations that scale to the high dimensionality
needed for today’s complex engineering systems are lacking to date. This
research will overcome this barrier by developing and employing modern high-
performance algorithms that exploit the mathematical structure of the equations
that have to be solved. The resulting simulators will, for instance, advance the
control and operation of satellites through accurate real-time estimation of
atmospheric satellite drag; advance the design of aircraft through low-resource
computational models that allow for a large number of design iterations; and
optimize our cities’ water networks through efficiently simulating water flows
and water quality so that pump stations can be scheduled optimally. This will
result in greater benefits to society, improvements of civil infrastructure, and
contribute to the industrial competitiveness of the United States. This grant
will also support science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
workforce training through a workshop at Virginia Tech that targets early-career
researchers, as well as through undergraduate research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to develop a new class
of reduced-order models and controllers for complex high-dimensional polynomial
nonlinear systems via the concept of nonlinear balanced truncation. To date,
this framework has not been applied to model reduction for high-dimensional
nonlinear systems since solving the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equations,
which are at the core of the balancing approach, remained infeasible for large-
scale systems. Very recent developments in tensor calculus, nonlinear state
transformations, and polynomial feedback laws now make the solution to this
problem feasible. This project will develop a scalable tensor-based approach to
solve the HJB equations to obtain polynomial expansions of the energy functions
required for balanced truncation, as well as high-performance algorithms and
numerical analysis to analyze the conditioning of the tensorized problems.
Moreover, efficient algorithms for parametric nonlinear balancing will be
designed by exploiting the structure in parameter space. Additionally, reduced-
order nonlinear controllers will be designed using a simultaneous reduction and
control framework, which is far superior to the existing reduce-then-control
framework. The project will also develop a theory for the robustness of these
controllers, and their stabilizing properties when applied to the high-
dimensional systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.