* 2130544
* Strain engineering of exciton-polaritons in 2D Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vinod Menon, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,997.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Atomically thin two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductors, owing to their unprecedented strong interaction with light have
become a very attractive material platform for applications in photonics. From a
fundamental standpoint, they demonstrate a wide array of phenomena including the
regime of strong light-matter interaction where the system exhibits both the
properties of light and material excitation. Such hybrid systems have potential
applications in quantum technologies in the solid state that allow them to take
on the best properties of matter and light. Due to the atomic thickness of these
2D materials, strain presents a unique approach to enhance the optoelectronic
properties. This research is focusing on using strain to control the
optoelectronic properties of these hybrid systems and to explore emergent
properties that arise when strain is introduced in a lattice geometry. Such
lattice of half-light half-matter systems can enable simulation of other quantum
systems which are hard to simulate on a classical computer. Other potential
application areas include realizing light-based circuits and switches which
could conceivably operate at the level of a single particle of light. The
project aligns with the NSF Big Idea of “Quantum Leap.” It will train graduate
and undergraduate students and expose students from local area middle schools to
the wonders of light and nanomaterials. A highlight among the outreach
activities is a hands-on 2D materials workshop for undergraduate students at
City College and a series of demonstrations for local area middle
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Exciton-polaritons,
hybrid states of electronic material excitations and photons demonstrate a wide
array of rich physical phenomena. They are a potentially good platform for solid
state quantum nonlinear photonics. In this project the research team will
utilize the ability of 2D materials to withstand large strains to manipulate
excitons and exciton-polaritons formed in optical microcavities embedded with
atomically thin semiconductors. Extremely large strain via substrate engineering
is induced to control strain patterns, manipulate exciton and polariton
diffusion and finally enhance their nonlinear interactions for realizing
correlated states of polaritons and their lattices. Specifically, 2D transition
metal dichalcogenides embedded in strain engineered microcavities are used in
the studies. Their linear and non-linear optical properties are investigated
using combination of steady state, time resolved and Fourier space
spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.