* 2130267
* Advancing Academic Success and Career Development for Talented, Low-Income Computer Science, Mathematics, and Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2027
* Karen Adams, Shepherd University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,993.00

This project will contribute to the preparation of a well-educated workforce in
STEM fields by providing financial, academic, social, and career support to a
diverse cohort of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated
financial need at Shepherd University. The project will apply and strengthen
evidence-based student support programs that improve the educational success of
a diverse community of 52 students (total of 126 scholarships) majoring in a
degree program offered by the Department of Computer Sciences, Mathematics, and
Engineering (CME): Data Analytics, Mathematics, Computer Information Sciences,
Computer Information Technology, Computer Engineering, or Engineering Science.
The project will assess the effectiveness of these student supports on retention
and graduation rates of scholars, many of whom are anticipated to be first
generation, female, and transfer students. The program will identify and
eliminate barriers, leading to improved retention of the targeted population of
students in STEM. Scholars will receive support from faculty and peers and have
the opportunity to participate in academic, social, and professional activities
that will allow them to accentuate their strengths and explore a number of
future options. Further, the program will enhance Shepherd’s regional alliance
with business, industry, and government agencies while improving connections
with local high schools and community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project has four specific objectives: (1) increase enrollment and retention of
CME majors, (2) improve four-year graduation rate of CME majors, (3) increase
the proportion of graduating S-STEM scholars who find employment, or continue to
graduate studies, in their field within six months of graduation, and (4)
enhance student support programs. The program will recruit students by enhancing
marketing activities with high schools and community colleges, and through a
variety of student clubs and competitions. Scholars will be selected through a
competitive application process, supported by removing the financial and other
barriers that can impede scholars’ progress towards timely completion of their
degrees. The selected students will participate in summer bridge programs,
internships, research opportunities, career development services, S-STEM
seminars, and interactions with local industry representatives. Student support
programs such as faculty and peer mentoring, cohort-building experiences,
seminars and tutorials, counseling, and learning communities will allow the
project to address scholars’ individual needs with thought and care. Shepherd
University will gather critical evidence as found in the current literature to
better understand essential elements for student success. Furthermore, mixed
qualitative and quantitative approaches will be employed to extend the research
base regarding what is known about the impact of several student support
initiatives and programs on the success of STEM students. The project’s models
and findings will be disseminated through websites, social media, publications,
and conference presentations aimed at higher education communities interested in
improving their preparation of undergraduate STEM students. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.