* 2130159
* Support for Electrical Engineering Students Emphasizing Pathways to the Electric Power Sector
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2027
* Marvin Loiseau, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN CUMMINGS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,499,997.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology (BFIT), a Minority-Serving
Institution located in Boston, Massachusetts. Over its six-year duration, this
project will fund scholarships to 34 unique full-time students who are pursuing
bachelor’s degrees in Electrical Engineering (EE). The duration of the
scholarship depends on the starting year of funding; for freshmen, the duration
is four years; sophomores, three years; and juniors, two years. Boston Tuition-
free students, who are funded by the Boston Tuition-free program for three
years, will receive a scholarship with a one-year duration. The community of
scholars will be supported by: a pre-matriculation overnight stay in Maine to
learn about electric energy, sustainability, and Maine's unique ecology; a
hands-on seminar about electric power; mentoring opportunities with local Boston
middle and high school students; and exposure to the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Power and Energy Society events and other
professional activities. The scholars will take classes together, attend weekly
IEEE meetings, participate in an annual Electric Power Day event, learn together
in study groups, and benefit from BFIT's extensive support services. The
significance of the project would be an increase in the number of electrical
engineers, particularly in electric power, an industry that is experiencing a
shortage, including minorities underrepresented in engineering. It will serve as
a potential model to middle schools, high schools, community colleges,
universities, and industry demonstrating that partnerships among these
constituencies encourages students - particularly minorities - to study
engineering, resulting in an increase in both minority representation among
engineers in the US, and more qualified engineers overall. The project aims to
further the understanding of the extent that activities aimed at providing
academic and social support, progress feedback, increased self-efficacy and
project involvement impact S-STEM Scholars’ self-identity and motivations to
persist in EE degrees. Its results can be applied to similar contexts and
programs desirous of improving their students’ retention and persistence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase STEM degree completion rate of low-income,
high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need, this project
aims to improve retention to graduation in EE and entry into the STEM workforce,
particularly into the electric power industry, for academically qualified Boston
Public High School students with limited financial means. In particular, BFIT
will partner with several entities, including eight companies that service the
regional electric power grid around Boston, a middle school program, three
Boston Public high schools, and one community college. Most students from these
schools are underrepresented minority students with financial need. The
objectives of the project are: 1) to have a 90% second-year retention rate with
a 90% five-year graduation rate; and 2) to have at least half of the Scholars
intern in electric power and pursue work in that industry. Achieving these
objectives requires multiple factors in addition to meeting students’ financial
needs. Research has demonstrated that academic and non-academic factors affect
levels of success in STEM disciplines, and, while important, financial support
alone cannot increase retention and graduation rates. Therefore, the project
explores the effects of institutional and departmental level support to promote
successful academic and social student experiences, answering the question: "To
what extent do activities aimed at providing academic and social support,
progress feedback, increased self-efficacy and program involvement impact S-STEM
Scholars’ self-identity and motivations to persist in EE degrees?" Tinto’s model
of institutional action will be used as a theoretical lens to explore how
project activities impact S-STEM Scholars’ motivations to persist in EE. A
comprehensive evaluation of this project, using quantitative measures such as
surveys and the college’s data system, and qualitative measures such as
interviews, observations, and exit tickets, will be performed. The findings of
the project will be disseminated both within BFIT and to the broader public,
through workshops, seminars, conferences, and publications. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.