* 2130749
* CEDAR: Evaluating the Molecular Viscosity Assumption for Gravity Waves in the Upper Thermosphere Using Ground-Based Airglow Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Harold Knight, Computational Physics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alan Liu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 467,069.00

This award would determine experimentally what the proper expression should be
for the quantity of dynamic molecular viscosity that is used in thermospheric
gravity-wave models. The approach is to analyze multiple types of ground-based
observations of optical emissions and gravity-wave and upper-atmospheric
emission model results. The optical instruments include four all-sky imagers
(ASI), three Fabry-Perot interferometers (FPI), and three narrow field-of-view
photometers, all located at Arecibo Observatory (AO) and the Culebra Remote
Optical Facility (ROF) in Puerto Rico. Ionospheric observations made by an
ionosonde located in Puerto Rico are also to be included. Observations would be
made of OI 6300Å and OI 8446Å emissions, both of which are produced in the upper
thermosphere, with the peak of OI 8446Å typically 20-70 km above that of OI
6300Å during twilight and nighttime hours. Peak heights for the two emission
lines would be determined by applying triangulation to the ASI images from the
two ground sites. The FPIs would provide perturbation vertical wind velocities
above the ground sites. The ASIs would provide horizontal gravity-wave phase
structure. Gravity-wave periods will be obtained from all three types of optical
emission observations. Background temperature and horizontal wind, required for
gravity-wave modeling, would be obtained from FPI observations. The amplitudes
of the perturbation vertical velocity wave fields would be determined with the
help of a full-wave, fully compressible gravity-wave model including molecular
viscosity and thermal diffusion and a photoelectron/photon transport and optical
emissions model. The changes in phase and amplitude of the vertical velocity
wave fields going from the 6300Å peak altitude to the 8446Å peak altitude would
be compared with gravity-wave model predictions for a range of different dynamic
molecular viscosity parameter values to determine the value that best fits the
observations. The expected outcome of this research is to resolve an open
question raised by Vadas and Crowley as to whether the standard formula for
dynamic molecular viscosity gives values that are too large in the upper
thermosphere. The 8446Å FPI at AO would be improved by detector replacement and
two ASIs would be added to the labs at AO and the RFO. This research would be
integrated into the Science Technical Engineering and Math (STEM) outreach and
educational programs at Arecibo Observatory. A large poster describing the work
in layman’s terms would be created to describe the research for visitors to the
Angel Ramos Foundation Visitor Center at AO. A public lecture would be provided
at that facility during each observing travel visit by Dr. Kerr. The Visitor
Center at AO has had more than 100,000 visitors annually, mostly Hispanic K-12
students in formal and informal education programs. Improved modeling of gravity
wave propagation in the low to mid-latitude F-region thermosphere will lead to
an improved understanding of ionospheric irregularity triggering. These
irregularities cause radio frequency scintillations and disruptions of
communication and navigation system&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of knowledge
in the areas of gravity-wave modeling and upper atmospheric physics would be
advanced through the application of a novel combination of observations and
modeling to an open question about viscosity in the upper thermosphere.
Background wind and temperature, needed as inputs to gravity-wave models, will
be provided by FPI observations. Observed changes in both phase and amplitude as
gravity waves propagate and dissipate going from one altitude to another in the
upper thermosphere will be compared with model predictions. The combination of
observations will largely eliminate the need for simplifying assumptions
typically present in observational gravity-wave studies, making it possible to
answer the above-mentioned open question about viscosity in the upper
thermosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.