* 2130059
* Blended Learning in a Geographically Distributed Education System for Geomatics Students
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2027
* Amr Abd-Elrahman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 11/30/2027
* USD 973,925.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low- income students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of Florida. Over its 6-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships for 38 unique full time and half-time students who are
pursuing a bachelor’s degree in geomatics. Third- and fourth-year students,
including transfer students from community colleges, will receive up to two-year
scholarships. This project intends to increase student enrollment and
persistence in geomatics by linking scholarships with effective support
activities, including faculty mentoring, intentional advising, participation in
co-curricular activities, professional training, and participation in
discipline-specific conferences. This project builds on the existing
geographically distributed blended geomatics education system at the University
of Florida, which delivers the degree program at the main campus, and at two
locations close to the largest population centers in the state. Transfer
students will be recruited from community and state colleges and support
services will be provided to help students have a successful transition to the
University of Florida and complete their geomatics degree. This project
introduces a model that will improve the collaboration between a four-year STEM
degree program, community/state colleges, and professionals in industry at the
state level. It is expected that new knowledge will be generated by studying the
effects of blended learning and organizational structure accommodations on low-
income student participation and success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal
of the project is to increase STEM degree completion for low-income, high-
achieving undergraduates with demonstrated financial need. This project aims to:
increase the enrollment of low-income geomatics students in a geographically
distributed education system; provide professional development to help students
transition to the geomatics workforce; and generate new knowledge by studying
factors affecting recruitment and retention of low-income transfer students.
Organizational structure adaptations through geographically distributed
education and the use of a blended education system should help improve STEM
education and overcome systemic barriers for transfer students. Further study is
warranted to understand how organizational structure adaptation, intentional
mentoring, participation in co-curricular activities, and providing financial
support can affect low-income students’ participation and success in the
geomatics technology field. This project will identify the barriers affecting
the enrollment of low-income students, the factors contributing to student
advancement, and the effects of adopting a blended geographically distributed
geomatics education system on student success. The data collected in this
project will be analyzed to assess differences between project scholars and
other students in the degree program. Socioeconomic, organizational structure,
demographic, and geographic related factors will be analyzed using exploratory,
statistical, and machine learning analysis techniques. This project has the
potential to contribute new knowledge about how a distributed education system
with financial, cultural, and professional support will affect low-income
transfer student recruitment and advancement in STEM fields, which will benefit
geomatics technology education and the broader STEM education community. The
results will be presented at education and professional conferences, workshops,
and seminars as well as other digital dissemination venues. This project is
funded by NSF’s Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees
in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future STEM workers,
and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer,
graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.