* 2130658
* Collaborative Research: High-precision monitoring of foodborne pathogens in food manufacturing facilities
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Henry Spratt, University of Tennessee Chattanooga
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Disease-causing bacterial microorganisms associated with food can cause various
infectious diseases with significant health impacts. Food manufacturing and
processing facilities are a rich place for these foodborne pathogens to spread;
thus, it is important to have efficient detection systems that can be used to
quickly monitor foodborne bacterial pathogens in food manufacturing facilities.
Current technologies that are available for detecting pathogens can be expensive
and/or take a long time to get results, so they are not suitable for routine
application in fast-paced food manufacturing sites where products are developed
continuously. New and improved technologies are needed for rapid detection of
foodborne pathogens in order to avoid health impacts and economic losses due to
food product recalls. This project will develop a novel technology that will
accurately detect foodborne bacterial pathogens using a unique artificial
molecule called ‘aptamer’ that is designed to act as a true test for the desired
pathogen with the result detected in multiple ways to enhance precision. The
technology will use computational methods and mobile devices, such as
smartphones, to enable rapid detection and wireless data transmission for remote
access to the results. The technology can be developed to detect various types
of foodborne bacterial pathogens in real-time, a significant step towards
improving food safety in food manufacturing and processing facilities. The
project will provide students with hands-on training in the development of the
technology to build the related skillset in the United States workforce. The
project will also facilitate K-12 outreach programs on food safety as well as
promote STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math) education amongst
women and underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The food industry
needs “fit-for-purpose” pathogen detection technologies that can be easily
integrated into manufacturing process systems to rapidly deliver precise
identification and quantification of bacterial pathogens in real-time.
Leveraging an interdisciplinary research team that will exploit structural
bioinformatics, data analytics, and aptamer-based biosensing, the proposed
project will develop a wireless multimodal aptasensor with mobile integration to
precisely detect foodborne bacterial pathogens via an integrated electrochemical
and optical monitoring. The technology will deliver the following performance
characteristics: (i) a high-precision method for flow-through monitoring; (ii) a
portable device that can be moved to different process locations; (iii) an
ability to detect target pathogens in complex food micro environments; (iv)
capacity for real-time remote monitoring and integration into SCADA (supervisory
control and data acquisition) systems; and (v) multimodal sensing capability to
enhance precision. These represent significant improvements over existing
foodborne pathogen detection systems used in food manufacturing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.