* 2130560
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: A new framework for building fail-slow fault-tolerant distributed systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tianyin Xu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project targets a long-lasting and an increasingly pervasive challenge of
distributed system design and implementation—fail-slow fault tolerance. Most
existing fault-tolerant distributed systems are developed and tested to tolerate
faults where a node has completely stopped, but they often do not perform well
with the “fail-slow” faults, where a faulty node has not crashed but is
operating at a degraded speed far below the standard performance. Fail-slow
faults can happen for various reasons including hardware (e.g., an overheated
chip), software (e.g., the process uses up all the memory), network (e.g., a
loose cable), and human errors (e.g., the administrator launches too many
processes on the same node). In many current fault-tolerant distributed systems,
the fail-slow nodes can damage the entire system performance by holding up the
healthy nodes in their execution. For example, a healthy node may keep buffering
outbound messages to the slow nodes until it uses up its memory and crash.
Improving fail-slow fault-tolerance is an important issue as fail-slow faults
have been reported to be common in large-scale distributed systems deployed in
modern data centers. The performance issues they cause are more hidden and hard
to debug. To help improve this situation, this work will develop a set of novel,
transformative technologies, including distributed-system programming support,
design patterns, and runtime verification techniques, that will be encapsulated
in a unified programming framework and will dramatically improve the performance
and fault-tolerance of modern distributed systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research may have a major impact on industry and society, since distributed
systems are the cornerstones of modern computing infrastructures such as cloud
computing, cluster and datacenter technologies, and high performance computing.
In particular, this work will be done in collaboration with widely used
distributed databases, specifically MongoDB and TiDB. The PIs envision this
effort as a catalyst for multidisciplinary research and education on distributed
systems technologies at Stony Brook University and the University of Illinois.
The PIs will use this work as a core that they hope will eventually grow to
agglutinate other faculty of diverse expertise with interests in cloud
computing, distributed systems, and software engineering technologies. Both
universities are experiencing an unprecedented surge of students in Computer
Science. The PIs are working with the department to broaden the course offerings
with multidisciplinary courses in the general area of cloud computing,
distributed systems, reliable systems, and software engineering. The PIs will
incorporate the topics in this proposal in the courses they are teaching. The
PIs have a long-standing commitment to undergraduate education and research, and
to broaden participation to under-represented minorities. They will use this
work to involve undergraduates and under-represented students in their research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.