* 2130381
* Scholarship and Mentoring Investment in Low-Income, Academically Talented Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Baccalaureate Degree Seeking Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2028
* Aldo Morales, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at the Pennsylvania State University – Harrisburg Campus, a public, four-
year institution of higher education. Over its six-year duration, this project
will fund scholarships to 30 full time students who are pursuing bachelor’s
degrees in one of several areas. These include degrees in Biology, Civil
Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mathematical Sciences,
Mechanical Engineering, (General) Science, and Structural Design and
Construction. Three cohorts of ten students each will receive support during
their first year at Penn State- Harrisburg and will receive four years of
scholarships. Low-income, first-generation students experience several
challenges when attending institutions of higher education. Some challenges
include higher levels of stress, lower levels of life satisfaction, decreased
sense of belonging, and lack of interest in STEM fields. These factors may
influence students' persistence in continuing in their majors. This project aims
to examine how a series of interrelated project components foster the STEM
scholars’ persistence related to academic interest, positive attitude, the rigor
of the STEM program, and commitment to the STEM program. Additionally, the
project will generate knowledge about how institutions can create a series of
integrated and interdisciplinary supportive structures that promote STEM
students’ persistence throughout undergraduate degree seeking, enhancing the
learning opportunities for all current and potential STEM students. The project
supports NSF’s mission to promote diverse, equitable, and inclusive
participation in STEM programs. The project will include various robust
recruitment strategies and attention to retention through the interdisciplinary
engagement of peers, STEM faculty, and representatives from the career fields to
foster students’ engagement in social and academic experiences. This will
include a particular focus on seminars that attend to scholars’ socio-emotional
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase STEM
degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates with demonstrated
financial need. Using Prenzel’s Persistence of Interest model, the project
objectives include: (i) increasing the number of diverse, low-income,
academically talented students who enroll in and graduate from Penn State-
Harrisburg STEM undergraduate programs; (ii) contributing to the workforce in
STEM frontier areas; (iii) implementing curricular and supportive activities
that promote scholars’ persistence in STEM programs; (iv) identifying factors
that, from those curricular and supportive activities, contribute to scholars’
persistence to remain in STEM undergraduate programs and successfully graduate;
and disseminating knowledge about the role of the STEM components in promoting
persistence in undergraduate STEM programs. The interrelated STEM components
include scholar support, team-based cohorts, and engagement activities. The
structured Multi-Level mentoring and implementation of Scholars Persisting in
Academic (SPA) Seminars are two core components of this project. The SPA
Seminars are intended to alleviate the stress and anxiety that low-income
students experience when taking challenging courses in STEM. Another projecs
component is the broader participation of local industry, such as providing
internships and mentoring scholars, to accomplish these goals. Sample project
deliverables include an industry mentoring plan, sample team-based Calculus
modules, scholar research or internship products, and evaluation results. It is
anticipated that the lessons learned from applying the persistence framework
with the STEM components will enhance the retention and graduation rates of low-
income, academically talented students at other institutions. Findings will be
disseminated through regional channels for publicly funded four-year
institutions, with a focus on how to best gather and present pertinent
information needed for widespread adoption. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.