* 2130663
* 2021 Antarctic Subsea Cable Workshop: High-Speed Connectivity Needs to Advance US Antarctic Science
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jonathan Pundsack, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 05/31/2023
* USD 49,992.00

Current networking capacity at McMurdo Station is insufficient to even be
considered “broadband,” with a summer population of up to 1000 people sharing
what is equivalent to the connection enjoyed by a typical family of three in the
United States. The changing Antarctic ice sheets and Southern Ocean are large,
complex systems that require cutting edge technology to do cutting edge
research, with remote technology becoming increasingly useful and even necessary
to monitor changes at sufficient spatial and temporal scales. Antarctic science
also often involves large data-transfer needs not currently met by existing
satellite communication infrastructure. This workshop will gather
representatives from across Antarctic science disciplines—from astronomy to
zoology—as well as research and education networking experts to explore the
scientific advances that would be enabled through dramatically increased real-
time network connectivity, and also consider opportunities for subsea cable
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will assess the importance
of a subsea fiber optic cable for high-capacity real-time connectivity in the US
Antarctic Program, which is at the forefront of some of the greatest climate-
related challenges facing our planet. The workshop will: (1) document unmet or
poorly met current scientific and logistic needs for connectivity; (2) explore
connectivity needs for planned future research and note the scientific advances
that would be possible if the full value of modern cyberinfrastructure-empowered
research could be brought to the Antarctic research community; and (3) identify
scientific opportunities in planning a fully instrumented communication cable as
a scientific observatory. Due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, the workshop
will be hosted and streamed online. While the workshop will be limited to
invited personnel in order to facilitate a collaborative working environment,
broad community input will be sought via survey and via comment on draft
outputs. A workshop summary document and report will be delivered to NSF.
Increasing US Antarctic connectivity by orders of magnitude will be
transformative for science and logistics, and it may well usher in a new era of
Antarctic science that is more accessible, efficient and
sustainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.