* 2130256
* The Intersection of Science Identity and Success for Low-Income, Academically-Talented Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2027
* Christopher Hall, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2027
* USD 749,922.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the retention and
graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need at Berry College in Georgia. Over its six-year duration, this project will
fund scholarships to twenty-one (21) high-achieving, low-income undergraduate
STEM majors in biochemistry, biology, chemistry, mathematics, and physics. In
addition to financial support, the project will provide curricular and co-
curricular support through student centered efforts, building community, and
fostering student collaboration. In line with this, the project will implement
myriad activities and opportunities, including a summer bridge program for
matriculating students, field trips, student participation at conferences and
scientific meetings, small group faculty mentoring, and the inclusion of career-
exploration ventures. Individual support mechanisms will include: engaging
parents and guardians in their students' academic journeys, plus individual
mentoring by faculty, staff, peers, and STEM professionals. Additional
mechanisms involve providing the availability of STEM research experiences and
proactively advising students for enrollment in extant introductory courses that
engage-students in active learning pedagogies. Project investigators will
disseminate outcomes and findings using national venues, while, at the same
time, targeting other small, liberal-arts colleges lacking robust strategical
programs to provide support to low-income, highly talented STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this Berry College project is
to increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. Specific objectives include closing gaps for
STEM students in unmet financial need and diminishing - eliminating when
possible - other challenges and barriers to persistence to a STEM undergraduate
degree, and enhancing existing support infrastructure, while creating new
student support structures. Additionally, the project team intends to use extant
research on STEM interventions as a theoretical grounding for choices of project
components. In particular, the project will base its activities on findings that
student-centeredness, community building, and collaboration are integral to
effective administration of interventions for STEM students. Insights and
outcomes from rigorous mixed methods project evaluation will generate new
knowledge on which aspects of support interventions, or combination of
interventions, are most effective for retention, engagement, commitment, self-
efficacy, feeling of belonging, academic performance, and overall success of
students. The lines of investigation will address gaps in the literature and
inform other higher education professionals seeking to support students with a
combination of curricular and co-curricular interventions, especially for
students in liberal arts institutions in rural settings who are underrepresented
in their participation in STEM courses of study. This project is funded by NSF’s
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.