* 2130977
* The orientation, shape, and stability of the Golden Gate sand waves
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Dan Hanes, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 240,873.00

Marine sand waves are like underwater sand dunes. They are found worldwide in
shallow marine environments such as tidal inlets and tidal banks. They are also
found in some estuaries, submarine canyons, and deep shelf environments. They
can be important to navigation and the design and placement of submarine cables,
pipelines, and wind power generation facilities. For instance, the unintended
exposure of a buried pipeline or cable due to the growth or migration of sand
waves can cause catastrophic failure resulting in high costs and destructive
ecological impacts. The dynamic migration of sand wave crests into shipping
channels can render navigational charts inaccurate and be hazardous to shipping
and small boats. This project will use models to study sediment transport in the
Golden Gate sand waves, one of the earthâ€™s most striking field of sand waves.
The project Broader Impacts include an improved understanding of sand wave
dynamics that will help inform sediment management in the region. The project
would also support a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shape and
dynamics of sand waves will be investigated through the integration of multiple
existing high resolution field surveys of the Golden Gate sand waves and a
calibrated numerical model that incorporates physical processes such as fluid
dynamics and sediment transport in coastal regions. The hydrodynamic forcing in
the region is due mainly to tides and exhibits a powerful tidal jet due to the
flow in and out of San Francisco Bay. In combination with ocean waves this
results in a complex and energetic sediment transport patterns and bedform
morphodynamics. The goals of this project are to evaluate hypotheses to explain
several perplexing observations found in various fields of sand waves worldwide,
such as: the asymmetric shapes of individual sand waves and their relation to
sand wave migration; the dynamics linking the tidal forcing and the orientation
of individual sand wave crests; and the occasional appearance and disappearance
of a new sand wave crest within a field of sand waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.