* 2130687
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Quantum-enhanced long-range energy capture
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Gabriela Schlau-Cohen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 495,000.00

Photosynthesis powers life on Earth, providing all of our food, oxygen and most
of our energy. The general principles underpinning the first steps of
photosynthesis have been conserved by evolution; a protein network, termed the
antenna, captures solar energy and delivers it to a dedicated protein, the
reaction center, where electricity is generated. Remarkably, these steps can
occur with almost 100% quantum efficiency. Recent observations suggest that
nature may achieve this high efficiency by utilizing wavelike transport of
absorbed solar energy from the antenna to the reaction centers. However, the
presence and role of such quantum mechanical phenomena in natural systems are
highly debated. One challenge to characterizing their impact has been that
experiments on the antenna were performed in non-native and isolated solutions.
In this project, which is a collaboration between researchers at the Michigan
Institute of Technology (US) and the University of Sheffield (UK), the
investigators will attempt a step-change in our understanding by investigating
how solar energy is transported within the native network. These experiments
will simultaneously uncover the mechanisms that give rise to efficient capture
and conversion of solar energy to electricity and identify the interactions that
enhance or repress the underlying quantum behaviors. They will then seek to
exploit these natural design principles to build non-native systems with
enhanced abilities to propagate energy efficiently over increased distances.
These studies will thereby lay the groundwork for improving energy transport in
biohybrid and semi-conductor devices for application to emerging technologies
relevant to consumer electronics, solar energy capture, quantum computing,
quantum communications and photocatalysts. The project will simultaneously train
the next generation of researchers at the biology/physics interface and
disseminate the fascinating fundamental science underpinning natural solar
energy conversion to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In photosynthetic
light harvesting and solar energy conversion, the protein architecture involved
varies dramatically with species, yet the general design is conserved; a network
containing light-harvesting complexes (LHCs) absorbs and transfers energy to a
reaction center (RC) for charge separation. Remarkably, absorption to charge
separation can occur with almost 100% quantum efficiency. Experimental
observations of oscillations within the excited state manifold led to a body of
theoretical work that suggested the high efficiency is, in part, due to quantum
coherence. However, the measured oscillations have been increasingly assigned to
vibronic coherences, and experimental evidence of quantum coherence or its role
in light harvesting has been elusive. To date, experiments have all been
performed on isolated LHCs and RCs, yet these proteins function natively within
a network. Furthermore, non-native interactions introduced through lithography
have been shown to enhance the properties of the LHC, including energy transport
and oscillator strength from exciton-plasmon coupling. Thus, the behaviors
within the native network as well as the ability of non-native interactions to
impact this behavior have not been investigated. In this project, the
investigators will use different in vitro platforms to replicate the native
network and introduce non-native interactions for different combinations of
photosynthetic proteins. They will use advanced spectroscopy and microscopy to
characterize excited-state properties, energy transport, solar energy
conversion, and network geometry. The results will provide a blueprint for how
nanoscale organization and interactions direct energy for light harvesting and
solar energy conversion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project
is supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.