* 2130832
* The Expanded Owens Valley Solar Array as a Community Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Dale Gary, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Roman Makarevich
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,798,474.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar flares and active regions in
the solar atmosphere represent two phenomena that are key to better
understanding of initiation mechanisms of solar activity. The evolving magnetic
fields power explosive releases of the solar energy, and their measurements are
therefore of utmost importance for understanding and forecasting of solar
activity that impact the Earth and near-Earth space environment (Space Weather).
The work will support operations and research conducted at the Expanded Owens
Valley Solar Array (EOVSA). EOVSA is the US sole solar-dedicated radio facility
with the capability to provide routine spectral imaging of the solar activity
and directly measure the solar magnetic fields in 3D. The recently passed
bipartisan PROSWIFT Act (Promoting Research and Observations of Space Weather to
Improve the Forecasting of Tomorrow) calls, among other things, for "sustaining
ground-based observational capability" including "maintain and improve ground-
based observations of the Sun." The work directly addresses this call by
providing solar radio data during the rising phase of Solar Cycle 25. This work
will also develop the mathematical framework to deduce information about solar
environment from the currently unutilized polarized data, which will provide key
information for both active region structure and theoretical understanding of
particle acceleration in solar flares. Further, this project will improve image
reconstruction techniques by more accurately accounting for differential solar
rotation, which will greatly enhance the capability to image solar flares and
active regions. This project will stimulate integration of research and
education by directly supporting several graduate students at the New Jersey
Institute of Technology and the University of California Berkeley who will be
responsible for EOVSA operations on a rotating basis as well as develop STEM
workforce by supporting and involving students and early-career postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.