* 2131621
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Integrated Assessment of Climate Impacts on Ecosystem Functions and Productivity of Critical-Zone Eco-Hydrology
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Daniele Zaccaria, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 101,795.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a framework for the
assessment, analysis and management of environmental risks and impacts resulting
from anthropogenic activities and climate change on water-scarce critical zone
systems. This project seeks to define and implement actionable mitigation
measures for critical zone sustainable management, aiming to shed light on
human-water interactions, largely in regard to salinization and groundwater
intrusion. This project utilizes participatory modeling and narratives derived
from stakeholder engagement to identify critical challenges that the research
program can help solve. The project will develop science-based knowledge on the
sustainability of water-scarce critical zone systems through an integrative
approach that will include environmental, socio-economic and institutional
aspects, and multi-stakeholder’s perspectives. This approach will highlight key
knowledge gaps that when filled, can help stakeholders and decision-makers
enhance the long-term environmental and economic sustainability of the water-
scarce critical zone systems. By integrating scientific knowledge, models and
the direct involvement of stakeholders, the team will be able to define
“sustainable adaptation pathways” that describe the possible dynamic evolution
of the water-scarce critical zone systems in the next 10- 20 years. These
pathways will account for the uncertainties related to climate change, land use
patterns, human behaviors, and the related adaptation strategies and can be used
ultimately used as decision support tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.