* 2131201
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: S&amp;CC: A Distributed Framework for Resource Availability Tracking and Decision Making for Power Systems During Natural Disasters
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Nayda Santiago, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,642.00

The quality of life for citizens in a city is determined by how strong its
infrastructure is. One of the most important aspects of a city's infrastructure
is the electric power grid. When a natural disaster occurs, parts of the
electric grid become damaged and cannot properly function. In current systems,
the information of the status of each component of the grid is collected by a
central unit that will then proceed to send control information to all
subsystems to maintain the grid working. This scheme does not work during
natural disasters due to the large number of failures. This work will use
distributed algorithms for managing the grid under natural disaster
conditions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project proposes the development of a
blockchain-based power system resource availability tracking algorithm that can
track the status of power system components even with communication failures. In
addition, a hierarchical decision-making algorithm for real-time power system
operation under severe damage conditions will be developed. This will advance
the state of the art of Internet of Things in critical infrastructure systems
and will advance algorithm development for resilient real-time power system
operation during natural disasters. The proposed hierarchical decision-making
algorithm will consider dynamic system islanding and make decisions based on
system resource availability and network topology flexibility in the real
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcome of this research will provide models for
decentralized operations of power systems under extreme conditions. This will in
turn improve the resilience of power systems, which in turn reduce economic
losses caused by natural disasters and improve the quality of life for people
suffering from natural disasters. The project will set a foundation for the
decentralized operations of different critical infrastructure systems and
improve their resilience against natural disasters. In addition, this project
will involve Hispanic graduate and undergraduate researchers and produce
interdisciplinary research-oriented teaching modules to improve the students'
research capability in Internet of Things applications in power
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Results of this project will be disseminated to
the general public via school visits, outreach activities, open houses, and to
the research community via publications and technical presentations. In
addition, a public web page containing information and results from this work
can be found at https://dresilientpower.uprm.edu/ . It will be maintained for
the duration of the project and at least two years
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is partially funded by the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.