* 2131361
* I-Corps:  A bisulfite-free method of quantifying the methylation patterns for detecting cancer recurrence in blood
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Michael O'Donnell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
development and validation of a minimally invasive blood test that can help
assess cancer patients' response earlier and more accurately than current
standards of care such as computerized tomography (CT) scans and antigen
testing. The results from current tools often leave patients and physicians
waiting for extended periods and can lead to ineffective therapies and
downstream diagnostic follow-ups. This technology provides real-time insights
into how a patient is responding, thus informing clinical decision-making and
improving patient outcomes. There are currently 16 million cancer survivors in
the US, and the uncertainty of relapse causes significant anguish for patients
and caregivers alike. This technology addresses cancer types ranging from
colorectal cancer to glioblastoma, and from breast cancer to lung
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops novel methods for
detecting and quantifying methylation, structural patterns in patients' blood.
Current approaches for detecting methylation involve a harsh chemical
modification that degrades almost 90% of the DNA and limits the overall
accuracy. The approach used here has demonstrated initial success with the use
of bisulfite-free approaches to detect and quantify methylation patterns. This
workflow includes the use of a novel methylation-sensitive fusion protein and a
nanomaterial platform to amplify the signal. The proposed technology has the
potential to detect methylation signals at multiple timepoints within the
patient care journey and to create significant clinical
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.