* 2131944
* Structure Prediction and Design of Molecular Crystals with the GAtor Genetic Algorithm
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Noa Marom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2024
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research and
educational activities aimed at developing and applying computational methods to
predict crystal structures of molecular crystals. Molecular crystals are solids
comprised of molecular building blocks. They are used extensively in a variety
of applications that require packing molecular ingredients into structures with
uniform, reproducible properties, including pharmaceuticals, energetic
materials, and organic electronics. The properties and performance of molecular
solids are inextricably linked to their crystal structure. Because molecular
crystals are held together by relatively weak inter-molecular interactions, as
opposed to the strong chemical bonds that hold atoms together to form molecules,
the same molecule may crystallize in several different crystal structures, known
as polymorphs. Polymorphs of the same molecule may have markedly different
physical and chemical properties. The ability to predict all the possible
polymorphs of a given molecule and their properties by computer simulations is
of paramount importance across industries whose products are marketed in the
form of molecular crystals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the
PI and her team will develop algorithms for prediction of molecular crystal
structures and for design of crystal structures with improved properties. This
award also supports the PI's educational and outreach activities, which include
training of graduate and undergraduate students in high performance computing
and machine learning, new curriculum development, and organization of "Women
Leaders in Science and Engineering" luncheon meetings where female students meet
with women seminar speakers, providing them with mentorship and networking
opportunities to help retain them in science and engineering and advance their
careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities aimed at developing and applying
computational methods to predict crystal structures of molecular crystals.
Molecular crystals are bound by weak dispersion interactions that generate
potential energy landscapes with many local minima that may be extremely close
in energy. This gives rise to polymorphism, the crystallization of the same
molecule in different structures. Crystal structure may profoundly influence the
physical and chemical properties, and hence the functionality of molecular
solids in diverse applications, including pharmaceuticals, energetic materials,
and organic electronics. Therefore, the ability to predict the structure and
properties of molecular crystals is of paramount importance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research project, the PI and her team will develop
algorithms for prediction of molecular crystal structures and for inverse design
of crystal structures with improved properties. Specifically, multi-component
crystals and crystals of flexible molecules will be targeted. This will be
achieved through the development of new methods for configuration space
exploration, combining first-principles simulations, optimization algorithms,
and machine learning in seamlessly integrated workflows. These will be
implemented in open source codes, parallelized and designed for efficient
execution on high-performance computers. Crystal structure prediction datasets
will be made publicly available as a resource for other researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities, which include training of graduate and undergraduate students in
high performance computing and machine learning, new curriculum development, and
organization of "Women Leaders in Science and Engineering" luncheon meetings
where female students meet with women seminar speakers, providing them with
mentorship and networking opportunities to help retain them in science and
engineering and advance their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.