* 2131916
* RII Track-4:NSF Engineering mixed microbial communities &amp; bioreactor configurations to optimize biotransformation processes for metal and metalloid bioremediation and biorecove
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Erika Espinosa Ortiz, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 136,638.00

Waste streams from agricultural run-off and industries such as mining typically
contain pollutants like metals and metalloids (M&amp;M), which can be toxic and
pose a threat to the environment and health. The removal and recovery of M&amp;M
from wastewater is crucial to prevent environmental contamination and to develop
a more sustainable use of resources. This project proposes to exploit the
ability of microbes to transform toxic and water-soluble forms of M&amp;M into
non-toxic forms which can be recovered as value-added products (e.g., metallic
nanoparticles that can have multiple applications). Under the concept of
"together is better", we plan to use mixed microbial communities of fungi and
bacteria (relatively unexplored communities) to develop bioreactor systems for
metal- and metalloid- biotransformation processes; by increasing the number and
diversity of partners in a microbial community we can create more resilient,
tolerant, and stable communities with improved biotransformation processes
compared to their individual counterparts. The proposed work will (i) provide
key fundamental knowledge regarding microbial interactions between fungi and
bacteria in mixed microbial communities, a topic of interest to better
understand the microbial system in nature; and (ii) lay down the foundation for
the development of improved systems for the removal and recovery of harmful
M&amp;M from waste streams, which has transformative potential and can
revolutionize both bioremediation technologies and future biomanufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project envisions using multi-domain mixed microbial
communities (MMCs), specifically the relatively unexplored fungal-bacterial
biofilms, for improved biotransformation and bioremediation of metals and
metalloids (M&amp;M) from waste streams and biorecovery of value-added products
(e.g., metallic nanoparticles) beneficial to society. This project will address
some of the main challenges in using MMCs for bioprocessing: the poor
understanding of MMCs and the lack of bioreactors to successfully cultivate MMCs
and maintain stable bioprocessing. Thus, the goal of this project is to develop
and optimize MMCs and bioreactor systems for improved bioprocessing of M&amp;M
for bioremediation and biorecovery. As a proof of concept, selenium (Se, a
common metalloid found in acid mine drainage) will be used as an example to
assess the potential use of the proposed fungal-bacterial biofilm systems for
M&amp;M bioremediation and biorecovery in this project. Three main tasks are
proposed: (1) establishing fungal-bacterial biofilms with relevant environmental
microorganisms and characterizing their structural and mechanical properties
using a combination of cutting-edge techniques including magnetic tweezers,
shear rheometry, and optical coherence tomography; (2) developing Membrane
Biofilm Reactors (MBfR), an emergent technology based on the use of membranes
that transfer gas to a biofilm growing on the membrane, to support fungal-
bacterial biofilm establishment; and (3) assessing and optimizing reactor
performance and stability of MBfRs with fungal-bacterial biofilms for the
removal of Se and its recovery. Understanding and controlling microbial
interactions in MMCs and developing improved multi-domain bioreactor systems is
key to building a sustainable future minimizing pollution and to utilizing waste
streams for the recovery of the generation of high-value
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.