* 2131687
* WORKSHOP PROPOSAL: EARTH TO ECONOMY: ACCELERATING INNOVATION FOR CLIMATE CHANGE SOLUTIONS AND TRANSLATIONAL RESEARCH
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* J. Douglas Walker, The Geological Society of America, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2022
* USD 42,485.00

Climate change is having a major impact on society, the environment, and the
economy. To help crowdsource potential solutions with accompanying roadmaps, the
Geological Society of America (GSA) is implementing a rapid, thorough, and
focused campaign to collect ideas, plans, and potential solutions via a
concentrated outreach campaign to its internal working groups and its extended
and international geoscience society affiliates. Goals will be to identify the
biggest, most important interdisciplinary/convergent challenges in climate
change on subjects where results can be addressed and delivered in the next 2 to
3 years. In addition, ideas for socializing and training geoscientists in the
value and mechanisms of translational research and its benefits to society will
be solicited. To accomplish this GSA will crowdsource through a variety of
social media and virtual communication channels the knowledge, wisdom, and
insights of the extensive GSA community through their 22 Scientific Divisions,
global Associated Societies, and the communities they support, as well as
contacts with state and local communities and geological surveys. Broader
Impacts of the activities will be the generation of potential climate change
solutions to mitigate the impact of a changing climate on environmental,
societal, and economic arenas. They also include the engagement of early career
scientists and members of underrepresented groups whose lives and careers are
most likely to impacted over time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The impacts of climate
change on the environment and society are serious concerns for the environment
and society. The Geological Society of America (GSA) is one of the two major
professional societies of geoscientists in the US with over 22,000 geoscientist
members in addition to other affiliated organizations. GSA will use this vast
network to solicit input and ideas for combating deleterious effects of climate
change and generating momentum for improving human's ability to adapt or
mitigate its impacts. Through a series of virtual and social media platforms the
Society will crowdsource input from across the spectrum of the geosciences and
society by energizing and engaging its 22 Scientific Divisions, early career
scientists, and those underrepresented in geoscience and whose communities tend
to be most heavily impacted by policies on which communities and parts of the
country will be most impacted by proposed changes and which will be considered
most at risk. GSA will be generating input with the goal of producing a report
to be submitted to the National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.