* 2131476
* DASS: Accountability from Attention, not Assumption
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 10/31/2024
* USD 749,999.00

Modern software and cyberphysical systems face open-ended tasks in complex
environments, rendering accountability in the event of harm or injury an ever-
growing challenge for both social and technical processes. Although well-
understood techniques can judge whether programs obey formal properties, the
real-world assurance that this process provides depends on its scope and
precision. Harms can even occur when every agent operates correctly according to
its model of the system and knowledge of its state. An understanding of the
contribution of autonomous agents to a harm is necessary in order to consider
counterfactuals and verify whether those agents acted appropriately. Philosophy
and law employ decision artifacts such as beliefs, desires, and intentions as
the basis for such assessments, motivating an understanding of how they arise
within modern software systems. The project's novelties are (i) the use of
formal reasoning to assure the machine analogues of these decision artifacts
will be faithfully recorded for accountability processes; and (ii) an
investigation of how these artifacts can be used to guide development of
software more amenable to responsibility assessment. The project's impacts
include (i) the development of formal methods to assure the sufficiency of
retained information and programming languages constructs that assist developers
to that end, and (ii) the construction of frameworks that contribute to the
assessment of responsibility in an adaptable, value-neutral
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the aim of this project is to
evaluate how the tools of epistemic and other modal logics can be used to guide
formalization of the information underlying the actions, desires, beliefs and
intentions of an agent, and to develop a verifiable trace property --
reversibility -- which guarantees that the necessary information regarding those
decision artifacts is recorded in a manner conducive to retrospective analysis.
Furthermore, this project strives to decouple how information is specified from
how the underlying artifacts are interpreted by the different philosophical
schools, such as deontological or utilitarian ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.