* 2131469
* Hotspots of Genome Evolution in a Rapid Vertebrate Radiation
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* David Toews, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,129,575.00

Evolutionary radiations are groups of organisms that produce new species at an
exceptionally high rate. Biologists have long used such radiations as model
systems to study the process of speciation. Past studies have commonly focused
on the traits of organisms or their habitats that might have facilitated the
formation of new species. With the development of genome sequencing methods,
however, it is now possible to identify specific genes that might be involved in
producing evolutionary radiations. This project aims to identify genes that may
be associated with the exceptional diversification of a group of small, colorful
songbirds in North, Central, and South America. The project offers a rich
opportunity to understand the genetic bases of evolutionary radiations and the
substrate that has given rise to one of the most diverse vertebrate species
groups. The project will include training and mentorship of undergraduate and
graduate students, as well as outreach programs to extend the research to the
broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project focuses on wood
warblers (Parulidae), a family of birds with over 100 species that diversified
within the last 10 million years, and which has one of the fastest evolutionary
rates across songbirds. The goal of the project is to study the evolutionary
history of genes potentially involved in the diversification of this group. An
important starting point requires some knowledge of potential candidate genes
involved, something lacking in nearly all non-model biological systems. In
warblers, however, previous studies of independent hybrid zones have generated a
set of candidate genomic regions associated with species differences, many of
which have been found to be involved in plumage pigmentation. The project draws
upon the tools and theoretical framework of phylogenetic comparative methods and
will analyze whole genome sequence data from multiple individuals of every
species in the radiation. The work will first quantify patterns of genomic
divergence among closely related species to identify chromosomal regions and
genes associated with exceptional lineage-specific evolution. Second, the
researchers will estimate genealogical discordance in the topologies of trees
sampled across the genomes of species in the radiation to test for evidence of
reticulate evolution. Finally, by making use of the widespread availability of
genomes across the avian tree of life, the project will extend beyond warblers
to address a fundamental question regarding the extraordinary speciation within
evolutionary radiations: are there genomic predictors of
diversification?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.