* 2131976
* Exploring the Physical Limits of Structural Superlubricity
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Mehmet Baykara, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 11/30/2025
* USD 299,998.00

This grant will focus on “structural superlubricity”, a peculiar phenomenon
where friction between two objects nearly vanishes, without the use of any
lubricants. Friction is the leading cause of useful energy loss in mechanical
systems and processes, with an enormous impact on national energy demand. In
fact, recent estimates indicate that economic losses associated with friction
can amount up to a few percent of the gross domestic product of a developed
nation such as the USA. New methods devised to mitigate friction have important
implications for the conservation of useful energy, as well as economic and
environmental sustainability. Structural superlubricity is one such method,
which has been recently experimentally demonstrated for microscopic contacts.
This research project will explore the physical limits of structural
superlubricity in terms of speed of motion, operation temperature, and contact
size, to determine if the idea can be employed to establish ultra-low friction
sliding in mechanical systems of practical relevance. The project has a
significant diversity component, as it will be conducted at UC Merced, a
Hispanic Serving Institution where many students are first-generation. The
research efforts will be additionally complemented by outreach activities aimed
at K-12 students in the socio-economically underserved region of San Joaquin
Valley.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of the project is to
form a fundamental understanding of the physical limits of structural
superlubricity, in terms of its robustness against changes in operating
conditions such as temperature and sliding speed, as well as the length scale up
to which the ultra-low friction state can be preserved. To achieve this
objective, manipulation experiments based on atomic force microscopy will be
performed, whereby gold flakes will be laterally moved on top of atomically flat
graphite substrates and the associated friction forces will be recorded with
high precision. Experiments will be performed at different temperatures, sliding
speeds, and on flakes of sizes approaching the micrometer regime. The obtained
results will provide crucial experimental data for the still nascent theories
about the physical limitations of structural
superlubricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.