* 2131914
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): Atmospheric Science and Chemistry mEasurement NeTwork (ASCENT)
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ann Dillner, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 12,136,232.00

This Mid-scale Research Infrastructure – 1 award is for the establishment of the
Atmospheric Science and Chemistry mEasurement NeTwork (ASCENT). ASCENT will
provide the first high time-resolution, long-term measurements of the properties
of atmospheric particulates, known as aerosols. Aerosols have a significant
impact on climate through direct interaction with sunlight and their impact on
clouds. Aerosols also contribute to poor air quality which is a significant
health concern. This award will establish a network of 12 sites around the
United States, outfitted with state-of-the-art instruments for characterizing
the properties of aerosols. Data from ASCENT will allow researchers to address a
variety of questions about how the composition and abundance of aerosols are
changing, such as how the modernization of electrical production (coal to
natural gas to renewable) and transportation (gasoline to electric vehicles) are
impacting air pollution and climate-relevant variables. ASCENT will also allow
US researchers to remain competitive in a global research environment. On the
education and outreach side, the project has specific recruitment, mentoring,
training, and career development plans for graduate and undergraduate students,
with an emphasis on underrepresented groups. One of the ASCENT locations is on
tribal land and the project will train tribal air quality staff and perform
outreach to interested tribal members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASCENT network
consists of twelve sites across the United States that will provide a
comprehensive, high time-resolution, long-term characterization of aerosol
chemical composition and physical properties. The sites are strategically
located in rural, urban, and remote sites that have pre-existing infrastructure
for atmospheric monitoring. Each site will be equipped with four advanced
instruments: an Aerosol Chemical Speciation Monitor (ACSM, non-refractory
aerosols), Xact (trace metals), Aethalometer (black/brown carbon), and Scanning
Mobility Particle Sizer (SMPS, aerosol number size distribution and
concentration). The measurement capability of ASCENT represents a step change
between infrequent and low time-resolution filter measurements, and real-time
measurements of fine aerosol chemical composition and properties. ASCENT is
responsive to recommendations in the 2016 NASEM “Future of Atmospheric
Chemistry” report and a 2020 Government Accountability Office (GAO) report.
ASCENT will enable a wide range of new and exciting research capabilities, such
as advancing fundamental process-level understanding of atmospheric aerosols in
response to changes in infrastructure, energy systems, and land use/coverage,
constraining uncertainties in aerosol-radiation interactions and climate
feedbacks, unraveling specific aerosol types and properties responsible for
their adverse health effects, and improving chemical transport
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.