* 2131745
* ERASE-PFAS: Tunable Vacuum-Ultraviolet Irradiation Systems with Highly Polarized Redox Environment for Treatment of Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substances
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Yujie Men, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2024
* USD 455,000.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are manufactured chemicals that have
been used in a variety of industries. PFASs possess exceptional stability, oil-
and water-repelling capabilities, and other valuable properties that have
resulted in their global distribution in consumer products, electronic
manufacturing, and firefighting applications. However, emissions and improper
disposal, coupled with environmental persistence, have resulted in widespread
PFAS contamination of drinking water sources. Currently, adsorption, ion
exchange, and membrane filtration are among the most used technologies for large
scale treatment of PFASs in water. However, these treatment approaches do not
destroy the PFAS compounds, preventing their more widespread adoption due to the
need for frequent regeneration of exhausted media and costly disposal of
concentrated waste streams. The goal of this project is to address these
limitations through the development of advanced ultraviolet (UV) light-driven
reaction processes to effectively degrade PFASs into environmentally benign
products. This goal will be achieved through a series of experiments and kinetic
modelling of the generation and control of reactive species and their PFAS
reaction mechanisms. Successful completion of this project will generate
knowledge to develop efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable PFAS treatment
technologies for water utilities and industry dischargers to protect public
health. Results will be disseminated through scholarly publication to advance
knowledge. Additional societal benefits include strengthening and diversifying
the Nation’s STEM workforce through outreach, recruitment, and training of
underrepresented K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
fundamental knowledge of a potentially highly effective but poorly understood
vacuum UV light (VUV)-driven photochemical process for the treatment of PFASs.
VUV light is a clean and energy-efficient medium that directly photolyzes water
to create energetic radicals such as HO·, H· and eaq-. Application of VUV
systems for PFAS treatment is currently limited by the low polarized redox
environment and low quantum yield of desired radicals. To overcome these
deficiencies, research will focus on developing a VUV system with a modulable
redox environment to enhance degradation and mineralization of PFASs. Specific
research objectives designed to achieve this goal will: i) characterize radical
photochemistry under VUV irradiation and examine the reactivity of primary
radicals with PFASs; ii) investigate the roles of electron-donating and
-accepting solutes on tuning the speciation of transient reactive species and
redox polarity of reaction systems for PFAS treatment; and iii) develop a
comprehensive kinetic model based on a complete set of elementary reactions and
associated rate constants to identify the dominant reactions and predict PFAS
degradation under environmentally-relevant conditions. Research will employ
advanced state-of-the-science high resolution mass spectrometric analytical
tools to assess transformation products of PFASs and infer their reaction
pathways during modulated water photolysis. Successful completion of this
research will build the science necessary to address the urgent national need
for effective, low cost PFAS treatment technologies. Additional societal
benefits result from a multi-component educational and outreach effort to: i)
engage K-12 students and teachers in environmental chemistry and engineering
through seminars, lab visits, and training; ii) involve community college
students from underrepresented groups in research; and iii) recruit
undergraduate students to participate in a research and mentoring
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.