* 2131619
* Real-Time Prognostics of Lithium-ion Batteries in Electric Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Dazhong Wu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 345,059.00

Due to high energy and power density, high voltage capacity, and light weight,
Lithium-ion batteries are becoming the primary source of power propulsion for
electric unmanned aerial vehicles. Battery performance usually degrade due to
electrochemical reactions, also known as battery aging. Battery aging could
result in capacity fade and even catastrophic failure. Therefore, real-time
battery health management is crucial to the safety and reliability of electric
unmanned aerial vehicles. The limitations of existing battery health management
techniques include (1) few battery health management techniques can achieve
real-time prediction of discharge capacity and end-of-discharge because existing
techniques require condition monitoring data in charge cycles, which are not
always available during flight; (2) current battery health management techniques
are effective only under simple, fixed flight plans and constant payloads.
Effective real-time battery health management techniques will make a significant
impact on not only the aerospace but also healthcare, automotive, defense, and
logistics industries where batteries have a wide range of applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed research is to develop a
novel battery health management technique that enables real-time prediction of
discharge capacity and end-of-discharge of Lithium-ion batteries in electric
unmanned aerial vehicles. Specifically, a novel computational framework that
combines two deep learning algorithms will be developed. One deep learning
algorithm predicts discharge capacity by extracting spatial correlations between
discharge cycles; the other predicts end-of-discharge by capturing temporal
dependencies within a discharge cycle. In addition, an optimal transport-based
domain adaptation technique will be developed to predict discharge capacity and
end-of-discharge under varying flight plans and payloads through the transfer of
knowledge across flight plans and payloads. The proposed real-time battery
health management technique will be validated using experimental data collected
from electric unmanned aerial vehicles. The proposed research will advance the
field of battery health management by answering the following research
questions: (1) Can discharge capacity and end-of-discharge of Lithium-ion
batteries be predicted in real-time using condition monitoring data collected in
discharge cycles only during flight? (2) Can knowledge gained on discharge
capacity and end-of-discharge of Lithium-ion batteries under one flight plan and
payload be used to predict discharge capacity and end-of-discharge under another
flight plan and payload?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.