* 2131070
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: CCF: SHF: MSI/HSI Research Capacity Building via Secure and Efficient Hardware Implementation of Cellular Computational Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 275,993.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As use of renewable energy
sources, such as wind and solar power, continue to increase, distributed
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is needed to synthesize the large amounts of
predictive use indicators, such as weather data and Internet of Things (IoT)
sensor data, in order to allow the electric power grid to continue to operate
reliably with the high levels of variability and uncertainty associated with
renewable energy sources. Since this requires real-time processing, a secure and
efficient hardware platform is needed; AI software alone is not sufficient. The
Cellular Computational Network (CCN) is a distributed AI framework, with a
brain-inspired neural network architecture, which is suitable for critical
networked systems, such as the electric power grid. Hence, utilizing secure and
efficient CCN hardware implementations for power system applications will
accelerate operations to achieve a real-time performance guarantee on
representative large-scale networks without compromising accuracy, and will
simultaneously provide resiliency to cyber-physical system attacks, thus
enhancing sustainable and secure power system
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops both synchronous logic and
asynchronous logic hardware implementations of CCN cells and overall CCN systems
using reconfigurable Field Programmable Gate Arrays, and explores approximate
computing opportunities for application to CCNs. The resulting CCN hardware
systems will be tested via integration into Clemson University’s various Real-
Time Power and Intelligent Systems (RTPIS) Laboratory testbeds, including for
wide area predictive state estimation of power system variables, solving dynamic
power flows, and predictions of spatial-temporal wind speed/power, solar
irradiance/power, and energy consumption of buildings/rooms. Furthermore, this
project partners a Minority/Hispanic Serving Institution, Texas A&amp;M
University – Kingsville (TAMUK), with Clemson University to involve many more
TAMUK Computer Science faculty with RTPIS Lab related research, and establishes
a pipeline of high-performing Hispanic students from TAMUK to pursue Computer
Engineering or Computer Science PhD degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.