* 2131100
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: SCH: Mining Mobile Crowdsensing to Optimize Community Health Clinic Management
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Muztaba Fuad, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,695.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are numerous causes of waste
in the US healthcare system; a portion of this waste is associated with
inefficiency. In pro bono healthcare clinics, where demand often exceeds supply,
resources are often more limited, and student clinicians often provide services
in training, inefficiency often impacts both the quality and quantity of care
provided. In pro bono clinics, there is no direct financial drive for
efficiency. However, by focusing on increased efficiency through optimizing care
delivery, such clinics can serve more people of need in the community, optimize
services, and better address health disparities. The focus on efficiency is
centered on optimizing productive patient care time while minimizing the time
spent on unproductive, non-billable tasks such as movement throughout the
clinic, obtaining equipment and devices, communicating with other healthcare
providers, etc. Monitoring efficiency also allows supervising physical
therapists to identify when student supports and corrections in clinical
performance are needed as students learn. There have been multiple proposed
solutions to address inefficiency and improve the timeliness of care in
healthcare, one of which is clinic layout optimization. However, there is a lack
of understanding of how mobility is optimized, particularly in the pro bono
clinics, to increase efficiency/productivity to maximize contact time with
patients, improve the patient and provider experience, and enhance student
learning. The goal is to render high-quality care that meets patients' and
communities' needs while optimizing time and
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mobile crowdsensing is a powerful but affordable
technology for the pervasive sensing of valuable data that provides solutions to
various real-world problems. From a community clinic's perspective,
opportunistic crowdsensing data from the practitioners can be leveraged to allow
practitioners to use the clinic's facilities more efficiently and enhance the
practitioner's capability. Data that such mobile sensing apps can sense include
the practitioner's movement within the clinic and their contextual information,
such as location, body position, device analytics, and locomotion mode. By
combining such contextualized location and movement data within the clinic,
appropriate big-data analytics and visualization can be utilized to extract
intelligence and improve this instance of human-centric service delivery by
addressing several pressing needs. These needs may include incorporating
different clinic layouts to improve patient experience, finding the most
efficient way to utilize resources to improve patient contact time, making the
practitioner productive in providing patient care, and improving their learning
experience. This project envisions combining motionless and stationary mobile
devices within an indoor space to detect location and motion by using Bluetooth
proximity-based approach as utilized in COVD-19 contact tracing. This project
aims to design and develop a mobile crowdsensing application with visualization
and analytics to help the community clinic optimize practitioners' movement and
operating space to increase its efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.