* 2131037
* Circuit Mechansims of Color Preference
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2027
* Sheyum Syed, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2027
* USD 550,000.00

Understanding human preference for colors remains an enduring challenge in
psychophysics since the 1800’s. While some general principles have been
proposed, underlying biology of color preference remains elusive due largely to
the many confounding factors that affect human color preference and the
technical challenges associated in addressing them. Using the simple fruit fly
which has been used for over 100 years to address basic neurobiological
questions, the PI has recently established a new paradigm to investigate fly
response to color light. The results upended several prior dogma in the field
and revealed for the first time that color light preference changes rhythmically
with the time of day. This time-dependence highlights a previously unknown
regulatory principle and suggests that a thorough understanding of color choice
in animals must account for the daily variations. The proposal will take
advantage of the powerful genetic tools available in the fruit fly to describe
and characterize a neural circuit that controls these rhythmic changes in color
preference. The hypothesized circuit combines light information with external
temperature and output of the built-in clock network in the fly brain. Each of
these systems---visual, thermosensory and endogenous clock---has considerable
neurobiological overlap between flies and humans. Therefore, results from the
project are anticipated to provide major conceptual advances towards
understanding biological control of color preference in humans. Undergraduate
and graduate trainees will be engaged in carrying out proposed experiments, in
disseminating results through publications and scientific talks, and in helping
the PI with educational activities involving local middle-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a novel multi-color paradigm to
describe a circuit that integrates light, temperature and time inputs to adjust
innate color preference in fruit flies. Flies given a choice of color-light
illuminated areas, prefer green and dim in a time-of-day dependent manner. The
preference relies on the eyes, the antenna, thermosensory channels and modulated
by the brain’s circadian clock. These findings hypothesize a circuit that
incorporates photic and circadian signals from photoreceptors with temperature
signal from peripheral and internal thermometers. The combined signal flows
through dorsolateral clock neurons before impinging on downstream circuits.
Specifically, the project will utilize the Gal4/UAS system to separately
identify a thermosensory circuit and a minimal subset of clock neurons needed
for normal control of color preference. Studies will also leverage known
neuropeptide signaling network to identify cells that function as a site for
multisensory integration in color preference downstream of lateral neurons.
Fast-acting neurotransmitters, like octopamine and serotonin, are known to
mediate sensory inputs into the fly nervous system and this project will define
neurotransmitter receptors that are critical for temperature and photic inputs
into color preference. Through these studies, the project will lay the
foundation for a circuit-level understanding of innate color preference.
Scientific results from the project will be integrated into outreach activities
that will promote STEM education among middle-school students. All activities
will involve the PI with graduate and undergraduate trainees, who will together
disseminate the findings through peer-reviewed publications and
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.