* 2131833
* Mid-scale RI-1 (MI:IP): Facility for Open Research in a Compressed Environment (FORCE) at Arizona State University
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Alexandra Navrotsky, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 09/30/2026
* USD 13,711,265.00

This mid-scale research infrastructure (Mid-scale RI-I) project will create a
new facility (FORCE: Facility for Open Research in a Compressed Environment) at
Arizona State University (ASU) to study matter at extremely high pressure and
high temperature under conditions of compression and stress. New capabilities,
not previously available in the US, will be open to the scientific community
from universities, national labs, and industry. The facility is designed to
extend the existing pressure range to study larger samples of high pressure
materials in the Earthâ€™s lower mantle and the interiors of other planets both
within and beyond our solar system. The knowledge gained will help answer
fundamental questions of the past, present and future of our planet. FORCE will
enable the determination of fundamental chemical and physical properties of
materials under extreme conditions and the discovery of new materials of
potential technological importance. Higher pressure and larger sample size will
extend exploratory capabilities and allow new and unexpected materials to be
made and their physical properties, essential for technological applications to
be explored. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide four major pieces
of equipment, specialized space for their installation and operation, and staff
support. The equipment consists of 1. a state of the art high pressure gas
apparatus for treating samples at up to 1 GPa (gigapascal) pressure to be used
for studies of Earth and planetary crustal and upper mantle environments, for
preparing starting materials for the larger presses, and for materials science
and discovery. 2. A 6000 ton press that will allow very large samples to be
produced for a wide array of measurements and observations that cannot be made
on smaller samples. 3. A cubic press that will have two major functions: (a) In
a single-stage mode: rapid synthesis of large samples from 1-7 GPa, and rapid
pressure-temperature studies in the same region. (b) In a double-stage mode:
detailed work in the 30-100 GPa range that current large-volume capabilities
have not yet reached. 4. A torsional device for studying material behavior and
phase transitions caused by strain. There will be direct links to work at ASU
and elsewhere in other parts of high pressure research such as diamond anvil and
shock compression studies, as well as to characterization by electron
microscopy, diffraction, spectroscopy, and calorimetry. FORCE will be an open
facility with easy and clear access for researchers in universities, national
labs, and industry, using the well-established facilities access infrastructure
already established at ASU. The facility will also have summer internships and
workshops. It will provide short-term office space to encourage users to come to
the facility for short, medium, or long-term visits. FORCE will provide training
and hands-on experience for diverse students and other scientists coming from a
variety of scientific and cultural backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.