* 2131940
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): EduceLab: Infrastructure for Next-Generation Heritage Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Suzanne Smith, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2026
* USD 12,368,974.00

This project will create EduceLab, a data-centric instrument platform for
Heritage Science (HS). HS applies the tools, techniques, and rigor of scientific
measurement and inquiry to diverse heritage contexts, such as artifacts and
curated collections, biological remains, and human-impacted environments. The
proposed mid-scale instrument ecosystem is designed around key scientific
capabilities that the research community has embraced as crucial and fundamental
to addressing the challenging variability of HS contexts. The ecosystem includes
materials characterization; advanced multimodal imaging (tomography,
photography, photogrammetry); cyberinfrastructure and methodologies for
capturing, structuring, and processing large-scale data sets; and mobile and
flexibly-deployed instrumentation for in-situ data acquisition and initial
evaluations. Viewed as a holistic ecosystem uniquely capable of addressing
previously insoluble research questions in HS, EduceLab will be commissioned as
operational clusters based on usage patterns that match the diverse HS
communities and constituencies: laboratory equipment in a fixed, controlled
environment for precise measurement and analysis (BENCH); mobile equipment that
can be deployed on-site for collections and landscapes that cannot travel
(MOBILE); and a protean environment for envisioning, building, and testing
custom instrument configurations that address contexts impervious to laboratory
analysis and on-site capabilities (FLEX). The clusters will be interconnected
via cyberinfrastructure (CYBER) that powers efficient data flow through the
entire infrastructure, from data acquisition to structured analysis, supporting
the application of new techniques in data science and artificial intelligence.
EduceLab will function as a novel Mid-scale Research Infrastructure – a variable
scientific lens – for the rigorous, data-driven exploration of compelling
heritage science research questions, engendering new discoveries as well as
fundamental scientific advancement. Headquartered within the University of
Kentucky’s William S. Webb Museum for Anthropology, EduceLab will build cohesion
across a diverse group of national and international stakeholders and
constituents: trainees/students; researchers in HS and in areas where data
acquisition activities overlap; practitioners at institutions with active
heritage collections and connected research efforts; and community members with
investments in the ongoing conservation, preservation, study, dissemination, and
educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EduceLab in its organization will
allow rigorous scientific exploration in the face of the unique challenges posed
by natural and cultural heritage contexts. The EduceLab ecosystem will answer
ongoing demands for agility and innovation in measurement, computational, and
instrumentation solutions to these problems. Such advances will in turn
continuously promote knowledge, growth, and innovation across a range of
scientific disciplines involved in HS, including data science, computer science,
computer vision, imaging science, systems engineering, chemical and materials
engineering, anthropology, and cyberinfrastructure. The proposed instrumentation
strongly aligns with the National Science Foundation’s “Big Ideas” initiatives,
including: Growing Convergence Research (EduceLab and HS is a convergence
activity in itself, blending a number of scientific disciplines and relying on
robust collaborations for success); Harnessing the Data Revolution (EduceLab
activities will be data-driven and data-intensive, relying on emerging
computational tools at play across disciplines like chemistry, physics, and
computer science to capture the essence of objects and their environments); and
NSF INCLUDES (the EduceLab ecosystem combines STEM with heritage fields in a
culturally informed way to strategically grow the interest and participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields and increase societal public literacy and
engagement with science and technology.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure-Track 1 program, Information
and Intelligent Systems, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.