* 2131678
* AGU Workshops on Impactful Priorities for Climate Change Solutions
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,992.00

Climate change and its impact on society and the environment are some of the
most pressing issues facing our nation and the world today. To address these
challenges, the American Geophysical Union, one of the largest geoscience
professional societies will collect ideas on potential ways to increase our
understanding of processes and develop creative approaches to help combat and
potentially mitigate the effects of climate change brought on by extreme weather
events, changing weather patterns and landscapes, sea level rise, migration of
species both on land and in the ocean, among others. Goals are to provide a
prospectus of possible solutions and/or mitigations, with an emphasis on those
subjects that would have a positive impact and be able to deliver impacts on on
a time frame of 2 to 3 years. An aggressive program of outreach to geoscience
community members, working groups, and geoscience disciplinary executive teams
will be carried out. A significant component of these efforts will be on
collecting ideas and thoughts from early career geoscience researchers and
members of commonly marginalized and underrepresented groups. Broader impacts of
the activity include development and delivery of potential, workable approaches
to better understanding climate change with a framework of possible means of
slowing or mitigating negative impacts on society and the environment. Input
from marginalized communities and those that have not had a strong voice in
decisions made by policy makers and that commonly suffer impacts from decisions
on infrastructure and degradation of environmental conditions will be solicited
and incorporated into the final report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The negative
impacts of climate change on the environment and society are serious concerns
for the environment as well as populations and governments. The American
Geophysical Union (AGU) is a major professional society of over 60,000
geoscientists. It will use this vast array of geoscientists via its membership
and others to contribute to ideating possible solutions to issues related to
climate change. To do this AGU is holding a series of workshops, discussion
groups, and surveys to identify and catalog ideas and solutions to climate
related natural process issues where earth, atmosphere, ocean, polar, and
geospace science plays a major role and for which deliverables with major
impacts can be generated within two to three years. The AGU will accomplish this
task by convening executive committees, working groups, and its professional
society members to crowdsource ideas and possible avenues of attack and research
to fill gaps in knowledge to allow potential solutions to move forward while
still preserving precious earth environments. AGU is putting the generation of
this information and its community’s input as a priority with the goal of
producing a report to be made public and submitted to the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.