* 2131531
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Accountable Software Systems for Safety-Critical Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Bryan Choi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2024
* USD 374,999.00

Safety-critical software systems are entering the market in large numbers and
are expected to transform many industries including healthcare, transportation,
manufacturing, and others. In response to the rising societal impact and
complexity of software systems, lawmakers and regulatory authorities are
implementing new laws, regulations, and guidelines to hold software accountable
for its harmful effects. These legal approaches differ across jurisdictions and
across application domains, and they will evolve over time as lawmakers and
regulators continue to study and address emerging software capabilities. Despite
this mounting regulatory pressure, state-of-the-art software-design
methodologies are deficient at providing the desired accountability in safety-
critical systems. The project’s novelties are twofold: (1) developing principled
approaches and tools for assuring and demonstrating accountability of safety-
critical software systems with respect to laws and regulations that evolve over
time, and (2) advancing a legal framework that harmonizes regulatory oversight
of software systems across heterogeneous safety-critical domains. The project’s
impacts are facilitating the design of safety-critical software systems that are
accountable with respect to various regulations, and providing legal insight on
how to extend or amend current regulatory approaches to enhance software
accountability. In addition, the investigators will organize a series of
interdisciplinary workshops and symposiums to bring together experts in software
design and law to discuss open research questions and potential solutions to
software accountability. The investigators also plan to develop new course
materials in computer science and law to integrate the proposed research
outcomes, and actively recruit underrepresented students for positions in the
proposed project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three research
thrusts that seek to make fundamental contributions to both software design and
law. The first thrust creates novel approaches and tools for developing
compositional dynamic assurance cases throughout the software development
lifecycle to assure and demonstrate accountability. The second thrust develops
novel formal-verification techniques for generating provable and certifiable
regulation compliance guarantees, which can be used as evidence in assurance
cases. The third thrust develops legal insight on how lawmakers and regulators
should extend or amend current regulatory approaches to incorporate advances in
software accountability methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.