* 2131150
* ATETV presents: Technician Navigator
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Esperanza Zenon, Pellet Productions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 611,023.00

In its 2019 report on the skilled technical workforce, the National Science
Board noted that skilled technical workers represent 13% of the U.S. workforce
aged 25 and older. Furthermore, these workers “contribute to all parts of the
economy and the Science &amp; Engineering enterprise” by exercising “critical
thinking, design, digital, math, and coding skills to work as auto mechanics,
health care technicians, electricians, welders, computer systems analysts and
administrators, and operators of ‘smart’ infrastructure.” This project will
bring awareness to the educational pathways leading to work and career
opportunities in the skilled technical workforce, bolstering connectedness among
ATE students - and more generally all students in the two-year sector,
educators, and industry stakeholders. A STEM-capable and competitive workforce
leads to innovation, success in industry, new discoveries in research and
development, and advancements in STEM achievements. This ultimately yields a
more economically prosperous nation, renewed global competitiveness, and greater
economic security and prosperity, all of which are goals of the ATE
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technician Navigator will produce an ATETV
repository of authentic original content produced by current practicing
technicians for future technicians that will include blogs, videos, audio
materials, and forums. These materials will inform and engage students,
families, and educators. Through virtual events and one-on-one sessions
developed by faculty and industry representatives, technicians will guide
prospective students through the college decision-making process, supporting
them through enrollment. Creating contextual experiences to increase the
quality, quantity, and diversity of a skilled technical workforce is at the
heart of this project. Contextual experiences meet prospective students where
they are instead of trying to attract their attention, and then use a series of
connected experiences that incrementally guide them along their journey to
enrolling in technician education programs at community and technical colleges.
This will be a first-of-its-kind experiential resource designed to attract and
recruit students into technician education programs and walk them through the
process of enrolling in technician education programs. It is expected that
Technician Navigator will serve the ATE community as a tested model for student
recruitment with digital tools and resources for use in other ATE community
outreach efforts. Content and contextual experiences will establish a community,
connect people and programs, and generate excitement and interest through
authentic materials and experiences. This project is funded by the Advanced
Technological Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for
the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.