* 2131696
* RII Track-4:NSF: Isolated Amorphous Microgrid Design with Accelerated Power System Analysis and Network Layout (IMPALA)
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,03/31/2022
* Phylicia Cicilio, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 03/31/2022
* USD 0.00

Off-grid remote power systems, referred to here as microgrids, are key to
providing electricity to rural Alaskans and are also a promising solution that
addresses the fact that 10% of the world still lacks access to electricity as of
2019. The UNDP Sustainable Development Goal 7 (``Affordable and Clean Energy'')
aims to increase affordable and clean energy access for all by 2030. It is
estimated that 30% of newly electrified connections will be served by microgrids
by 2030 (up to 70% in rural areas). Numerous microgrid planning and development
tools exist. However, there are significant inconsistencies between network
design methods and assumptions used in these tools. Such inconsistencies and
uncertainty in best practices are detrimental to the rapid deployment of
sustainable and stable microgrids necessary to meet the UN Sustainability
Development Goal #7. The need for international and national remote isolated
microgrid development has driven a flurry of new microgrid tool creation, which
has grown in absence of comparative analysis of network layout and power system
design assumptions, and standard engineering and economic performance metrics.
This EPSCoR RII Track-4 Fellow Proposal entitled "RII Track-4:NSF: Isolated
Amorphous Microgrid Design with Accelerated Power System Analysis and Network
Layout (IMPALA) will assess remote isolated microgrid development tool methods
and associated performance metrics to inform standards and tools that will aid
the development of more stable, affordable, and sustainable
microgrids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to inform
standards and tools that will aid the development of more stable, affordable,
and sustainable microgrids. The project will develop a collaboration between Dr.
Cicilio at the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) at the Alaska Center for
Energy and Power and the Laboratory for Energy And Power Solutions at Arizona
State University (ASU). Through collaboration with ASU’s Laboratory for Energy
And Power Solutions (LEAPS) team, Dr. Cicilio will be provided access to the
Rapid Mapping Methodology and associated tools developed by the LEAPS team. The
Rapid Mapping Methodology will be the baseline microgrid development tool which
will be adapted to test variations in network design methods. The Rapid Mapping
tool was built with aims to reduce feasibility assessment and engineering
planning costs, increase speed, increase data analysis accuracy, improve
technical detail in respect to power engineering, and incorporate comprehensive
technical and financial analysis into one tool. Dr. Cicilio will bring together
several key players in this proposal to drive impactful and applicable resulting
metrics and methods to address these needs. This project will leverage the prior
established connection with OnePower Africa with the new collaboration with ASU,
as the host institution, to increase the geographical diversity and diversity of
experience to inform the project’s evaluations. Existing and potential microgrid
sites across the globe associated with project partners in Alaska, Lesotho,
Niger, and Sierra Leone will be assessed to determine regional characteristics
that may impact the performance of these methods. This will lead to more
sustainable, affordable, and stable microgrids with implications not just to the
African case studies but for rural Alaska as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.