* 2131371
* Collaborative Research: Characterizing the Cloud Formation Properties of Secondary Organic Aerosol (SOA) Formed from Aqueous Multiphase Chemical Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Daniel Cziczo, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 341,374.00

The goal of this project is to examine the climate effects of organosulfate-
containing secondary organic aerosol (SOA) by investigating their chemical
composition, morphology, and phase state in a laboratory setting, and by
parameterizing the resultant data for the prediction of aerosol-cloud
interactions. The hypothesis is that certain biogenic volatile organic compound-
derived SOA enhanced by aqueous reactions within acidic sulfate aerosol, will
serve as more effective ice nuclei particle (INP) and less effective cloud
condensation nuclei (CCN), due to the production of highly viscous and less
hygroscopic organosulfates. This research is expected to help improve the
understanding of how aerosols impact cloud formation and cloud properties and
will contribute to reducing the uncertainties in predicting future
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organosulfate-rich SOA produced from the oxidation
of isoprene, β-caryophyllene, and α-pinene, as well as authentic organosulfates
(OSs) synthesized at the University of North Carolina, will be systematically
examined for their INP and CCN properties during this project. Chemical
characterization methods will be used to identify the key species in the OS-rich
SOA that alter their INP and CCN properties. The primary objectives of this
research are to: (1) determine how chemical composition, phase state, and
morphology affect the CCN and INP activities of OS-rich SOA; (2) measure and
quantify how the chemical composition and phase state affect the cloud
activation properties of OS-rich SOA during atmospheric aging by heterogeneous
hydroxyl radical oxidation; and (3) develop parameterizations in order to
generalize the effects of SOA chemical composition, phase and mixing state on
the CCN/IN potential of these particles for potential model simulations and
field data comparison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.