* 2131309
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CNS: Truthful and Optimal Data Preservation in Base Station-less Sensor Networks: An Integrated Game Theory and Network Flow  Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Bin Tang, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 289,512.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
create a truthful and optimal resource allocation framework for emerging base
station-less sensor networks. As such networks are deployed in challenging
environments without data-collecting base station (e.g., underwater
exploration), the paramount task is to preserve large amounts of generated data
inside the networks before uploading opportunities become available. In a
distributed setting and under different control, however, the sensor nodes with
limited resources (i.e., energy power and storage spaces) could behave selfishly
in order to save their own resources and maximize their own benefits. The
tension between node-centric selfishness and data-centric data preservation
gives rise to new challenge that calls for integrated study of game theory (the
science of strategic interaction), and network flows (that studies how to move
network objects efficiently and effectively). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
deploys following research thrusts. First, selfish data preservation is analyzed
in terms of Nash equilibrium, price of anarchy, price of stability, and Shapley
scheme. Second, mechanism design approach is used to identify the limitations of
existing methodology and propose new incentive mechanisms. Third, a suite of new
data preservation and data aggregation games are designed to incorporate
network-specific features such as data values and data spatial correlations. All
the research thrusts intertwine game-theoretic and network flow technique to
achieve the truthful and optimal data preservation. Finally, the designed
techniques will be evaluated by simulations, existing network flow and game
theory software, as well as CloudBank.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By preserving large
amounts of data of the physical world otherwise inaccessible, base station-less
sensor networks provide a comprehensive view of scientific frontiers including
scientific exploration, disaster warning and climate change, thus benefiting the
society. This project is collaborated between California State University Long
Beach Economics Department and California State University Dominguez Hills
Computer Science Department. This cross-institutional and interdisciplinary
collaboration provides an integrative research and education experience for
students. The educational goal is not just recruiting and working with a few
best students but inspiring and educating as many underrepresented students as
possible at both institutions. Planned activities include student campus visit
and poster exhibition, intra-campus collaboration, conference presentation and
participation, curriculum update and development, and integrating with existing
minority-serving programs at both institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Details of
the project can be found at https://web.csulb.edu/~ychen7/bsn_gametheory/. This
website will be updated regularly as the research progresses and will be
maintained for public view for five to ten years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.