* 2131848
* AMS development of community ideas for coping effectively with climate change.
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Keith Seitter, American Meteorological Society
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 04/30/2022
* USD 49,859.00

Extreme weather events, changing patterns of precipitation, stronger and more
frequent tornados and hurricanes/typhoons, larger than normal oscillations of
the polar vortex, changes in the sun cycle, global warming due to increased
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, early arrival of spring, reduced snowpack in
the mountains, melting glaciers and icesheets, all are manifestations that are
impacting the environment and human habitation causing serious societal and
ecological problems. As such, global climate change is one of the most pressing
and immediate problems facing the world today. To assist in the identification
and devising of roadmaps of potential workable solutions to help ameliorate
impacts of climate change-driven issues that are negatively impacting society
and the world and that can be addressed within a 2 to 3 year timeframe, the
American Meteorological Society (AMS), a community of 13,000 atmospheric and
geospace scientists is positioned to run an information gathering activity to
solicit ideas and input from its extensive network of experts, nationally and
internationally. Broader Impacts of the activities will be the generation of
potential climate change solutions to mitigate the impact of a changing climate
on environmental, societal, and economic arenas. They also include the
engagement of early career scientists and members of underrepresented groups
whose lives and careers are most likely to be impacted over time. Additional
activities include outreach to K-12 and the public to provide information to
help them better understand the challenges of climate change and possible
solutions that can be implemented. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help solicit ideas
and possible mitigation of some of the serious impacts of climate change, the
American Meteorological Society, the largest professional society of weather and
climate scientist in the US, will run a series of broad, inclusive, and results-
driven activities focused on engaging the brightest minds in weather and climate
science to identify climate-related issues, with accompanying roadmaps, that can
be addressed and that will result in major advances within a timeframe of 2 to 3
years. This will involve a series of virtual meetings, webinars, crowdsourcing
events, one-on-one conversations, panels of experts, etc. to generate ideas and
obtain convergence on potentially workable solutions to specific aspects of
climate change with the biggest impacts on society and the economy. Part of the
effort will focus on the socialization and promotion of translational research
and its value to both climate change solutions as well as the academic research
enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.