* 2131820
* I-Corps: A home-based kit for monitoring melatonin profile in insomnia patients
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2021,10/31/2021
* Katsuo Kurabayashi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device to test individuals with circadian rhythm sleep
disorders at home. Conventional testing, called Dim Light Melatonin Onset (DLMO)
testing, is typically conducted in a laboratory by trained staff. The proposed
in-home DLMO device may enable biomedical researchers to understand the
circadian rhythms and related health impacts of patients otherwise unable to
participate in studies. In addition, the technology may allow for medical
diagnosis of sleep disorders at high certainty, which may help the ~20% of sleep
insomnia patients with circadian rhythm disorders to receive the proper
treatment while eliminating months of trial-and-error sleep treatments. The
project will target melatonin circadian rhythm researchers and individuals
homebound due to other illness or senior patients as potential customers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
device for home-based Dim Light Melatonin Onset (DLMO) testing that does not
require the use of trained staff. Dim Light Melatonin Onset (DLMO) is a key
parameter for the diagnosis of circadian rhythm sleep disorders. Currently, the
only way to accurately measure a person’s DLMO is in a sleep facility with
trained staff collecting saliva samples from a patient for 6 hours before
bedtime. This is an expensive procedure and makes it impossible for individuals
that cannot be in a lab for an entire evening to have their DLMO measured. The
proposed device is an intelligent machine that performs the tasks of a lab
technician. It allows the user to perform the saliva sample collection at home,
while monitoring whether the user successfully follows the protocol. In
addition, the proposed device uses the best performing melatonin
radioimmunoassay (RIA), validated via independent research studies, and the
device reports the sample collection times, sample temperatures from the moment
collected until returned to the researcher, and whether the participant wore
blue blocking glasses as required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.