* 2131942
* RII Track-4: NSF: Simulation and Modeling of Turbulent Flow Control via Flow-Dependent Anisotropic Surface Textures
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Wen Wu, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 173,392.00

Flow separation is the phenomenon that occurs when a fluid particle is slowed
down and cannot follow the shape of the surface. It has several negative effects
on drag and lift that are critical to energy consumption and emissions, aircraft
maneuverability, turbine noise, and vibration, etc. The proposed research is
motivated by the observation that dermal denticles (tough scales) on shark skin
show promising performance in reducing hydrodynamic drag. The ability of sharks’
unique skin in the fish world to dynamically respond to the flow offers a
significant performance advantage over current flow control techniques. This
fellowship aims at gaining a new fundamental understanding of the causal
mechanisms associated with the drag reduction role of shark skin denticles and
simultaneously advancing current numerical models for routine industrial design.
With the support of an EPSCoR RII Track-4:NSF Fellowship, the PI will learn to
simulate and analyze fluid-structure interactions and develop new models for
numerical predictive tools through the training at the Center for Turbulence
Research (CTR) at Stanford University. The fellowship will strengthen
collaboration between the University of Mississippi and Stanford, and promote
new economic development opportunities related to aeronautics, aerospace, and
naval industries in the mid-south and in the State of
Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The elastic anchoring of shark denticles
enables them to bristle when subjected to the reversing separated flow that
occurs at the onset of separation, thus hindering local separation. When flow is
attached, denticles return to the non-bristled position and form a riblet-like
texture to reduce friction drag. This motion leads to a flow-dependent
anisotropic (or directional) function of the denticles that indicates a passive,
flow-activated separation control technique. Current approaches, designed for
stationary surface roughness, are insufficient to understand or predict the
complex flows modulated by movable microstructures. The overarching goal of this
fellowship is to support the PI’s training and collaborative research at the
CTR. The training and research will focus on the cutting-edge fluid-structure
interaction simulation methods and the development and validation of a novel
wall model for the prediction of complex effects represented by surface
microstructures. Specific objectives include: (i) to generate an unprecedented
dataset of flows over movable anisotropic microstructures, (ii) to gain a new
fundamental understanding about non-linear interactions, (iii) to synthesize the
understanding to develop truly predictive models for drag and momentum flux.
This RII Track-4:NSF fellowship will expand the PI’s research capacity and
transform his career path towards a promising direction in the fluid-solid
multi-physics system and reduced-order model development. The unique flow
control techniques achieved by the flow-dependent anisotropic microstructure
will be highly transformative to many other research areas in aerospace,
agricultural, biomedical, energy, and environmental engineering where the
application of structures with directional function is needed for the flow
control process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.