* 2131294
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RPEP: III: celtSTEM Research Collaborative: Catapulting MSI Faculty and Students into Computational Research.
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2024
* USD 488,455.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As datasets have grown in size and
complexity, the data they contain are essential for advancing scientific
discoveries. Computational methods such as machine learning and data mining play
a key role in facilitating the analysis of large datasets. However, the tools
used to store and manage datasets and the tools used for machine learning are
largely separate and treat data differently. Machine learning algorithms for
data that has a network structure, in which a key feature of the data is
relationships between items in the network, are also less well-developed
compared to machine learning algorithms that treat items independently. This
project will advance network-based machine learning algorithms, developing new
approaches that are well-matched to common database technologies and apply them
to solve foundational problems in biology including genome and proteome
sequences. The project will also develop a long-term computational research
initiative at the lead institution, which is a Minority Serving Institution
(MSI), through working with a research-intensive organization along with
industry and government partners, to implement strategies for preparing MSI
students and faculty to excel in computational
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The machine learning methods portion of the
project will scale neural computations to huge graphs using graph neural
networks. Current approaches are limited because of problems scaling to very
large graphs and effectively distributing computations across multiple machines.
The approach focuses on leveraging relational database technologies, which are
ideally situated to overcome these limitations due to the close link between
graphs and relations and the rich set of tools they already possess for
optimizing computation across large datasets. The tools developed will be used
to help solve foundational problems in biology, focusing on two projects. The
first involves machine learning-aided search of large protein databases for
unique sequence patterns, developing new high-dimensional data encodings and
graph-based algorithms to facilitate evolutionary, structural, functional, and
ontological searches. The second involves analysis of metagenomic data to
identify viruses (and variants) carried by mosquitos, developing novel graph
encodings of mosquitos’ DNA and RNA along with machine learning-based analyses
of them to analyze nucleic acid sequence data and expand the understanding of
the viral collections carried by insects that interact closely with human
populations. The research will be carried out in close collaboration between the
lead university partners, who will develop coursework, team structures and
practices, and mentoring approaches that provide a framework in which MSI
students and faculty can gain both research skills and opportunities. This
capacity-building work will be guided by a situated learning pedagogy and a
socio-technical lens that emphasizes context and relationships between people
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.