* 2131783
* Mechanisms of Small RNA-Mediated Silencing in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Heriberto Cerutti, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2025
* USD 794,803.00

RNA interference (RNAi) is a cellular process that regulates gene expression and
acts as a defense system in plants and animals. This pathway relies on small
RNAs (sRNAs) to identify targets, which are then suppressed by a variety of
molecular mechanisms. Microalgae are an important and sustainable feedstock for
producing diverse biomaterials and nutraceuticals, but improving their
productivity is constrained by limited knowledge of how they control gene
expression and metabolism. This project will contribute to our understanding of
the role of sRNAs in microalgae and to the development of RNAi tools for
practical applications (such as RNAi-based crop protection strategies for algal
mass culturing). The research will also contribute to the training of
undergraduate and graduate students and one postdoctoral fellow. Recruitment of
students from underrepresented groups in the sciences, potential first-
generation college students, or those that have financial needs will be enabled
by participation in several educational programs at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several aspects of sRNA function in eukaryotes,
particularly how sRNAs mediate translational repression, remain poorly
understood. One key problem is an incomplete knowledge of the components of
sRNA-effector complexes and their potential modulation in response to internal
developmental programs and/or external cues. This project will provide insight
into aspects of sRNA function, particularly the translation repression of
polyribosome-associated transcripts. In the alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a
homolog of the Drosophila VASA INTRONIC GENE (VIG) is involved in this process.
The research will: (i) characterize the interplay between VIG and Argonaute
effector complexes in sRNA-mediated translation repression by several proteomic
approaches; (ii) isolate additional genes involved in sRNA-mediated translation
repression by using an insertional mutagenesis screen; and (iii) characterize
the biogenesis and potential function of a novel class of Chlamydomonas sRNAs,
similar in length to the metazoan PIWI-interacting RNAs. Since sRNA-mediated
repression of polyribosomal mRNAs also occurs in land plants and animals, the
results may contribute to our understanding of the evolution (i.e., conservation
vs. divergence) of sRNA-mediated epigenetic mechanisms in
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.