* 2131519
* DASS: Legally &amp; Locally Legitimate: Designing &amp; Evaluating Software Systems to Advance Equal Opportunity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Catherine Albiston, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

School districts struggle to increase equal educational opportunity and avoid
racial isolation for their students. Many districts use a school-assignment
software system to further these goals; today, more than 100 school districts
across the United States have adopted school-assignment software systems. Some
of these systems have been subject to legal challenges, both successful and
unsuccessful, to the approach the school districts used to advance equal
opportunity. This study examines how best to ensure that these software systems
are designed to respond to legal and economic constraints and democratic
community participation in order to ensure both legal compliance and legitimacy
in the eyes of the community. Improving these software systems will affect
hundreds of thousands of students’ access to education. Finally, this work will
contribute to the rapidly growing scholarship on equity challenges associated
with software systems and artificial intelligence, which is tied to a growing
number of legislative proposals regarding decisions made by software.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Organizations increasingly see promise in advancing their policy
goals, such as equal opportunity, using software systems that can implement pre-
defined procedures objectively, in contexts such as education, employment,
housing, voting rights, etc. These software systems must comply with complex and
ambiguous requirements, and their success relies in part on the legitimacy of
the decisions that they make in the eyes of policy makers, users, and
authorities. Legal rules, however, are often ambiguous without clear criteria
for compliance. Additionally, when no outside metric of fairness exists, how do
people perceive whether a decision is just? This project relies on two theories
in the field of law and society -- legal endogeneity theory and procedural
justice theory -– to study how to actively involve users and policy makers in
designing mechanisms for accountable software systems. It pursues a
generalizable five-step method to design Legal and Locally Legitimate (L3)
software systems. The research team will study and develop the method in the
context of a partnership with the San Francisco Unified School District, where
it will assist in the redesign of that district's student-assignment software
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.