* 2131791
* I-Corps: A multifunctional metal-based nanoparticle solution for surface disinfection and decontamination
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Jingyi Chen, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a metal-based nanoparticle coating solution for durable
antimicrobial and self-cleaning surfaces. Disinfected and cleaned surfaces are
critical to fight against microbes and to prevent infection. However, the most
commonly used methods including sprays and wipes involve repeated applications
of disinfectants, some containing volatile chemicals that are potentially
harmful. The goal of the proposed technology is to create a durable coating on
surfaces that are susceptible to microbes and contaminants. Compared with
existing methods, the proposed technology improves the convenience and potency
and is expected to find use in a number of applications including surface
disinfection, antimicrobial and self-cleaning coatings, and wastewater treatment
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a metal nanoparticle coating solution to enable antimicrobial and self-
cleaning surfaces. Metal nanoparticles are broad-spectrum antimicrobial agents
that can suppress growth and eliminate microbes via multiple mechanisms.
Tailoring the size, shape, and surface properties of the metal nanoparticles may
improve their antimicrobial potency significantly. In addition, surface
modification may enable antimicrobial and self-cleaning functions in one
formulation. Compared to the existing disinfection and self-cleaning methods,
the proposed metal nanoparticle-integrated solution has other possible
advantages including the flexibility to be a stand-alone product or to be
incorporated into existing products. The metal microparticles can also be
combined with a built-in indicator for a visual readout of effectiveness or with
an added external portable scanner for accurate readout and recording of
effectiveness that may be linked to a smart-phone app to log the result. The
proposed technology may create a durable, self-cleaning surface that protects
against bacteria, viruses, fungi, and chemical
contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.