* 2131951
* RII Track-4:NSF: Assessment of Multiscale Air Quality Model (CMAQ) Representation of Spatiotemporal Atmospheric Nitrate Chemical Production in New England
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Wendell Walters, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 168,980.00

Nitrate is a key component of the atmosphere that derives from precursor
nitrogen oxide emissions that have important implications for air quality, acid
deposition, and climate. Nitrogen oxide emissions are dominated by anthropogenic
activities, typically associated with fossil-fuel combustion, which has
dramatically declined across the US over the last several decades due to
effective regulations. Yet, atmospheric deposition of nitrate remains a
significant environmental stressor. Atmospheric chemistry transport models,
which are commonly utilized to help guide policy, have difficulties reproducing
observed atmospheric nitrate concentrations and deposition, resulting in unclear
guidelines to improve existing Clean Air Act Secondary Standards. This
disagreement may be related to complicated production mechanisms of atmospheric
nitrate, requiring a deeper understanding of nitrate atmospheric chemistry to
better predict the atmospheric burden of nitrogen deposition. In this project,
the PI will partner with scientists from the US EPA Research Triangle Park to
evaluate and improve upon a commonly utilized atmospheric chemistry and
transport model’s representation of atmospheric nitrate formation utilizing a
novel oxygen isotope tracer technique (Δ17O). Using a three-dimensional
atmospheric chemistry and transport model, this project will enhance the PI’s
research expertise and contribute to the training and learning of a graduate
student. This project will establish new and long-lasting collaborations between
the PI and host scientists. Project outcomes will include establishing the first
atmospheric chemistry and transport model at Brown University that will be
utilized in future research projects by the PI and other collaborators at Brown,
enhancing Rhode Island's research capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oxygen
stable isotopic composition (Δ17O) has been proven to provide quantitative
observational constraints on the production mechanisms of atmospheric nitrate.
This is because key atmospheric oxidants have distinctive Δ17O signatures (or
"fingerprints") incorporated in the product nitrate derived from the oxidation
of precursor nitrogen oxide emissions. This work will evaluate the chemical
representation of spatiotemporal atmospheric nitrate production in New England
from 2005-2017 using the Community Multiscale Air Quality Model (CMAQ). Model
simulations will be conducted using a high-resolution US domain, and atmospheric
nitrate formation pathways will be tagged and used to calculate the oxygen
stable isotopic composition that quantitatively expresses nitrate production
mechanisms. The model output will be used to compare with detailed
spatiotemporal Δ17O observations of atmospheric nitrate in New England,
leveraging detailed Δ17O data from prior NSF support to test and improve upon
atmospheric chemistry model representation of nitrate chemistry in New England.
The goals of this project include evaluating the chemical representation of the
spatiotemporal formation of atmospheric nitrate and differences between nitric
acid and particulate nitrate across the northeastern US during a period of
significant reductions in nitrogen oxide emissions. Ultimately, this project
will lead to a better understanding of the role of emission reductions on the
atmospheric cycle of nitrogen and its connection to atmospheric composition, air
quality, and acid deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.