* 2131758
* Collaborative Research: Topological Dynamics of Hyperbolic and Fractal Lattices
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Massimo Ruzzene, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 10/31/2024
* USD 274,988.00

This grant will fund research that dramatically enlarges the design space for
future vibration absorbing materials and structural designs, with applications
to energy harvesting and acoustic panel technologies, thereby promoting the
progress of science and advancing the national prosperity. The wave guiding
properties of such materials depend on an underlying spatial pattern of
individual oscillator elements. While the behavior associated with simple
patterns that tessellate the plane using regular polygons is well understood,
there is a gap in our knowledge of the ability of other classes of patterns to
steer, guide, and localize waves. This project will fill this gap by discovering
radically new wave-guiding physics associated with such new classes of patterns,
including fractals with self-similar features at multiple scales. The
experimental part of this work will uncover solutions to the problems of
fabricating acoustic crystals with a desired pattern, as well as characterizing
the pattern of a given crystal, opening up new research directions in materials
science, acoustics, and mechanics. The projectâ€™s collaborative research
ecosystem, where pure mathematics meets computational modeling and physical
validation, will provide unique training opportunities for both undergraduate
and graduate students, as well as for postdoctoral researchers. Outreach
programs will expose middle- and high-school students and teachers to advanced
topics in geometry, topology, and dynamics through dedicated and hands-on
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make fundamental
contributions to the mathematical theory of wave-guiding metamaterials that can
be characterized as hyperbolic or fractal lattices, as well as to the ability to
physically realize such structures for experimental validation or design. It
will achieve this outcome by formulating a theoretical framework for the
classification of topological dynamics and of the possible manifestations of the
bulk-boundary principle in hyperbolic and fractal lattices. The research will
further demonstrate how intrinsic degrees of freedom of such lattices may be
controlled to achieve new forms of wave steering, phase control, edge and bulk
mode localization, and topological pumping. The experimental effort will
demonstrate bioinspired packing and design solutions for large-scale fabrication
of aperiodic lattices. The project will expand our knowledge about the
collective dynamics of lattices, and will deliver analysis tools, mathematical
models, and experimental platforms that will help chart the complex landscape of
novel lattice geometries and their possible application for future material and
structural designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.