* 2131899
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Lower bounds on concrete complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Anup Rao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,945.00

Computational complexity theory is the study of computation that can be carried
out using limited computational resources like processing power, memory and
communication. The goal is to investigate the mathematical possibilities and
limits of efficient computation. Modern life continues to be transformed by the
use of computational devices that have access to limited resources, like cell
phones. It is invaluable to understand what can be computed by such devices.
Results in complexity theory provide a guide to help implement efficient
solutions using such devices. In this project, we investigate fundamental
questions about communication, viewed as a scarce resource. For example, if the
best solution to problem A requires communication X, and the best solution to
problem B requires communication Y, what is the communication required to solve
both problems at the same time? It turns out that the answer need not be X+Y.
The investigators will build mathematical tools to address this kind of
question. In order to pursue these goals, they will use ideas from various
mathematical disciplines like geometry, analysis and combinatorics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on several fundamental questions
related to communication complexity. The investigators will study questions
related to understanding the limits of compressing interactive communication
protocols, proving lower bounds on the running times of certain kinds of
algorithms, and proving the log-rank conjecture. This includes an approach to
proving tight lower bounds for the famous disjointness problem in communication
complexity. In the realm of boolean circuits, the focus is on proving lower
bounds for arithmetic circuits with bounded coefficients and understanding
boolean circuits that use threshhold gates. With regards to the extension
complexity of polytopes, the project focuses on proving new lower bounds on
approximations of polytopes, as well as exploring a new connection between
extension complexity and circuit lower bounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.