* 2131750
* Vesicular Acetylcholine Transporter Function in the Central Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Hakeem Lawal, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 06/30/2025
* USD 973,923.00

Regulation of the synthesis, storage, release and degradation of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (ACh) is essential for normal organismal
capabilities such as the ability to move, think and remember. Scientists
presently understand the major elements of the cellular and molecular machinery
required for these aspects of brain function, which include the molecular
complex that this project is focused on, called the vesicular acetylcholine
transporter (VAChT). VAChTs are responsible for transporting acetylcholine into
synaptic vesicles inside nerve terminals so that it can be released onto its
target cells. However, the detailed mechanisms through which VAChTs mediate this
transport process remain unclear, as does the role that VAChT-related changes in
acetylcholine release may play in regulating behavioral changes. This project
uses the outstanding genetic resources that fruit flies possess for studying the
acetylcholine regulation system to determine how changes in VAChT affect
acetylcholine release and the regulation of the behaviors described above. This
project also utilizes a wide range of sophisticated tools and methodologies
(including the ability to record electrical activity from fly brain cells) to
train undergraduate and graduate students from historically under-represented
minority backgrounds, equipping them with an up-to-date set of transferrable
skills in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM), and broadening the
participation of minorities in the advanced STEM workforce. The project also
includes a strong focus on research training and education of K-12 students
through a virtual internship program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
this project is to determine how specific changes in the vesicular acetylcholine
transporter (VAChT) alter acetylcholine (Ach) release by using a collection of
genetic alterations available in Drosophila. A variety of experiments employing
this mutation and overexpression collection will help elucidate the relationship
between ACh release and ACh-linked behaviors. The central hypothesis is that an
inverted V-shaped model underlies ACh synaptic release, such that strong
decreases in or overexpression of the transporter cause severe defects in
synaptic physiology and ACh-linked behavior, while mild increases in VAChT
expression will enhance synaptic activity. The work will test this hypothesis
using three Specific Aims. Aim 1 will determine how specific changes in VAChT
affect that proteinâ€™s expression, its activity, and the levels of ACh. Aim 2 is
focused on determining how changes in VAChT expression affect synaptic vesicles
(SV) by testing the hypothesis that graded increases in VAChT upregulate both SV
release and SV fusion. Aim 3 will determine the effects of graded changes in
VAChT function on ACh-linked behaviors. Altogether, the project will advance our
understanding of the mechanisms through which VAChT ultimately helps to mediate
synaptic release.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Organization Program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate
Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.