* 2131291
* CISE-MSI: RPEP:S&amp;CC:Information Systens meet CUltural COmpetencies (IS-CUCO): Enabling data-driven decision-making in underserved Hispanic populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ali Jalooli, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The United States Department of
Agriculture reported that in 2020 more than 34 million residents struggled to
secure enough food to sustain an active and healthy lifestyle. Underrepresented
communities, such as Hispanics in urban areas, make limited use of Information
Systems (IS) when making decisions to access resources such as food. The goal of
the Information Systems meets CUltural COmpetencies (IS-CUCO) project is to
integrate cultural, linguistic, data, and infrastructure factors into IS that
provide access to food-security services such as food pantries. The project
focuses on the development of IS to increase their use by Hispanics and other
underserved populations. The project members are from Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSIs) located in communities with large Hispanic populations (New
York City, Los Angeles, Chicago, and El Paso). IS-CUCO builds research capacity
and trains the next generation of professionals who develop more inclusive IS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key activities for the IS-CUCO project include identifying
how cultural, linguistic, data, and infrastructure factors impact the use of IS
by Hispanic populations, and incorporating these factors into the software
engineering process. The project uses an innovative community-based approach
that brings together an interdisciplinary research team from the social
sciences, computer science, and software engineering across HSIs serving diverse
Hispanic populations. Expected outcomes include: i) knowledge base of key IS-
usage factors that support the effective design of food-security IS targeting
Hispanic communities; ii) software-engineering models and practices that inform
development of food-security and related IS to meet the needs of diverse
communities; and iii) increased capacity at the participating HSIs with respect
to research, curricular, and co-curricular activities. This project can
potentially transform the way organizations in urban areas address information
needs of underserved populations to support their decision-making. The
collaborations created in this project with local organizations will foster the
sustainability and adoption of the expected outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.