* 2131182
* CISE-MSI:RCBP-ED:SaTC: Cultivating and Developing Research Talent to Support Research in Cyber-Security
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Shweta Jain, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cyber-crime is an emerging global
threat and cyberattacks are getting increasingly sophisticated. At the same
time, there is a national deficit in highly skilled cyber-security workforce
needed to secure the nations cyber infrastructure. Thus, it is a national
imperative to develop new and diverse talent with cutting-edge skills and
abilities to respond to emerging cyber-threats. This project develops such
talent through the infusion of research in undergraduate curricula enabling
knowledge development in cybersecurity, machine learning, quantum computing and
forensic examination of emerging technologies. Through the curricula, the
project builds research capacity at a minority serving institute, preparing
student researchers to collaborate with faculty on cutting edge research and
creating generations of highly trained graduates. The main novelty is in drawing
on existing STEM focused undergraduate programs, while also casting a wider net
to draw in untapped talent by creating a Cyber Bridge from degree programs such
as criminal justice, criminology and humanities, to a Master degree in Digital
Forensics and Cybersecurity. By expanding the talent pool to draw from, this
project also creates opportunities for multi-disciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a research intensive 5-year
BS-MS program to prepare undergraduate researchers to contribute to cyber-
security research through early immersion into a research methods course and
research enhanced 300 and 400 level classes. The five-year curriculum includes
multiple intensive tracks and a Cyber Bridge program that permits students from
non-STEM disciplines to make smooth transitions to the third, fourth and fifth
years of the BS-MS program. The Cyber Bridge will attract and quickly integrate
talented individuals who would otherwise be discouraged from pursuing cyber-
focused education/research. The work planned in this project will build
curricula that infuse research preparation and research into upper division and
specialized courses so students can be trained, supported and mentored for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.