* 2131297
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Regulatory control of the system-wide innate immune response in marine invertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Katherine Buckley, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 06/30/2025
* USD 910,860.00

Animals live in constantly changing environments that are rich in microbial
life. The role of immune systems is to first recognize these microbes and then
respond appropriately by either protecting the host or allowing the microbes to
grow as part of a carefully regulated, mutually beneficial relationship.
However, despite decades of research, the immune systems have been investigated
in detail in only a few species (humans and mice). The proposed work will
address this gap in knowledge by investigating immune responses in echinoderms,
specifically the larval stages of sea urchins and sea stars. These larvae are
morphologically simple, transparent animals that swim and feed in the ocean for
several months prior to metamorphosis. In this project, which is a collaboration
between researchers at Auburn University (US) and University College London
(UK). Larvae will be exposed to specific marine bacteria that elicit immune
responses. Infected larvae will be dissociated to single cells which will be
used to measure changes in gene expression. These experiments will identify
fundamental aspects of animal immune systems and identify novel strategies for
treating disease. These scientific findings will be complemented with additional
strategies to engage various segments of the broader community. This includes
the development of marine-based workshops for elementary school students and
participation in an interactive open house for middle- and high-school students
from local under- resourced schools hosted at Auburn University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work proposed here employs a collaborative approach
that integrates recently available genome sequences with new technology for
quantifying gene expression at single-cell resolution. This systems-level
approach will define the regulatory mechanisms that control immune responses
across different echinoderm species to identify fundamental properties of animal
immunity as well as species-specific adaptations. By protecting the host from
harmful pathogens and cultivating a beneficial microbiota, immune systems
operate at the forefront of animal evolution. In response to rapidly evolving
microbes, animals rely on sophisticated mechanisms for detecting and eliminating
pathogens. These mechanisms are intertwined with host mechanisms for maintaining
cellular homeostasis and resolving stress. The aim of this proposal is to
understand how evolutionary pressures shape the cells that mediate immune
response. This work builds on the well-characterized immune responses in purple
sea urchin (Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) larvae by extending these findings to
additional echinoderm species at varying phylogenetic distances. Cellular immune
responses of echinoderm larvae exposed to bacterial and viral pathogens will be
characterized using microscopy and by profiling system-wide changes in gene
expression using single-cell RNA-Seq. Network modeling approaches will be used
to predict regulatory linkages that control immune responses. Candidate linkages
will be confirmed using in vivo perturbation assays. This innovative analysis
will reveal evolutionarily conserved principles of immune response as well as
species-specific adaptations. This collaborative US/UK project is supported by
the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.