* 2131408
* Understanding Thermal Energy Scavenging in All-Inorganic Perovskite Nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Matthew Sheldon, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 10/31/2024
* USD 319,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The industrial revolution was
enabled by heat engines that perform work by converting thermal energy (heat or
high temperature) to mechanical energy. Recently, several advantages have been
theorized for heat engines that do work by converting heat into light, similar
to how traditional engines use fluids or gases such as steam. However, there are
very few known optical materials that can efficiently convert heat to optical
energy, in part because heat degrades their optical performance. This project
will prepare new classes of materials with precise structural and chemical
properties on the nanoscale to allow for efficient conversion between thermal
and light energy. The research team will examine how increasing the thermal
energy in these materials can also result, unusually, in an increase of the
energy of light that they emit. This phenomenon can ultimately lead to
significantly more efficient heat engines with no moving parts, better solar
cells, or new methods of refrigeration that do not require compressed gasses or
mechanical components. The project will support graduate and undergraduate
research students working in the PI’s laboratory as well as the development of
novel curricula and technological tools for teaching large-format freshman
chemistry courses. The primary investigator will refine some of the best
innovations developed during the pandemic and take advantage of these for the
transition back to classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study thermal energy scavenging
by one-photon optical upconversion, also known as anti-Stokes photoluminescence.
Upconversion results when heated photoluminescent materials emit band-edge
photons during subgap excitation, while simultaneously decreasing in
temperature. Inorganic lead halide perovskite nanocrystals are a champion
materials system for efficient one-photon upconversion, but fundamental details
of the mechanism are unknown, impeding rational strategies for further
development. Spectroscopic studies conducted by the PI’s team will elucidate a
clear mechanism for optical up-conversion, as well as outline the structure-
property relationships that define the absorption cross section, bandwidth,
temperature response, and the fundamental limits on efficiency. The research
team will vary composition and morphology during nanocrystal synthesis.
Structural parameters such as crystal phase, shape, and surface-to-volume ratio
will be tracked using high resolution transmission electron microscopy, and
powder X-ray diffractometry. In parallel, the team will perform
photoluminescence excitation spectroscopy and photoluminescence lifetime
studies. These experiments will quantify the dependence on above-gap or below-
gap excitation wavelength, power density, and nanocrystal temperature to
identify the unique states that mediate the interconversion of vibrational and
electronic excitations, while preserving the intrinsic, near-ideal luminescence
efficiency of the nanocrystals. The overarching goal is to understand the
thermal energy scavenging properties of inorganic lead halide perovskite
nanocrystals to create luminescent materials that can aid thermal-to-optical
energy conversion, optical up-conversion, and optically driven
refrigeration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.