* 2131929
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:IP): Observatory for Online Human and Platform Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* David Lazer, Northeastern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2026
* USD 16,217,700.00

The core objective of this project is the construction of a secure, privacy-
protecting, ethically robust, scientifically valid online behavioral research
observatory. This observatory captures the online behavior of a large sample of
volunteers as well as details of the algorithmically driven decisions of the
major platforms of the Internet. The observatory enables a wide range of
research concerning the Internet, including examination of the state of the
information ecosystem, analysis of damaging online behavior of a variety of
types, and generally studies of manifold aspects of the online world. This
infrastructure fills a gap by providing researchers with high-quality data on
human and platform behavior at a scale and granularity that will allow
transformational investigation of this new and all-pervasive
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project (1) collects data on the online
behavior of a large number of volunteers, on the order of tens of thousands of
individuals, whose consent is carefully ascertained; (2) records the tracking of
those individuals by third parties; (3) captures the algorithmic curation of
content by third parties (e.g., what is prioritized in newsfeeds and search
engines); and (4) provides analytic access to a wide set of academic researchers
within a secure, privacy-preserving framework. There are two samples of
volunteers. The first is smaller and higher quality, carefully balanced in terms
of demography and geography. The second is larger and open to a wider array of
volunteers but therefore potentially less balanced and therefore treated with
methods to reweight the entire sample to be more representative. Through the
observatory, both volunteer behavior and platform behavior are collected using
desktops, laptops and mobile devices. The observatory involves a layered system
of governance involving a wide array of researchers, both to refine protocols in
terms of research ethics and security and to define the priorities for the data
collected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.