* 2131486
* Super-Resolution Optical Material Characterization
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Kevin Webb, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 09/30/2025
* USD 415,346.00

This project entails the study of a means to determine information about object
features at nanometer length scales, and in situations where the environment
does not allow direct imaging of the object, using laser light. The approach is
based on relative motion between a structured illumination pattern, formed from
coherent light, and the object or material system, where either the light or the
object is scanned in small precise spatial steps. To date, because the
achievable resolution is generally limited to about one half of the optical
wavelength without prior information, the approach in technology to improve
spatial resolution or optical memory capacity has been to reduce the wavelength.
This faces increasing challenges in moving to shorter wavelengths. On the other
hand, the use of relative motion of a sample with a spatially varying optical
intensity provides information about the sample that can be used for super-
resolution imaging of features far smaller than the wavelength. Consequently, it
should become possible to detect small structures of importance in the
semiconductor industry and in microscopy. Furthermore, a suite of material
inspection and imaging situations have significant background clutter,
exacerbating the challenges. For example, it is currently difficult or
impossible to detect small defects in the three-dimensional semiconductor
processing steps used in building vertical solid-state memory, with multi-
billion-dollar market ramifications. With laser inspection following the
deposition of films, random scatter due to material roughness produces speckle,
and this seemingly worsens the situation. During this project, an inspection and
imaging method for extracting information about such defects and other objects
by using speckle is being developed. More broadly, the approach enables a means
to image objects hidden in a randomly scattering environment such as fog or
biological tissue using light. The associated research is forming the basis of
theses for two Ph.D. students, and the project involves undergraduate research
students. A mathematical learning module is being created for junior high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing optical inspection methods are incapable
of adequately detecting small defects in three-dimensional semiconductor
structures like those in vertical memory. This project offers a path to finding
such defects through two key objectives: (i) Numerical modeling to develop
sensing and imaging with relative field motion; and (ii) Evaluative application-
oriented experiments. Simulations with background laser beam interference
fringes and random speckle fields are being used to investigate the relationship
between far-subwavelength material geometric variables and the measured
intensity as a function of relative position change, to provide a physical
forward model for cost-function-based inversion, and to aid in the design of
experiments. Two types of coherent optical sensing experiments are being
investigated to illustrate technology applications with relative motion between
an object of interest (to be characterized) and the background field. One
involves speckle generated from a randomly scattering medium and statistical
extraction of the relevant features. Another utilizes membrane films translated
through interference fringes, with the use of a forward model to determine the
associated parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.