* 2131987
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Designing a global measurement infrastructure to improve Internet security
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* David Clark, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 7,897,527.00

While the Internet has become critical infrastructure permeating all aspects of
modern society, its security and trustworthy character are subject to constant
threats and attacks. Any enterprise or service can have its traffic deflected to
a masquerading site that attempts to mimic the legitimate site, steal user
credentials, disrupt security, or defraud users. The security of the Internet
infrastructure is a high priority for the security research community, but that
community is greatly hindered by a lack of relevant data. The goal of this
project is a validated design for a transformative infrastructure to support
collection, curation, archiving, and expanded sharing of data needed to advance
critical and stunted scientific research on the security, stability, and
resilience of Internet infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The measurement
infrastructure design effort will focus on the Internet transport layer:
routing, domain naming, addressing, and key management (the Certificate
Authorities). Community workshops and interactive prototyping efforts will
enable evaluation of a proposed design of a measurement infrastructure to
acquire and share such security-relevant data at a macroscopic scale. Due to the
complexity, volume, and sensitivity of resulting data, the design will cover
many facets of data management: curation, post-processing analytics, privacy
preserving data analysis frameworks, data discovery and accessibility, and
normalized data sharing agreements. To support use of and feedback on
prototypes, the PIs will develop an on-line course on Network Infrastructure
Data Science, that will facilitate responsible (ethical, privacy-respecting) use
of the datasets and analytics, and STEM/cybersecurity workforce training. This
design project will enable the application of data-intensive methods to data
from the global Internet infrastructure, overcoming a key barrier to scientific
and engineering advances to navigate current and future Internet-related harms.
The project will contribute to a broad range of disciplines that now depend on
data about the Internet, including network science, socioeconomic studies,
international relations, and political science. The resulting capabilities to
support data acquisition, curation, and sharing will have an inherent equalizing
effect on the research community. Moreover, if successful, this
cyberinfrastructure will increase the trustworthiness of the Internet for U.S.
citizens, and serve as a model for rest of the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.