* 2131600
* GOALI/Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Energy Dynamics of Aerodynamically Coupled Oscillators
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Niell Elvin, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2025
* USD 396,807.00

Wind energy became the largest renewable energy generated in the US in 2019, and
this energy is projected to be a signification portion of all generated
electrical energy in the nation within a decade. The introduction of large wind
turbines has been considered to be an important direction, as they can result in
an increase in generated power. However, wind turbines may not be the best
solution for all wind speeds and locations such as building roof-tops. As an
alternative, a set of piezoelectric harvesters, which can be used with small
foot-prints and at low wind speeds will be studied. These harvesters represent
an example of an oscillatory system, in which the coupling between the
structural members is dominated by fluid forces that are generated during
motions through an air flow. Other oscillatory systems with similar fluid
(aerodynamic) coupling include rotating blades in turbine generators,
compressors, and turbo fans. Through support of this Grant Opportunity for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award, fundamental studies will be
pursued to develop and extend the knowledge base on aerodynamically coupled
oscillators. A salient impact is expected to be the advancement of our
understanding of the nonlinear behavior of systems involving fluid-structural-
electromechanical interactions. Through experimental demonstrations of the
feasibility of these systems, it is expected that one can design and build
piezoelectric energy harvesters for use in building systems and tethered
unmanned vehicle systems. This work will usher in a new generation of
researchers trained to use multi-disciplinary tools suited for study of
nonlinear dynamics of energy harnessing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building
on prior efforts on nonlinear oscillators, aeroelasticity, experimental fluid
mechanics, and active materials, a team of researchers from academia and
industry will pursue the common goal of developing a fundamental understanding
of aerodynamically coupled piezoelastic oscillators. The group will conduct
original wind tunnel experiments to understand flow induced oscillations of thin
airfoil oscillator arrays and bluff body oscillator arrays and study the energy
distribution in the system responses across a variety of flows. Informed by
experimental findings and guided by industry experience, modeling and simulation
efforts will be undertaken to uncover nonlinear phenomena and nonlinear
instabilities including Hopf instabilities. On the fundamental side, one of the
outcomes will be an enhanced understanding of the behavior of the coupled
oscillators with aerodynamic coupling, the nature of this coupling for different
flows and oscillator configurations, and the associated nonlinear fluid-
structure interactions. On the application side, this work will result in
performance characterization tools for energy harnessing arrays based on
streamlined and bluff body oscillators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.