* 2131695
* Collaborative Research: Next Big Research Challenges in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Saman Zonouz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 24,999.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) initiated its Cyber-physical systems (CPS)
program more than a decade ago. As a result, there have been many foundational
solutions developed to address various research challenges in modeling, design
and control of trustworthy, real-time and dependable cyber-physical platforms in
different application domains. The proposed solutions in CPS technologies are
transforming the way people interact with such engineered systems. While
tremendous progress has been made in advancing CPS technologies, the demand for
innovation across application domains is driving the need to accelerate research
to keep pace. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify and prioritize the fundamental
research challenges that need to be addressed, this project will organize a
workshop, where experts from different CPS domains are invited to share their
thoughts on the most important current challenges and directions. The main
objective of the workshop is to identify the new and important areas, where CPS
researchers might be better advised to focus on. More specifically, the
attendees are asked to present their vision on i) what research challenges in
CPS have been addressed the best over the last decade, ii) the most important
challenges that the CPS community need to focus on now, iii) the most common
mistakes over the last decade of CPS research that we should avoid moving
forward, and iv) the new solutions for the community (including academia,
industry, and government agencies) for more effective technology transfers in
coming years. The outcomes of this workshop are presented at NSF CPS PI Meeting
Mini-Workshop. After these events, a takeaway summary will be prepared of the
presentations and panel discussions in the form of a report to be published and
shared with the CPS research community. The outcomes of the above-mentioned
events will help to keep our CPS community informed about upcoming research
challenges that they may choose to focus on in their future research efforts.
This will indirectly improve our societal development in the long run by novel
solutions developed by the CPS community to address real-world research
challenges that the industry is facing nowadays. Furthermore, the discussions
throughout the above-mentioned two workshops regarding challenges in educational
initiatives on CPS will introduce new ideas and directions towards more cohesive
CPS education and outreach strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.