* 2131283
* Exploring mechanisms of plasticity and tolerance in early stage marine invertebrates in response to marine heatwaves
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Gretchen Hofmann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2024
* USD 273,644.00

Marine heatwaves (MHWs) – prolonged periods of unusually warm surface seawater
temperatures - have increased in intensity and frequency in US coastal waters.
Recent MHWs on the US West Coast have resulted in changes in species
distributions, loss of biodiversity and closed fisheries due to harmful algal
blooms. As the frequency of MHWs increase, these events will continue to impact
natural marine ecosystems and important resources from the ocean (e.g., fishing
and aquaculture). The goal of this project is to better understand how MHWs will
affect coastal marine communities like kelp forests. A key missing piece of
information is how early life-history stages, the stages that disperse and
maintain healthy populations of marine organisms, fare in response to these
anomalously high ocean temperatures. This project is investigating the response
and resilience to MHW stress in embryos and larvae of two key marine
invertebrates, the red and purple sea urchins that inhabit the kelp forests of
coastal California. The red urchin is a valuable fishery (the roe is sold as
uni) and data from this project is contributing to the management of this
natural resource. Lastly, the project is training early career researchers,
undergraduate and graduate students with a focus on broadening participation in
the fields of science and technology. The broader impacts are providing research
experiences and mentoring to under-represented undergraduates at UC Santa
Barbara, a Hispanic-Serving Institution since 2015. The project directly
supports the PhD dissertation research of three women Ph.D. graduate students
from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
understand the consequences of anomalously high temperatures during MHW events
on reproduction and early development of marine organisms. In the coastal
California system, marine invertebrates of the kelp forest ecosystem are
reproductive when MHWs tend to occur and intensify. The major goal is to examine
how maternal and paternal effects, that play out in a MHW context, influence the
thermal tolerance of early developmental stages of two sea urchin species from
the temperate kelp forest communities of coastal California, the purple
(Strongylocentrotus purpuratus) and red (Mesocentrotus franciscanus) sea
urchins, the latter being an important wild fisheries species. This project is
addressing climate-change relevant aspects of larval ecology and is examining
how phenotypic plasticity contributes to adaptive capacity of marine organisms.
A series of traits are being assessed for each species: (1) fertilization
kinetics, (2) successful developmental progression, (3) thermal tolerance (via
thermal tolerance trials and biochemical indices of thermal stress), and (4)
parental effects. Gene expression using RNA sequencing is capturing the
influence of maternal effects to address whether females that experience MHW
temperatures in situ during gametogenesis produce progeny with greater thermal
tolerance via changes of the larval transcriptome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Biological Oceanography and Integrative
Ecological Physiology Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.