* 2131762
* EAGER Investigating Barriers and Strategies to Increase HBCU Participation in STEM Education Research
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* John Haynes, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,818.00

HBCUs are critical to producing a diverse and inclusive workforce as they
graduate a disproportionate number of African American future STEM workers and
STEM leaders. Although the National Science Foundation is fully committed to
diversity and inclusion, there has been little research to determine why
Historically Black Colleges and Universities are not fully participating in the
NSF STEM educational research opportunities. The project will investigate the
challenges, needs and support for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) to succeed in applying for educational research support from the
National Science Foundation (NSF). Participants will be recruited from 96 HBCUs
that are eligible to apply for such funding and will include the wide range of
college and university administration and faculty that are involved in the
preparation of research projects and related applications for research funding.
The investigation will focus primarily on the Division of Research on Learning
in Informal and Formal Settings (DRL) within NSF. The investigation will: 1)
determine the submission rate and funding success rate of HBCUs within the DRL
funding mechanisms; 2) determine why a greater proportion of HBCUs are not
successful in their applications of research or do not apply; and 3) determine
what factors, such as institutional support, research expertise, and
professional development, could lead to a larger number of research proposals
from HBCUs and greater success in obtaining funding. The project has the
potential to have significant influence on the national educational and research
agenda by providing empirical findings on the best approach to support and
encourage HBCU participation in DRL educational research funding programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research project will investigate what
changes and/or supports would contribute to significantly increasing the number
of applications and successful grant awards for STEM educational research
project proposed by HBCUs. The project has the following research questions: (1)
What factors discourage participation of HBCUs in the DRL funding mechanisms and
what are the best practices to encourage participation? (2) What approaches have
been successful for HBCUs to obtain DRL funding? (3) What dynamic capabilities
are necessary for HBCU researchers to successfully submit STEM proposals to NSF?
(4) What changes would be helpful to reduce or eliminate any barriers for HBCU
applications for DRL educational research funding and what supports, such as
professional development, would contribute to greater success in obtaining
funding? Participants will be recruited from the 96 eligible HBCUs and will
include both individuals from within the administration (e.g., Office Sponsored
Programs, Deans, VP, etc.) as well as from within the faculty. The research will
collect variety of quantitative and qualitative data designed to support a
comprehensive analysis of factors addressing the research questions. The project
will develop research findings and recommendations that are relevant to faculty,
administrators, and policymakers for improving HBCU participation in research
funding opportunities. Results of project research will be widely disseminated
to HBCUs and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) through a project
website, peer reviewed journals, newsletters, and conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST), the Advancing Informal
STEM Learning (AISL), and the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) programs.
These programs which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
and general public knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.