* 2131647
* Island Population Responses to Environmental Stresses
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Shu-Ching Chen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 35,000.00

Large and unpredictable stressors like new diseases are impacting practically
all species with increasing frequency and strength. Understanding how species
respond often relies on studies of genetics. Islands are a good place to study
such responses because a large fraction of resident species are usually
impacted. The COVID pandemic has disrupted the ability of many students –
especially those from underrepresented groups -- to get the training and
mentoring they need to study genetic responses to stressors. This workshop will
help fix that problem by providing students from Puerto Rico and southern
Florida with cutting edge skills for analyzing and interpreting genetic data
that they may find challenging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will help
ensure the continued academic progress of participants from STEM
underrepresented communities by engaging them in research activities that can be
undertaken when most laboratory and fieldwork is limited. Workshop participants
will acquire skills to analyze gene expression data from their independent
research projects on response of organisms across the span of biological
diversity to biotic and abiotic stressors. A high degree of “hands-on” virtual
interaction between participants and instructors will be used as a platform.
This will be followed with email and chat group communications and coupled with
posted recorded sessions and associated supporting instructional materials.
Results are likely to yield new insights about how organisms adapt to new
environmental challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.