* 2131012
* Collaborative Research:  GEM--Radiation Belt Losses Using Combined Global Hybrid and Test Particle Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Hong Zhao, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,007.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The radiation belts around the Earth consist mainly of
relativistic particles that are trapped from the solar wind and cosmic rays.
This region of space is extremely dynamic. In the inner magnetosphere, the part
of the radiation belts closer to Earth, ultra-low frequency (ULF) waves play
important roles in the acceleration and loss of particles. This project will
investigate these processes with 3-D hybrid simulations combined with test-
particle electron calculations, guided by multipoint space observations. Results
will have broad application to understanding magnetospheres of the Earth and
other planets. The work supports a Ph.D. student and two undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish the role of ULF waves,
including electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) waves and kinetic Alfven waves
(KAWs), in the radiation belt electron loss as well as electron radial
diffusion. The science questions that will be answered include: (1) What
internal or external processes control the generation and global structure,
including ion wave-particle interactions, of EMIC waves and KAWs in the inner
magnetosphere? How are EMIC/Alfven waves excited by localized injections from
the tail or external compressions? (2) What are the transport coefficients of
energetic electrons in these EMIC waves and KAWs, and what are the associated
electron scattering and precipitation into the loss cone? (3) What are the
effects of ULF waves and external compressional pulses on electron radial
transport? The team will conduct relativistic test-particle electron
calculations in 3-D global hybrid simulations. The hybrid models, describing
fully kinetic ion physics, include an inner magnetospheric hybrid model in
dipole geometry and the Auburn global hybrid code in 3-D (ANGIE3D) based on the
self-consistent solar wind-magnetosphere interaction. The simulations will be
validated with observations of the near-equatorial measurements from NOAA and
NASA operated satellites and low-altitude measurements from satellites,
CubeSats, and balloon experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.