* 2131368
* Collaborative Research: A Nitrate Radical Oxidation Flow Reactor: Development and Use in Laboratory and Field Studies
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Andrew Lambe, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 214,924.00

This project is a collaborative effort to develop a new tool to study of the
role of nitrogen in nighttime chemistry in the atmosphere. A field-deployable
Oxidation Flow Reactor (OFR) will be built to provide new insights into nitrate
radical (NO3)-initiated atmospheric oxidative aging processes. Experiments will
be conducted in both environmental chambers and OFRs to distinguish the relative
contributions of hydroxyl (OH) and nitrate radicals to the formation of oxidized
volatile organic compounds (OVOCs) and secondary organic aerosol (SOA). These
species can have widespread impacts on weather, climate, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort addresses the following questions: (1)
To what extent can OFRs reproducibly generate OVOCs and SOA from VOC + NO3
reactions? (2) Are unique oxidation products formed from sequential multi-day
oxidative aging processes that can be used to trace these processes in the
atmosphere? (3) What is the OVOC and SOA formation potential of ambient air
exposed to NO3 versus OH radicals in an OFR, and how does it change as a
function of integrated oxidant exposure and source region? (4) Can NO3-OFR
perturbations of ambient air enable clearer delineation between nighttime NO3
and O3 chemistry, especially with respect to identifying non-nitrogen-containing
NO3 oxidation products?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports several
graduate students and an early career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.