* 2131105
* CAS-Climate: Acquisition of an Ultraportable Field CO2 Isotope Analyzer and a Soil Gas Flux Chamber to Investigate CO2 Efflux and Stable Carbon Isotopes in Carbon Cycling Research
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Angelia Seyfferth, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 96,337.00

Understanding how ecosystems “breath”, or exchange carbon dioxide (CO2) between
the soil and the atmosphere, is critical to carbon cycle research. An important
component is to understand the rate at which CO2 is lost from the ecosystem;
however, measuring concentrations and fluxes alone cannot discern contributions
from different components of the ecosystem. For example, a molecule of carbon
dioxide that moves from the soil to the atmosphere may be due to geogenic or
biological processes, and the latter can include respiration of soil
microorganisms, plant roots, or a mixture of both. By evaluating the isotopic
composition of the CO2 in soils, we can uncover information about the origin and
underlying processes that control CO2 production. The purchase of a CO2 Isotope
Analyzer will allow us to gain a better understanding of the carbon cycle in
NSF-funded research across a variety of ecosystems and will support ongoing
educational and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
purchase an isotope analyzer along with peripherals to perform measurements of
the efflux and isotopic signature of 13C-CO2 across a variety of NSF-funded
research projects. Soil CO2 fluxes and 13C-CO2 are complementary information
to understand the underlying processes of CO2 production and provide insights on
carbon cycling from local to global scales. New technological advances allow to
perform these measurements in situ and in a continuous way to better understand
the temporal dynamics of soil CO2 production and efflux. The purchase of a CO2
Isotope Analyzer will allow us to gain a better understanding of the carbon
cycle in multiple NSF-funded projects across a variety of ecosystems and will
support ongoing educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.