* 2131052
* StEM: Stimulate, Engage and Motivate student research by enhancing the research capacity (CISE-MSI: RCBP-ED: IIS – III)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mohamed Khalefa, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,498.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Exposure to research is one of the
best predictors of degree completion and success in postgraduate education among
students pursuing degrees/careers in STEM fields. However, only a small
percentage of undergraduate students are engaged in research. This lack of
participation has been attributed to factors such as interest in more applied
experience, lack of awareness about research opportunities and their benefits,
lack of time, lack of interest, perceived barriers to interactions with the
faculty, and personal and financial barriers. The problem further aggravates
with little participation from underrepresented minority groups. Additionally,
biases in several sectors of computer science are evident due to the historical
underrepresentation of researchers. Significant evidence shows that engaging
undergraduate students in research builds confidence and efficacy, motivates
them to pursue advanced graduate level STEM courses, increases retention in
majors having high attrition rates, and acclimates them to the demands of a
research environment. In addition, underrepresented minority groups students’
participation in research is beneficial to the field as it enhances diversity in
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
stimulate, engage, and motivate graduate and undergraduate STEM students,
including from underrepresented minority groups to conduct data research in
different domains, while supporting expansion and enhancement of research
capacity to provide more research opportunities to the diverse student
population and the faculty. This goal will be achieved by following a three-
pronged approach to 1) enhance and expand the technological infrastructure by
acquiring new equipment to facilitate computational processing and big data
analyses; 2) embed research within the curriculum for existing courses via CURE
and introduce new research-focused programs and courses; and 3) motivate and
engage students in research activities and provide hands-on experience via
research projects, training, seminars, and workshops through guidance and
mentoring by academia and industry experts. The award will improve the academic
and professional skills of STEM students, in particular female and other
underrepresented minority students, provide an opportunity to work with
experienced research mentors and present/publish their work, create educational
materials for long-term enhancement of academic curricula, and foster knowledge
and promote the developmental skills to prepare students for data science and
big data careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.