* 2131961
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): National Full-Scale Testing Infrastructure for Community Hardening in Extreme Wind, Surge, and Wave Events (NICHE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Tracy Kijewski-Correa, Florida International University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2026
* USD 12,835,821.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Mid-scale Research
Infrastructure-1 award will support the design of a National Full-scale Testing
Infrastructure for Community Hardening in Extreme Wind, Surge, and Wave Events
(NICHE). The United States is experiencing increasing economic, social, and
infrastructure development in its coastal areas over recent decades, with 40% of
the Nation’s population now calling those areas home. As a result, the Nation is
increasingly exposed to natural hazard events, particularly hurricanes along its
Atlantic and Gulf coasts. Meanwhile, the country’s interior grapples with
downbursts and tornadoes. Extreme windstorm events, such as hurricanes,
downbursts, and tornadoes, occur annually and historically have caused community
disruption, damaged civil infrastructure, population displacement, and economic
losses. The risk to the Nation’s society and assets, especially to civil
infrastructure, e.g., residential homes, buildings, bridges, and critical
utility systems, is now compounded by increasing hazard exposure and sea level
rise due to anthropogenic warming. To help protect the Nation against such
extreme event losses, this project will design the mid-scale research
infrastructure NICHE, which will provide a unique, national-scale, multi-user
facility to experimentally test the impact of extreme winds combined with storm
surge and wave actions on different types of civil infrastructure. The
envisioned NICHE responds to a pressing national imperative to promote more
resilient communities by reducing losses, population displacement, and
outmigration due to climate-driven hazards, enabling communities to thrive
sustainably and equitably to improve quality of life. This design project is led
by Florida International University (FIU), a minority-serving institution, with
participation from Colorado State University, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Oregon State University, Stanford University, University of Florida, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Notre Dame, Wayne State
University, and Aerolab LLC. This project will be a component of the National
Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) and will contribute to the NSF role in the National
Windstorm Impact Reduction Program (NWIRP). Data produced by this project will
be archived and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NICHE facility will
enable the wind and coastal engineering research community to address high-
priority scientific questions arising from the impact of increasing storm risks
on civil infrastructure, particularly from the combination of extreme winds,
storm surge, and wave action, through high-fidelity investigations of the three
dimensions of the problem space: wind hazards (synoptic and non-synoptic),
coastal hazards (waves and storm surge), and the built environment (e.g., from
structures to community scale). Historically, these investigations have engaged
a trio of methodological approaches: physical experimentation, computational
simulations, and field observations. While considerable advances have been made
in each, none has been able to adequately capture the complex physics of
structures subjected to interacting wind and coastal hazards. Existing
experimental facilities can simulate the impacts of coastal and wind hazards on
civil infrastructure separately, missing opportunities to advance and validate
computational models for coupled hazards. These facilities further lack the
physical scale and intensity to authentically recreate the catastrophic failures
observed in practice and assess the efficacy of potential mitigation solutions.
The NICHE facility will be designed to physically simulate coupled climate-
driven hazards at the scales required to faithfully reproduce vulnerabilities in
the built environment. To aid in the design of the full-scale NICHE, the project
will develop and implement an integrated design testbed (IDT), including
construction of a prototype smaller-scale, physical design testbed (PDT),
derived from a combination of field observations, computational modeling, and
physical experimentation. The PDT will be constructed at FIU, with the potential
for the wind-wave PDT component to be constructed at an alternate institution
with an existing wave testing infrastructure. The IDT, and the prototype PDT,
will inform and incubate the follow-on design of the full-scale NICHE, that will
integrate basic and applied research, research translation, student training,
and development of a more diverse workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.