* 2131292
* Collaborative Research: Data-driven Path Metrics for Machine Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Anna Little, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2022
* USD 103,553.00

The era of big data has introduced unprecedented computational and mathematical
challenges. Traditional machine learning algorithms often lack scalable
computational complexity, while modern approaches lack solid mathematical
foundations. Moreover, high data dimensionality creates challenges for
traditional methods of data analysis. The principal investigators (PIs) propose
to combine classic dimension reduction methods with data-driven distances, so
that both the distance and embedding procedure are data dependent. This novel
approach allows for greater flexibility in balancing the density-based and
geometric features of the data, achieves a density-based simplification of
geometry, and insightfully represents the data in a small number of dimensions.
In contrast to black box methods such as deep learning, the developed
methodology can be rigorously analyzed to derive strong theoretical guarantees
for several statistical and machine learning tasks. This research will
contribute computational tools for cancer immunogenomics and the investigators
will consult with the Rogel Cancer Center at the University of Michigan for
scientific questions related to tumor immunology and T-cell biology. In
addition, new data analysis tools will be made publicly available in an open
source software package. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators' approach is
driven by the analysis of a family of data-dependent path metrics. These metrics
are both density-sensitive and geometry-preserving, with the balance governed by
the choice of a single parameter p. By utilizing the space of paths through
data, the PIs will obtain density based metrics and embeddings while avoiding
the explicit computation of a density estimator, which may be unreliable in a
large number of dimensions. The PIs will propose a simple yet highly flexible
data model which does not assume the data is sampled from a manifold or
collection of manifolds, and investigate the continuous limit of these metrics
and an associated graph Laplacian operator. By continuously varying the
parameter p, the PIs will propose to create data videos which represent the data
from multiple perspectives. The PIs will investigate both multidimensional
scaling and graph Laplacian embeddings as mechanisms for obtaining path-based
low dimensional representations, and will explore fast algorithms with scalable
computational complexity for approximating these metrics. The PIs will
contextualize path metrics in the larger frame work of data-driven metrics and
focus specifically on the analysis of biological data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.