* 2131972
* Mid-Scale RI-1 (M1:IP): Implementation of a National Silicon Carbide Research Fabrication Facility
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2026
* USD 17,874,769.00

Silicon carbide (SiC) is a emerging and transformative semiconductor technology,
enabling innovation across a broad range of groundbreaking research and
revolutionary growing markets, including: (1) the transition from the internal
combustion engine to all-electric vehicles, (2) modernization of the electric
power grid through advanced solar inverters and protection equipment, and (3)
powering data centers to provide greater reliability and efficiency, all of
which will significantly impact American lives through more efficient use of
energy, a cleaner environment, and economic growth. This NSF project aims to
establish a national Multi-User SiC (MUSiC) fabrication facility, located on the
University of Arkansas campus, is an open facility that can support US research
and industrial interests, expertise, and ingenuity to drive the development of
SiC integrated circuits and devices. This will be achieved by creating a unique
fabrication laboratory with the necessary equipment and instrumentation to
realize the necessary semiconductor processes, train students on them, and
execute the processes to achieve low-volume prototypes for US academic and
industrial users. MUSiC will produce higher temperature electronics, sensors,
and optoelectronics that can survive in geothermal wells, gas turbines and many
other industrial processes, and extreme environment locations such as Venus. The
broader impacts of the project will unleash American ingenuity and help develop
a needed workforce in the semiconductor fabrication industry, while bridging a
gap between ideas formulated in the lab to high volume production provided by
industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed MUSiC research fab line at the UA
includes the semiconductor processing equipment such as oxidation, annealing,
etching, metallization and associated metrology tools. It will create a national
solution to the instrumentation access, knowledge-gap, and bottlenecks that are
impeding progress and ingenuity in SiC material, devices, and circuits. This
will be achieved through three primary objectives: (1) Deploy the equipment and
processes that become the baseline of the MUSiC fab line to enable years of
competitive research by all US researchers at universities, small and large
businesses, and government organizations; (2) bridge the gap between the low-
volume prototyping specialization of research universities and high-volume
production for US manufacturing; and (3) Provide student training and education
for future leaders of SiC technology in both research and industrial settings to
encourage US growth in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.