* 2131802
* “Autonomous Flying Fire Blanket”: New Adaptive And Learning Architectures For Multi-UAV Cooperative Formation With Firefighting Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Xu Jin, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2024
* USD 289,067.00

Fires cause significant damage in the United States every year. Unmanned aerial
vehicles have been increasingly used in fire fighting and prevention tasks.
However, current firefighting aerial vehicles suffer from several limitations
and constraints, including complex designs of the platforms, limited tank
capacity and flow rate for the suppressant fluid, and high costs. This project
aims to develop a new “autonomous flying fire blanket” system, using a team of
relatively simple and cheap unmanned aerial vehicles to collaboratively tether a
fire blanket to be dropped at a designated place. This system puts a high demand
on the safe, precise, and resilient operations of the aerial vehicle team. The
intellectual merits of the project include new adaptive and learning cooperative
formation architecture designs that will significantly advance the current
state-of-the-art in cooperative control algorithms. The broader impacts of the
project include collaboration with the industry, our Lexington Fire Department,
and Kentucky Division of Forestry, on the designs and verifications of the
system, and on promoting the system for real-world fire fighting and prevention.
This project will advance research and educational experiences for K-12 and
undergraduate students including underrepresented students. A graduate course on
intelligent control methods will be developed based on the research findings of
this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
adaptive and learning architectures for physically interconnected unmanned
aerial vehicles to ensure safe, precise, and resilient operations. Major
technical challenges to be addressed include: (1) satisfying multiple formation
constraint requirements that are time and path dependent; (2) adaptation and
learning under varying operation conditions over both the time and iteration
domain; and (3) resilient designs in the face of potential malfunctioning at the
fire scene. Current cooperative control algorithms mostly focus on constant or
time-varying constraint requirements, which often require more aggressive
kinematic behavior that can potentially cause actuation saturation. The
geometric and spatial nature of the constraint requirements is often overlooked,
largely due to difficulties in integrating time-domain system kinematics with
path-domain constraints. Moreover, existing works can at best deal with adaption
or learning over either the time or iteration axis. Unified structures to learn
and adapt over both the time and iteration domain have not been addressed in the
literature. Furthermore, existing cooperative formation algorithms often ignore
any malfunctioning of the physically interconnected agents during constrained
operations. To address these challenges, we will use barrier Lyapunov analysis
and a new framework of composite energy function discussion, to develop new
adaptive and learning cooperative formation architectures based on universal
barrier functions, adaptive learning structures, and resilient control framework
designs, while taking unknown external payloads, system nonlinearities, and
external disturbances into considerations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.