* 2131151
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CPS, CNS: Emergency Response and Evacuation Training for Active Shooter Events
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Brendan Morris, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 120,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, we have witnessed
a sharp increase in active shooter events; however, unfortunately, there has
been no introduction of new technology or tactics capable of increasing
preparedness and training for active shooter events. This project promotes the
progress of science and technology development by building interdisciplinary
partnerships and research capacity between Bowie State University (BSU) and
University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV) for exploratory investigation of active
shooter events at Institutes of Higher Education (IHE). The goal of this project
is to conduct data collection, preliminary experiments, and a prototype
development for the two campuses for improving emergency preparedness for an
active shooter event using collaborative immersive virtual reality (VR)
environment. This project develops algorithms, implement software and
demonstrate proof-of-concept using building systems as a challenge application
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves devising novel conceptual
methods for new theoretical and empirical guidance needed to have an environment
for human and machine decision making for highly uncertain, complex, time
urgent, and dynamically changing missions. The research objectives of this
proposal include: 1) Develop an immersive Collaborative Virtual Environment
(CVE) using Oculus for course of action, visualization, and situational
awareness for active shooter events, 2) Develop a unique immersive graphical
user interface (GUI) for communicating between PCs (Player characters) and NPCs
(Non-Player Characters) for user interaction, 3) Implementing algorithms for
human behavior for NPCs in active shooter events. (e.g. Hostile, Non-Hostile,
Selfish, Leader-Following, Panic), 4) Deep learning-based (data-driven)
behavioral modeling for realistic NPCs. The successfully implemented project
contributes to the state-of-the-art in emergency response training using VR by
developing knowledge that could form the basis of public education and awareness
programs to help facility occupants, their rescuers and city officials respond
appropriately during extreme emergency situation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.