* 2131701
* I-Corps: Power Single-Layer Integration with Component Embedding for Wearable and Internet of Things (IoT) Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Markondeya Raj Pulugurtha, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of next-generation power delivery products for the wearable,
Internet of Things (IoT), and portable electronics markets. The proposed
manufacturing path may generate opportunities at all levels of the electronics
supply chain as the technology is agnostic to the power delivery mode,
extensibility to other system components, heterogeneous component integration,
and compatibility with emerging chiplet packaging. Both supply chain (analog
chip, passive component, and multiferroic component manufacturers) and end-users
may benefit from the proposed technology by creating optimal building blocks
with agile designs. The proposed technology may provide low-cost components with
the required power densities, size, thickness and system interfaces that may be
purchased by various end-users in healthcare, safety, and security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of power
delivery subsystems with embedded power telemetry units, rectification, and
storage in a single thin flex package. Such packages are proposed to be
manufactured using low-cost, flex-embedding technologies. The proposed
technology may transform biomedical electronic systems from their current 2D
assembled architectures with pre-packaged devices to thin embedded modules. The
underlying technology is based on a power telemetry approach with multiferroics
to provide much higher power densities through external magnetic fields and
embedded packaging of multiferroic power telemetry with capacitive storage and
thin diodes. The power modules may be customized to different functions based on
the required performance, physiological, and design constraints. Since future
components are expected to be thinned and diced to chiplets of less than 100
micron thickness, this approach transforms wafers to systems with the least
disruption to the supply chain where device manufacturers can directly adapt
their devices to subsystems. This low-cost manufacturing path may enable high-
volume production of power modules, bringing the best combination of
multiferroic telemetry with rectification and storage. In addition, the
modularity will allow easy extensibility to incorporate building-block component
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.