* 2131464
* CSBR: Emergency Rescue of the Orphaned Fish Collection of the University of Puerto Rico and Capacity Expansion of the Ichthyology Collection at the Sam Noble Museum
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2025
* Dahiana Arcila, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 12/31/2025
* USD 602,344.00

Biological collections are a primary source of information to understand Earth’s
biodiversity. They not only document existing diversity, but also provide the
baseline to track changes across time and geography, as well as extinctions at
local and global scales. This project aims to rescue the orphaned Fish
Collection of the Department of Marine Sciences at the University of Puerto
Rico, Mayaguez (UPR-M), improve access to specimens and associated information,
and expand the shelving capacity of the Ichthyology Collection at the Sam Noble
Museum (SNOMNH). Integration and accessibility of the two fish collections have
the potential to be used across multiple scientific disciplines, including
ecology, conservation biology, taxonomy, phylogenetics, fisheries management,
anatomy, and physiology. The proposed activities for this proposal are organized
around three primary goals—rescue, integration, and long-term preservation—each
associated with specific timelines to achieve the overarching proposal goals.
The team combines expertise of graduate and undergraduate students, and
volunteers with museum experience at different levels in Oklahoma and Puerto
Rico to provide a rich context for workshops, and for the development of an
integrative training program for the next generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;
Natural history collections play a fundamental role as repositories of
biodiversity and provide verifiable and permanent records of wildlife and past
environmental conditions. This project will rescue and safeguard the UPR-M
Ichthyology Collection, one the largest biorepositories of marine fish
biodiversity in the Caribbean, encompassing historical data from 13,000
specimens, comprising 805 species, 392 genera, and 123 families in imminent
danger to become lost. Integration of the UPR-M Ichthyology collection into the
SNOMNH will greatly increase its accessibility to scientists and other users
through improved physical access, specimen loans, digitization of the
collection, and sharing of data via the museum website, and other network
portals. This project will enhance the infrastructure of the SNOMNH Ichthyology
Collection and increase its scientific value and accessibility for scientists,
educators, and the general public. The SNOMNH Ichthyology Collection is an
important scientific resource and biological legacy for the lower Great Plains
representing about 20% of the total fish diversity of the United States. It
hosts diverse assemblages of mostly freshwater fishes (although its scope has
recently expanded to include marine fish species as well), and endemic regional
fish fauna from streams and reservoirs in Oklahoma. This project will provide
multiple opportunities for integrating research into learning and education
activities. Students at UPR-M and OU will participate in the collections-based
activities as part of their academic and practical experiences and summer
workshops at Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.