* 2131193
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: S&amp;CC: Building a Smart Mobility Network for the San Antonio Transit  to Improve Transit Service and Social Impact (SmartSAT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Young Lee, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,897.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public transportation connects
people to their jobs, schools, medical and recreational facilities, friends, and
family. Public transportation users in most American cities have
disproportionately lower incomes than commuters who use automobiles. San Antonio
(SA), TX, follows this trend, with 67% of public transit users falling below the
poverty line. Providing reliable and accessible public transit will benefit all
transit users and, therefore, promote the upward mobility, health, and wellness
of all San Antonians. To improve the reliability of transit information and the
quality of the rider experience, many transit authorities have developed
smartphone apps. The public demand for public transportation smartphone apps is
increasing in many urban areas, particularly among people in lower income
brackets who primarily access the internet through their smartphones. However,
maintaining sustainable, high-quality service and information on these apps is
challenging. This SmartSAT project will develop a customizable secure mobile app
for SA public transit that provides users with enhanced, accurate information
about transit service and enables data collection to evaluate the impact of
poverty, race, and ethnicity on the experience of transit users.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The resulting SmartSAT project will (1) provide riders
real-time information of arrival times and bus capacity with limited seats
available, (2) build an in feedback on-trip experiences, (3) utilize intelligent
technology and conduct data-driven decision making when analyzing data, (4)
provide reliable and accessible transit with convenient and equal access to get
places, and (5) integrate SA community stakeholders into a future smart and
connected city in the long run. Researchers and students from diverse
disciplines (sociology, computer science, cyber security, &amp; information
science) will work collaboratively to achieve project success. The outcomes of
this project will primarily benefit low-income SA residents, especially the
large Hispanic population. SmartSAT will ultimately improve SA mobile network
infrastructure and connect more workers to jobs and workforce training, more
students to educational opportunities, and more residents to social and leisure
activities. It can impact the lives of public transit users, specifically,
minority communities and lower income earners who make up most transit users.
The built network can serve as a transferal model for similar metropolitan areas
in advancing the mobility of public transportation services supported by data-
driven decisions using intelligent technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.