* 2131260
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RPEP: SaTC: HBCU Artificial Intelligence and Cybersecurity (AI-CyS) Research Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Felicia Doswell, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 10/31/2024
* USD 77,489.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together
researchers from seven Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
three National Research Laboratories (NRLs) to develop the AI-CyS research
partnership at the intersection of artificial intelligence (AI) and
cybersecurity. Cybersecurity vulnerabilities are growing at a scale and speed
that strains human capacity to proactively address threats; developing AI and
machine learning (ML) techniques to support prediction and detection
capabilities is thus an important area of research. The HBCUs involved in AI-CyS
either already have or are rapidly developing cybersecurity research capacity
that would be further developed by increasing student and faculty involvement
and training. To develop that potential, the project team will leverage its
existing research activities and collaborations to deepen relationships with
both other HBCUs and with the NRLs. The NRLs will provide additional research
resources and mentoring through both regular remote meetings and on-site visits
to the NRLs around projects of mutual interest, and opportunities for student
internships and faculty visits at the NRLs. The team will also work to expand
the impact of the partnership by (a) hosting an annual research conference to
bring researchers together across the partners, (b) adding additional research
projects, HBCUs and national lab partners with complementary research and
educational interests to the existing partnership, and (c) developing cross-
university curricula and mentoring programs to train HBCU students to be future
research and workforce leaders in cybersecurity. Together, these efforts will
advance research in cybersecurity, research capacity at the partner
institutions, and research and educational opportunities for students at HBCUs,
who are often members of underrepresented groups in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership will be organized around five seed
research projects chosen to maximize existing capacity and collaborations. The
first will use reinforcement learning to improve target selection by current
autonomous network mapping software agents. The second involves analyzing
network traceroute data to better understand and work around limitations of its
ability to map paths in order to better detect and classify network anomalies.
The third focuses on developing, then defending against, adversarial attacks on
computer vision algorithms in which attackers add visual patches to objects to
fool object detection and classification tools. The fourth will analyze existing
tools and algorithms for generating “deepfake” videos to develop methods to
detect forged video in near real-time, with applications to surveillance and
authentication tasks. The fifth will extend probabilistic sequential models to
develop threat detectors at multiple levels of the network stack in the context
of Internet of Things devices. Beyond these specific seed research projects, the
project team will also analyze its activities to develop evidence-based best
practices for research capacity-building efforts. These efforts will include
developing mechanisms to expand current collaborations and foster resources,
sharing expertise between HBCU members, and hosting an annual research
conference that allows faculty and students from both current and potential
partner HBCUs to showcase their cybersecurity research and create connections to
other researchers and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.