* 2131234
* Collaborative Research: Linking Climate, Disease, and Demography To Understand Extinction Risks in Ectotherms
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Joseph Mihaljevic, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 01/31/2026
* USD 844,035.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117- 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ectotherms are organisms like
amphibians, insects, and plants, whose metabolic processes, including immune
system functioning, are largely controlled by environmental temperature. Climate
can therefore strongly influence the interactions between ectotherm hosts and
their pathogens. In recent decades, amphibian populations have been strongly
impacted by disease and many species are now extinct. A primary goal of this
project is to build mathematical models that help us understand and predict how
a changing climate will influence the severity of disease outbreaks, and whether
we expect disease to lead to long-term population declines in ectotherms. To do
this, we must build models that incorporate the effect of climate on host traits
that influence pathogen transmission, as well as the effect of climate on the
timing and success of host reproduction. In this project we build such models,
and we test the models using experiments and field observations of a salamander
host and the prevalent Ambystoma tigrinum virus. Testing our models against
these data will help us narrow down the ways in which climate most strongly
impacts disease and long-term patterns of population abundance. Then, we can use
our well-tested models to make forecasts of how a changing climate might affect
disease and host population stability in the future. We will also work with
collaborators in state and federal wildlife agencies to better understand the
threat of Ambystoma tigrinum virus to natural amphibian populations. Moreover,
we will work to increase the participation of historically underserved groups in
science by creating and refining a program that recruits undergraduates from
underserved populations, trains these students in grant writing and scientific
hypothesis testing, and incorporates them as members of our research team, where
they will seek to answer complementary questions. We will also build web-based
modeling resources in which the general public can manipulate versions of our
disease dynamics models while learning about the effects of climate and disease
on ectotherm populations across the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lethal
pathogens often regulate how host population abundances fluctuate over time,
which can cause host population declines, local extirpation, and even species
extinctions. For ectothermic host species, climate regulates traits that affect
host demography and pathogen transmission, such that climate can mediate how
disease affects host population dynamics. Yet key knowledge gaps impede reliable
predictions of how a changing climate will interact with disease to drive long-
term fluctuations in host abundance. We ultimately require more robust host-
pathogen models that forecast long-term host population dynamics in response to
disease and climate, combined with robust tests of this theory. Here we build
novel host-pathogen models that more realistically describe how climate
simultaneously affects transmission, host demography, and host phenology.
Further, our models allow host individuals to respond idiosyncratically to
temperature fluctuations in the environment. This is important because we
hypothesize that the size of disease outbreaks and the risk of population
declines are ultimately determined by whether temperature controls the degree to
which traits vary among host individuals. To test our theoretical developments,
we conduct laboratory experiments and observe natural disease outbreaks in a
salamander-virus system. We also follow an overarching, Bayesian framework to
estimate model parameters and compare competing models, which allows us to
identify the specific climate-dependent mechanisms that matter most for
explaining large-scale patterns in the field. We then use our well-tested model
to project how a changing climate and viral disease will alter the future
population dynamics of salamanders in the US Southwest. We will also develop an
undergraduate outreach program to enhance engagement in STEM fields.
Specifically, with the Equal Partners in Inclusive Community (EPIC) program at
Northern Arizona University, we will create a grant-writing workshop for
students who are under-represented in STEM. Finally, we will develop a web
portal to broadly disseminate the results of our work, which will allow the
public to interact with graphical model output and explore the effects of
climate change and disease on amphibian populations in different
ecoregions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.