* 2131394
* I-Corps: Blockchain-based Digital Timebank
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Sara Saberi, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be a
blockchain-based timebank that results in a shared empowerment system that
leverages students’ strengths and addresses the corresponding potential
obstacles. If successful, this empowerment system may promote tangible
employment skills, improve trust and relationships, and develop social capital
within participants. The proposed timebanking system may help channel the
collaborative spirit at universities and foster communities that are actively
engaged. In addition, it also may offer students an avenue to practice
leadership skills while experimenting in a convenient low-risk setting. The
proposed technology may provide students with an opportunity to gradually build
up confidence for transitioning from a market incubator environment into a real
market. This tech-based system could also serve a broader set of participants
such as homemakers and elderly communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will be a borderless, digital timebanking system built upon blockchain,
in which the participants interchange skills through their time rather than
money. Using the proposed technology, participants leverage their unique skills
to provide services to other members of their social network and are compensated
with a time-credit for future services provided by other members of the network
rather than with money. With the proposed blockchain technology, the goal is to
create a trustworthy system in which users’ credentials are proved via a
traceable and decentralized ledger while the meaningful contributions of the
participants may be credited for the value they offer. The technology may
improve the trust and transparency between users and their skill statements,
diminishes the chance of fake reviews and late transactions, and facilitates
participation growth by incentivizing individuals to contribute services to the
social network. A novel cryptographic protocol called zero-knowledge proof (ZKP)
will be applied in this skill-exchange network. With ZKP, ethical behavior is
enforced while privacy, secure anonymity, and the flexibility of sharing
identities will be maintained. This protocol allows users’ information to be
validated without the need to expose their data. It also may help users to
interact with digital services that they can trust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.