* 2131709
* EFRI DCheM: Distributed solar energy harvesting for carbon-free ammonia synthesis
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Galen Fisher, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

This EFRI Distributed Chemical Manufacturing project seeks to provide the
scientific and technical foundations for producing fertilizer close to the farm
and for the avoidance of the significant greenhouse gas footprint of the current
industrial standard ammonia synthesis process. Small-scale distributed
fertilizer manufacturing is vital for rural areas of the U.S. and for many other
regions of the world where access to fertilizer is limited. The solar energy-
driven and carbon-free strategy of distributed, small-scale ammonia production
provide a platform for new business models for agricultural communities.
Distributed fertilizer manufacturing close to the farm offers two intertwined
pathways for significant global impact: one toward decreasing the carbon
emissions during production and transportation of fertilizer, and another toward
engaging agricultural and industrial stakeholders and exploring the best methods
and appropriate scales for providing cost-effective access to fertilizer in
rural communities here in the U.S. as well as in low-income countries suffering
from food insecurity. The project’s aims are not to replace the existing
industrial ammonia synthesis infrastructure. Instead, the goal is to cover part
of the future increased demand for fertilizer by enabling a sustainable
distributed fertilizer manufacturing process for select rural locations such as
farms operated by Native&lt;br/&gt;American Indian tribes on a scale where it
makes logistical and economic sense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Th fundamental
research project pioneers the concept of photo-enhanced thermal catalysis,
conducting photocatalytic reactions not in a liquid phase batch reactor at
ambient temperature and pressure, as is the general practice, but in a
continuous flow gas-solid reactor at moderate temperatures and relatively low
pressures. As such, this work will lay the foundation for a fundamental
understanding of the underlying physics and surface chemistry that leads to
photo-enhanced ammonia formation rates. Besides developing novel catalytic
materials and catalyst architectures optimized for light interaction, the
project also brings significant innovation to reactor design by distributing
light uniformly within catalyst plates in a new type of photocatalytic reactor.
Renewable energy-powered electrolysis of water provides the required process
hydrogen and nitrogen is separated from the air and further converted into
fertilizer, such as aqueous ammonia, carbamate, or urea. The solar-spectrum-
enhanced thermal catalysis research results, combined with the project’s
community and curricular engagement approach, will advance scholarship on three
fronts: (1) fundamental understanding of the physics of photo-enhanced nitrogen
activation on catalytic surfaces; (2) design and modeling of an integrated
system for renewable-hydrogen-based distributed ammonia synthesis and fertilizer
production; and (3) prototyping, piloting and assessment of training modules to
convey the innovations to stakeholders and move towards
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.