* 2131995
* Use-Inspired Climate Change Solutions: A TOS-ASLO Workshop Series
* GEO,RISE
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Jennifer Ramarui, Oceanography Society
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 05/31/2022
* USD 0.00

The Oceanography Society (TOS) and the Associated Sciences for Limnology and
Oceanography (ASLO), the two largest professional societies of aquatic
scientists in the US will hold a series of community-driven information
collecting events to identify interdisciplinary and convergent challenges the
nation and world are facing due to climate change. A focus will be to
crowdsource research directions and solutions to mitigate the threats posed by
climate change in such a way that major impacts to society and the economy will
be realized within a quick time frame. Outreach to the limnology and
oceanographic communities will be spearheaded by a task force of thought leaders
with a membership reflecting diverse interdisciplinary expertise, gender
diversity, career stage, and ethnicity. Activities will be professionally
facilitated and will be tied to identifying solutions that target sustainability
science. Results of the community outreach will include a synthesis of
workshop/communication venue results as well as the mining of information from
recent professional society abstracts to augment the in-person/virtual
conversations and input. Broader impacts of the work will be to surface
transformational, global ideas that accelerate use-inspired, entrepreneurial,
and nature-based solutions to the threats the nation and world are facing due to
a warming world which is driving climate change. As such, the potential societal
impacts are great. Other impacts include aquatic science community building;
support of the development of early-career scientists; enhancing
interdisciplinary, inter-agency, and international collaborations; and providing
vehicles for connections between government, academic, and the private sector
that link scientists in developed and developing nations in accelerating the
design and implementation of use-inspired climate change
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change and its impacts on the
environment, society, patterns of land use, locations of communities, etc. are
serious problems facing the nation and the world. The two US premier
professional societies of aquatic scientists (The Oceanographic Society and the
Associated Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography) will use their network of
thousands of scientists to obtain input and crowdsource ideas for solutions to
tractable issues being caused by climate change. These professional societies
will jointly hold meetings, surveys, and conversations with members, nationally
and internationally, to identify possible areas in which convergent science that
crosses disciplines and stakeholder groups and where major advances in a short
time frame can be made. The two professional societies will generate a report
that will be submitted to the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.