* 2131608
* Collaborative Research: Interfacial Engineering for Stabilizing Hybrid Perovskites and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Letian Dou, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 255,861.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Highly efficient and low-cost
light emitting diodes (LEDs) are critical for the future energy landscape in the
United States. They are widely used in displays and lighting. Current
technologies use high temperature and high vacuum for materials processing and
device fabrication, which are energy- and infrastructure-demanding. In this
project, LED devices based on a new type of semiconductors—the so-called
organic-inorganic hybrid perovskites—will be studied. These materials exhibit
excellent optical and optoelectronic properties required for LED applications.
In addition, they can be processed at low temperature under mild conditions,
making the device fabrication and integration much easier. This research will
enable future LED devices that are scalable and cost-effective. This project
will also provide interdisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate
students, providing them with critical-thinking and problem-solving skills
needed for future careers in areas of semiconductor
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Organic-inorganic
hybrid perovskites have shown tremendous potential for low-cost, energy-
efficient optoelectronics (e.g. LEDs and solar cells). Development of viable
devices based on the perovskites, however, has been inhibited by materials and
device instability. Among the factors that are responsible for the performance
loss, ion migration appears to be intrinsic to this new class of semiconductors
and remains challenging to be circumvented. This project aims to identify new
ways to stabilize perovskite-LEDs by interfacial engineering. Three questions
that are critical to the success of the proposed research will be answered: (1)
which interface in perovskite devices is more vulnerable to ion migration? (2)
could the ion migration be suppressed by introducing “extrinsic” interlayers at
the grain boundary and interface? (3) what are the suitable techniques for
implementing such interlayers? Leveraging comprehensive expertise on materials
chemistry and device physics, the collaborative team will unravel fundamental
roles of the interfaces in materials degradation and provide a practical
strategy for stabilizing perovskite devices. The ultimate goal of the project is
to break the current ceiling of device stability and demonstrate perovskite-LEDs
with &gt; 1000-hour operation lifetime. On a broader scope, the approach of
interfacial engineering established in this project will also be applicable to
other perovskite devices such as solar cells and photodetectors, which share
many common features with perovskite-LEDs from materials selection to device
architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.