* 2131400
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Anatomy and functions of LTP interactomes and their relationship to small RNA signals in systemic acquired resistance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Pradeep Kachroo, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 684,792.00

Plants possess a unique form of immunity called systemic acquired resistance
(SAR). SAR is highly desirable because it protects the whole plant against a
wide range of pathogens and is long-lasting. When a primary pathogen infects the
plant and activates SAR, mobile signals generated at the infection site travel
to distal portions of the plant and prepare them to fend off future infections.
Several SAR-inducing factors, including some that move systemically, have been
discovered, though the identity of the early SAR signal has remained elusive. In
a recent breakthrough, we identified RNA-based molecules that function within
the early time frame of SAR. This collaborative project between laboratories at
the University of Kentucky and University of Warwick will combine computational,
biochemical, gentics and metabolomic analyses to generate a deep mechanistic
understanding of these molecules. By facilitating the use of SAR in developing
sustainable and environmentally friendly crop protection strategies, and its
applicability to economically important crop species, this project will benefit
US and UK agricultural economies. The knowledge gained could have rational
applications in human health because the underlying components have conserved
functions in mammalian physiology. The project will generate undergraduate
research experiences for Kentucky students from primarily underserved
backgrounds, middle-high school workshops via the Kentucky Youth Science Summit,
Girl Scoutâ€™s GEMS program, Science on the Hill public engagement series and
undergraduate research-based experiential learning coursework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will investigate early signals in Systemic
Acquired Resistance (SAR). The production of the SAR mobile signal is thought to
occur within 3 h of primary infection, and the infected leaf must remain
attached for at least 4 h after inoculation for SAR to be induced, suggesting
that the mobile signal is translocated during that early timeframe. We find that
two phased 21 nucleotide RNA (tasi-RNA) derived from Trans-Acting Small
Interfering RNA3a (TAS3a), are synthesized within 3 h of pathogen infection,
move to distal leaves within 4 h and function as the elusive early mobile signal
in SAR. TAS3a cleaves Auxin Response Factor (ARF) 3 and conversely increased
ARF3 negatively regulates SAR. TAS3a positively regulates the expression of
Lipid Transfer Proteins (LTP) 3, 4 and AZI1 and a novel protein A70. The LTPs
form a complex and regulate SAR by promoting transport of tasi-ARFs. Systemic
mobility of the LTPs further suggests that SAR activation is associated with the
transport of a high molecular weight LTP-RNA complex. This project will
characterize the LTP-RNA interactome and the dynamics of systemic activation of
A70, and will compute how changes in these complexes regulate SAR. In addition,
we will characterize ARF3 targets and SAR-associated components that function
downstream of tasi-ARFs and A70. Research findings will be disseminated to the
scientific community via traditional publication routes, presentations at
conferences, and through outreach to US soybean, corn, wheat, and oat growers
via annual meetings and grower-targeted publications, as well as with vegetable
and protected crop growers and seed companies in the
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.