* 2131662
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2021 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM)
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Feng Luo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Bioinformatics and Biomedicine research requires close collaboration among
multi-disciplinary researchers from quantitative sciences, life sciences, and
their interfaces. The research is essential to the understanding of complex
biological systems, which impacts the science and technology of fields ranging
from agricultural and environmental sciences to pharmaceutical and medical
sciences. The IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
2021(BIBM-2021) will provide an open and interactive forum to promote
multidisciplinary research and education in Bioinformatics and Biomedicine,
facilitate cross-fertilization of ideas, and bridge knowledge gaps. The
scientific program will cover six synergistic themes on i) Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology of Molecular Structure, Function, and Evolution; ii)
Computational Systems Biology; and iii) Next-Generation Sequencing and High-
throughput Methods, which are all relevant to NSF research areas. A special
panel, the Bioinformatics Educational Workshop, will foster discussion on
education opportunities and barriers. As an effort to engage young researchers,
especially students from underrepresented groups, BIBM-2021 plans to involve
them in the meeting organization and will include mentoring activities in the
conference program. The conference travel grant aims to provide the crucial
funding needed to support the participation of early-career researchers and
graduate students, especially those from underrepresented groups, as a training
opportunity for the next generation of scientists, thereby, broadening the
scientific impact of this international conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.