* 2131115
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Low-Complexity Algorithms for Unsourced Multiple Access and Compressed Sensing in Large Dimensions
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Yury Polyanskiy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2024
* USD 175,000.00

Wireless traffic is increasingly heterogeneous, with growth coming primarily
from unattended devices. While early implementations of wireless communication
systems have focused on voice telephony, subsequent generations of cellular
infrastructures have enabled users to connect more broadly with the Internet, in
support of applications such as gaming, browsing, and video watching. Looking
into the future, unattended devices are predicted to grow rapidly and to
generate a significant portion of the wireless data traffic. This evolution
represents a formidable challenge for current infrastructures because such
devices interact with the Internet in fundamentally different ways than humans.
Individuals tend to establish sustained connections through their phones or
computers, whereas machines often sporadically transmit status updates or
control decisions with very short payloads. Without a fundamental redesign of
the medium access control layer, wireless infrastructures will be unable to
efficiently carry machine-type traffic, thereby creating a bottleneck for growth
and innovation. The main goal of this research effort is to devise pragmatic
random access schemes for machine-type data, with an eye towards addressing the
aforementioned issues associated with the digital traffic of tomorrow. Findings
from this project are expected to (i) help strengthen digital infrastructures,
by now unanimously recognized as a key driver of the economy; (ii) train
competent engineers with skills attuned to societal needs; and (iii) broaden
participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics through
recruiting and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Close connections will be
exploited between multiple-access communication, compressed sensing, and sparse
graph inference. The crucial challenges and main innovations arise from the
exceedingly large dimensionality of the engineering problems considered,
compared to the state-of-the-art. The envisioned structures and algorithms for
performing at such scales are rooted in the divide-and-conquer approaches of
stochastic binning and splitting data. Techniques from graph-based codes to
modern iterative methods and interference management are expected to play
important roles in pushing the boundaries of unsourced random access and
inference in large dimensions. The fundamental limits of complexity-constrained
algorithms in wireless communications will be characterized by leveraging
recently developed tools from finite-block-length information theory,
statistical physics, and applied probability. Key attributes of the proposed
models include uncoordinated access and the ability to operate without
explicitly acquiring device identities. This departure from established schemes
is crucial for eliminating a reliance on individualized feedback, which has
enabled fast connections in the past but would now become cost-prohibitive as a
mechanism for machine-type traffic. Likely outcomes for this project include
near-optimum, low-complexity schemes for the next-generation of random access
wireless systems, which will be broadly applicable to deal with inference in
exceedingly large dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.