* 2131440
* Understanding the Structure, Corrosion and Mechanical Behavior of Nanostructured Al-V Alloys Produced by High-Energy Ball Milling and Subsequent Consolidation
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Rajeev Gupta, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 192,815.00

Developing stronger, lightweight, and durable materials is critical to address
current technological challenges in many industries including automotive,
aerospace, energy and infrastructure. The strength and durability of metallic
materials is limited by the conventional compositions and manufacturing
technologies. In particular, aluminum alloys suffer from corrosion
susceptibility when subjected to processing techniques used to increase the
strength of many alloys. The development of new aluminum alloys, with concurrent
high strength and corrosion resistance, requires new scientific knowledge of the
mechanisms that control corrosion and deformation behavior in these materials.
This award supports fundamental research to uncover these mechanisms of
degradation and strengthening. The investigation will also support the
development of the knowledge base and workforce for the nation's future. The
graduate and undergraduate students working on this research will be trained to
address future technological challenges in a multidisciplinary setting. The
outcomes of the research will help in developing teaching materials to support
the nation's first undergraduate program in corrosion engineering at the
University of Akron, and to support K-12 outreach activities to work with the
local communities and high school students to increase STEM
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Use of aluminum (Al) alloys is limited in many
applications due to their limited strength and deterioration of the corrosion
performance with efforts made to increase their strength. Therefore, developing
new Al alloys exhibiting ultra-high strength and excellent corrosion resistance
is of paramount importance. It is hypothesized that grain refinement &lt; 100 nm
and extended solid solubility of Vanadium (V) in Al can improve mechanical and
corrosion properties simultaneously. Nanocrystalline Al-V alloys with a wide
range of V content will be produced using high-energy ball milling. The alloys
will be exposed to various heat treatments for studying the thermal stability
and creating a wide range of grain size, V solid solubility, and intermetallic
distribution. The role of the microstructure on passivation, corrosion
initiation and propagation processes, and mechanical properties will be studied
using state-of-the-art material and surface characterization, electrochemical
and mechanical testing techniques. This investigation will advance scientific
understanding of the: 1) influence of the processing on the structure, corrosion
and mechanical behavior of the nanostructured Al-V alloys, 2) role of
nanocrystalline structure, intermetallics, and extended solid solubility of V on
the corrosion and mechanical properties, and 3) phenomena leading to the
simultaneous improvement in corrosion and mechanical properties. Fundamental
understanding developed in this research will lead to a theoretical framework
for the development of ultra-strong and corrosion resistant Al
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.