* 2131959
* 3rd Enterprise and Infrastructure Resilience Workshop
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Izabela Balicka, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 13,195.00

The engineering systems designed today are increasingly complex and dependent on
other surrounding systems. Due to this complexity and interdependence, it is
often impossible to predict all disruptive events that can be expected in the
systemâ€™s lifecycle, which may even lead to economically impactful disruptions
and critical failures. Resilience is a concept encompassing various disciplines,
and the creation of a resilient system will enable the system to recover from
unpredicted disturbances and adapt to these new conditions. Efforts to improve
resilience of chemical supply chains, chemical plants and energy networks will
benefit society in by providing techniques and approaches that are needed to
quickly respond to rapidly changing conditions. Knowledge from topics covered in
this workshop is expected to improve our economy's and society's ability to
recover from or adapt to large scale disasters, pandemics, stronger hurricanes,
and deep freeze from winter storms. Further, these discussions will emphasize
sustainability and safety throughout development. This virtual workshop will be
advertised to a diverse audience. The NSF funds will be used to support student,
post-doctoral fellow, and early-career researcher attendance, for those who
would not otherwise be able to afford the registration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Incorporating concepts from resilience engineering in the
design of systems such as chemical plants, chemical supply chains, and energy
networks would be very effective in minimizing undesired effects of unforeseen
disturbances yet requires expertise from various disciplines in science and
engineering such as chemical engineers, sustainability engineers,
mathematicians, and more. This workshop explores multifaceted resilience
strategies for the modern enterprise that address dependence on external
systems, such as the environment, stakeholders, shareholders, and society. The
workshop would bring together professionals from various fields that are working
in academia, industry, and government to have a wide range of perspectives. Such
a combination of attendees has the potential of fostering impactful discussions
and potential collaborations that would serve to further advance the field.
Topics to be integrated at this workshop include risk management, optimization,
operations research, sustainable engineering, critical infrastructure, process
supply chains, computational models, machine learning methods, multi-scale
systems analysis tools, and process safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.