* 2131894
* I-Corps:  Ultrasound-Activated Shape Memory Lengthening Device for Orthopedic Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Josiah Owusu-Danquah, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a medical device for the treatment of bone fractures and
deformities in pediatric patients with immature skeletons. Fifteen to thirty
percent of all fractures in the pediatric population occur close to the physeal
or growth plate. These pediatric patients have reported complications such as
the occurrence of uneven bone growth and the need for follow-up surgeries to
readjust devices as bones mature. The proposed technology is a growth-friendly
surgical treatment that allows bone union and subsequent lengthening during
child growth. The proposed technology is designed to provide adequate forces for
the initial stabilization of deformed bone parts, as well as adaptable forces
that are required to accommodate the natural tendency for bones to lengthen. The
proposed technology may be extended to fracture fixation in osteoporotic and
osteopenic bones where there are significant changes in the porosity, density,
and strength of bones over time. Applications of the proposed technology may
decrease recovery time and reduce health care costs for the treatment of bone
deformities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an ultrasound-activated shape memory lengthening device for the
treatment of bone fractures and deformities in pediatric patients with immature
skeletons. The proposed technology uses ultrasound heating to activate a shape
change in the biocompatible material, nitinol, in a non-invasive orthopedic
surgical device. Initial results with the proposed technology have demonstrated
that each increase in temperature from ultrasound causes a slight change in the
shape of a nitinol device, which may allow a bone to naturally lengthen without
force (for growth plate fractures) or force the bones to lengthen (for scoliosis
treatments) after the initial stages of the surgery. The ultrasound heating is
on the order of a few degrees – well within the range for activating the shape
change and still be accommodated by the tissues adjacent to the implant in the
body. The temperature-associated shape change and lengthening may be tailored to
suit different bone morphologies or patient requirements. In addition, the
proposed device may minimize or eliminate surgeries for readjustment and may
reduce complications by 15-50%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.