* 2131441
* CAREER: Towards High Strength Corrosion-Resistant Magnesium Alloys
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,07/31/2024
* Rajeev Gupta, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 477,259.00

In order to meet current technological, socio-economic and environmental
challenges, the need for lightweight, high strength and corrosion resistant
alloys is increasing continuously. Magnesium, the third most abundant metal, is
the lightest of all structural metals and therefore has attracted significant
attention for a number of industries including aerospace, automotive, and
infrastructure applications. Magnesium alloys also possess excellent
biocompatibility and support bone growth, and thus these alloys are also
considered candidate materials for biomedical applications. The use of magnesium
alloys in these applications, however, is limited but their poor resistance to
environmental degradation and low strength. The ability to mitigate the
corrosion of magnesium alloys while simultaneously increasing the strength could
revolutionize the automotive and aerospace industries, as well as the field of
biomaterials. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award
supports research to understand the fundamental mechanisms of both strength and
corrosion resistance in magnesium alloys, with the goal of providing
unprecedented control over the properties and making it possible to tailor these
materials for specific technical applications. The work also incorporates far-
reaching educational and outreach objectives to inspire students in grades K-12
to purse education in STEM disciplines; to recruit, retain and support
outstanding and diverse student groups at undergraduate and graduate levels; and
to provide students the opportunities for active learning, mentorship, and
scholarship related to this research areas. The outreach programs include
research opportunities to high school students, working with the high school
teachers to stimulate interests in STEM fields among young students and broaden
participation of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to the fundamental understanding of the properties of
metastable nanocrystalline magnesium (Mg) alloys and the mechanisms that can
enable high strength and corrosion resistant Mg alloys. Inspired by the
phenomenon causing the "stainless" behavior in stainless steels, an innovative
approach of improving mechanical strength and corrosion resistance of Mg alloys
will be undertaken. The specific objectives of this research are to: 1) produce
Mg alloys with a wide range of grain size, dispersion of intermetallics, and
solid solubility of the alloying element; 2) study the influence of the
nanocrystalline structure, the solid solubility of the metal alloying elements,
and intermetallics on corrosion and mechanical properties; 3) identify the key
mechanisms causing simultaneous improvement in corrosion and mechanical
properties of magnesium alloys, and develop a theoretical framework for
designing high strength corrosion resistant magnesium
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.