* 2131682
* High-precision optoelectronic heart-on-a-chip platforms for investigating human cardiac physiology and drug development
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Igor Efimov, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Heart disease is the leading cause of mortality worldwide. Development of heart-
on-a-chip technologies to quantify and evaluate the response of human heart to
external stimuli such as drugs is of critical importance for determining
effective treatments for heart disease. Limitations of current systems include
insufficient mimicking of organ-level physiology and analysis methods that
prevent continuous monitoring of heart behaviors over extended time periods.
This project seeks to address those challenges and greatly expand the landscape
for heart-on-a-chip technologies by developing automated systems integrating
heart slice culture components with arrays of sensors and actuators for chronic
on-chip assessing of organ-level cardiac physiology. This will enable study of
heart disease mechanisms and facilitate drug screening. The outcomes of this
project will broadly impact and transform the development of engineered
biomedical systems and organ-on-a-chip technologies for drug screening and
disease modeling applications. The project will provide cross-disciplinary
education and research training opportunities in bioelectronics and cardiac
physiology to undergraduate and graduate students, especially students from
underrepresented backgrounds. Outreach activities to educate K-12 students and
local communities will showcase heart-on-a-chip demonstration kits and summer
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop scalable
heart-on-a-chip platforms that allow automated culture of human organotypic
heart slices and real-time continuous on-chip multiparametric analysis of human
cardiac physiology at cellular and tissue levels and their applications in drug
screening, which lie outside of the capabilities of state-of-the-art biomedical
technologies. This project relies on two investigators with complementary
expertise in materials, microfabrication, bioelectronics, life sciences, and
cardiac physiology. Specific research foci include: (1) developing high-density
single-cell spatial resolution sensors and actuators for crosstalk-free mapping
and modulation of essential cardiac properties; (2) designing scalable automated
heart-on-a-chip platforms to support chronic culture of human organotypic heart
slices and continuous on-chip electrical and optical mapping of human cardiac
tissue physiology; (3) assessing the heart-on-a-chip systems by testing acute
and chronic cardiac drug responses and cardiotoxicity of anti-cancer drugs. This
project will create transformative heart-on-a-chip systems that will
fundamentally expand the experimental options, improve the fidelity, and
simplify the operation in investigating human heart disease and preclinical drug
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.