* 2131875
* Research-Oriented Learning Experiences (ROLE) Program
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Hilda Cecilia Contreras Aguirre, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2024
* USD 369,821.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of a Research-
Oriented Learning Experiences (ROLE) program at New Mexico State University
(NMSU) will provide Latino/a college students with the tools and knowledge
required to succeed in Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) majors in
particular, and in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM)-related degrees in general. ECE is a field of great relevance for our
modern society, and where Latinos/as are commonly underrepresented. This project
will encourage Latina undergraduates to participate in high-impact research-
oriented educational activities, where they will conduct research in
collaboration with Latino/a graduate students and ECE faculty, leading to
pathways to graduate programs. This project will also train Latino/a graduate
students to mentor a selected group of undergraduates, in order that they can
strengthen and refine their mentoring and leadership skills, which are very
useful in STEM-oriented academia and industry positions. The involvement in
research and mentoring activities will help increase students’ engagement and
leadership, realizing the importance and value of their engineering degree, and
consequently, develop a strong sense of belonging to their major and campus. The
benefits of ROLE are two directional; on the one hand, higher degree interest
and attainment will increase for Latina undergraduate students in ECE; and on
the other hand, Latino/a graduate students will feel better prepared to occupy
leadership positions within their field either in academia or the private
sector. By focusing on Latinos/as, a population relevant for the demographics of
NMSU, this research project will produce outcomes aligned with the mission of
the NSF’s Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) program, that are
scalable, sustainable, and applicable to various contexts, settings, and
demographics within Engineering and Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.