* 2131161
* I-Corps: Process for upcycling plastic waste into a building material
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Corinne Vita, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
alternative to carbon-intensive construction materials by upcycling waste
plastics into building products. The growing options of building products
composed of concrete and high-performing additives points to a demand for
lightweight, cast finish materials that can reduce the amount of support
structure needed. Given the widespread availability of waste plastics, there is
great potential for translating this waste into a resource for architectural
product that address this demand while meeting the customer's budget and design
goals. This composite material offers designers and builders seeking sustainable
materials lighter weight, finished materials that reduce cost of back-up
structure. The product also offers a higher percentage of recycled content than
available composite products and a lower environmental impact. The products'
appearance are customizable in terms of varying color, texture, and patterning.
Design-forward and sustainability-driven architects and builders may reach their
sustainability goals and project those values through recycled materials adapted
to their distinct design vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will
build upon a lineage of investigations into monolithic thermocasting of waste
thermoplastic polymers with aggregates to upcycle common plastic waste into a
rock-like material for architectural applications. Recycling waste polymers
typically involves extensive sorting, processing, and size-reduction, resulting
in homogenized products in which the recycled content is imperceptible. The
method of combining and thermocasting polymers with aggregates allows for a more
heterogeneous range of input sizes and polymer types to produce a stone-like
composite material. The process is relatively low-energy compared to that of
similarly scaled cast building components that require high pressures and/or
high temperatures and long periods of cooling in the molds. A highly calibrated
range of stone-like textures and surface patterns can be generated by modulating
process parameters. Further analysis of waste polymer blends and waste
aggregates is needed to align product specifications with regulatory criteria
for non-structural building materials such as strength, UV resistance, and flame
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.