* 2131541
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Legally Accountable Cryptographic Computing Systems (LAChS)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Daniel Jackson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 576,064.00

Society is having a hard time governing digital systems, and poorly governed
systems lead to gaps in society's willingness to trust these systems with
sensitive or high-priority tasks. Part of this challenge arises from the fact
that law and software address rules and behavior at very different levels of
detail. Laws must be general in their application and thus leave interpretation
and detailed requirements to the discretion of software developers. This leaves
software developers, who cannot be expected to be legal experts, having to
decide what is the proper technical design to comply with often-complex legal
rules. For example, when a privacy law such as the General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) requires that users have a right to delete their data, does
that mean all data, including backups? Without clear answers to such questions,
developers can’t be confident that they have successfully complied with legal
requirements, and then the public who uses these systems has little reason to
trust them. This project's novelties are to introduce design patterns that help
software developers assemble components reliably and purposefully, in the
knowledge that they meet policy requirements effectively and thus warrant the
confidence of the public. The project's impact benefits society in two ways.
First, by closing the abstraction gap between law and systems, methods and tools
developed in this project help software developers build systems that comply
with legal obligations. Second, the project furthers the development of a
research community in computer science and law. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LAChS
(pronounced "lox") project makes two contributions toward better understanding
of how to build accountable software systems. First, policy concepts allow
software developers to identify the functional aspects of systems they are
developing in order to assess whether the functions of the system are consistent
with the policy constraints associated with the computations they are
performing. Along with policy concepts, the project introduces policy standards
-- functional descriptions of the requirements of law. Together, policy concepts
and policy standards provide a software-engineering framework through which
developers can more easily build systems that are accountable to legal
requirements. Second, the project develops an integrated legal-technical
methodology for assessing the accountability properties of a system with respect
to a set of legal requirements. Prior work has generally sought to define
accountability solely as a property of information systems. The project shows
that a full understanding of accountability requires considering the properties
of both law and computing systems. In sum, this research is premised on the view
that, with respect to key societal priorities such as privacy, the law has
actually made considerable progress in defining key rights for the digital,
while underlying technology is still struggling to adapt to these challenges.
Thus the project aims to bring more clear abstraction, modularization and
composability to legal and technical methodologies in order to better meet these
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.