* 2131001
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: IIS-RI: Analytically-based frameworks for AI model verification and improvement in cyber-physical systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Sachin Shetty, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 60,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial intelligence (AI) has
been used to solve many complex engineering problems across diverse cyber-
physical systems (CPS) such as autonomous driving, smart manufacturing,
efficient production systems, and rapid diagnosis of system defects. However, it
is often difficult to understand the models learned by these AI techniques from
data, or to adapt them to similar problems in related domains. This project will
study how existing scientific knowledge, in the form of theoretical and
analytical models from physics and other disciplines, can be used to improve
data driven AI-based models. Existing scientific knowledge could be used to
sanity check that data-driven models agree with existing knowledge and to
generate synthetic data that can be used to help guide the models toward new
domains. Through deeper coupling of domain models with data-driven AI-based
models, the project will provide new tools for developing safe CPS and give
decision-makers assurance that an AI-based model is trustworthy and safe to
operate in a range of environments under limited training data and dynamic and
uncertain conditions. The project will also develop educational and recruiting
capacity to train engineers from groups historically underrepresented in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a set of novel
techniques that use scientific knowledge to certify the effectiveness of AI-
based models to meet desired performance metrics in a given operational
environment. The first step is to design evaluation frameworks that use
analytical models to quantify physical inconsistency exhibited by the pre-
trained AI models prior to using them in new operational environments. Models
with low physical inconsistency can be used without any change. Models with
higher physical inconsistency will either be fine-tuned with transfer learning-
style approaches that use small amounts of data obtained from the new
operational environment, or entirely retrained using the physics-based
analytical models to generate synthetic data relevant to the new environment.
These methods will be validated using a case study of predicting traffic flows
and capacity in partnership with the Tennessee Department of Transportation.
Together, the research activities will provide valuable tools to understand the
behavior of complex CPS from the point of view of both data and physical
properties, as well as projects and software to support curriculum modernization
at Tennessee State University College of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.