* 2131063
* RAPID: Measuring the Variable Composition and Chemistry of a Volcanic Plume Using a Distributed Sensor Network
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2021,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Crawford, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 116,083.00

This RAPID project supports the deployment of a network of low-cost sensors on
the Big Island of Hawaii to measure the production rate of sulfate aerosols
during the current eruption of the Kīlauea volcano. Sulfate aerosols are of
particular interest due to their role as an air pollutant at ground level that
causes respiratory health effects and their role in the upper atmosphere as
having a potential cooling impact on climate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A network of
low-cost sensors at ground level around the Kīlauea volcano will measure the
chemical conversion rates of primary gases, such as sulfur dioxide, to secondary
air pollutants, such as sulfate aerosols, and assess how these rates vary under
different atmospheric conditions (e.g., humidity, temperature, sunlight, cloudy
vs. clear air). This research also will demonstrate the feasibility of using
low-cost sensors as part of monitoring and emergency response efforts during
extreme air quality events, such as wildfires. The uncertainty about the
duration of the volcanic eruption at Kīlauea requires that this work be
supported through a RAPID so that the research can be conducted while the
eruption is ongoing. The results of this study will have implications for human
health, air quality policy and emissions regulation, and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.