* 2131111
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Computational Modeling and Simulation Center 2021-2025
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Satish Rao, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2025
* USD 6,550,308.00

The Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) is supported by
the National Science Foundation (NSF) as a distributed, multi-user national
facility to provide the natural hazards engineering research community with
access to research infrastructure that includes earthquake and wind engineering
experimental facilities, cyberinfrastructure (CI), computational modeling and
simulation tools, high performance computing resources, and research data, as
well as education and community outreach activities. Originally funded under
program solicitations NSF 14-605 and NSF 15-598, NHERI has operated since 2015
through separate, but coordinated, five-year research infrastructure awards for
a Network Coordination Office, CI, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center
(SimCenter), and Experimental Facilities, including a post-disaster, rapid
response research facility. This award will renew the SimCenter component of
NHERI at the University of California, Berkeley, from October 1, 2021, to
September 30, 2025, along with its ten partner institutions: Georgia State
University, Johns Hopkins University, Stanford University, University of
California at Los Angeles, University of California at San Diego, University of
Delaware, University of Michigan, University of Notre Dame, University of
Southern California, and University of Washington. The SimCenter’s mission is to
provide next generation computational modeling and simulation software tools,
user support, and educational materials for natural hazards engineering research
to simulate the impact of natural hazards, such as earthquakes and windstorms,
on buildings, transportation and lifeline systems, and communities. The
SimCenter’s software development is motivated by three grand challenges for
natural hazards engineering that entail (1) quantifying the damaging
characteristics of earthquakes, hurricanes, and other hazards; (2) assessing the
physical and social vulnerabilities of civil infrastructure and communities
exposed to hazards; and (3) creating technologies and engineering tools to
design, construct, retrofit, and operate a multi-hazard resilient and
sustainable infrastructure for the nation. The SimCenter will address these
challenges through the development of an extensible library of software
components and computational workflows that foster multi-disciplinary research
collaboration to simulate the impact of natural hazards on communities with
unprecedented scale, complexity, and resolution. Education and outreach
activities, including a researcher in residence program for visiting faculty,
post doctoral scholars, and students; biennial meetings for developers and
current and potential users; seminars; workshops; software training bootcamps;
community-engaged working groups; and user support, will empower a diverse and
collaborative workforce to tackle challenges that can inform decision making on
planning, design, and deployment of mitigation strategies to create more
resilient communities. This award will contribute to NSF's role in the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) and the National Windstorm Impact
Reduction Program (NWIRP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SimCenter’s software
framework is a robust, open-source, extensible, and cloud-based system that will
utilize the high-performance computing (HPC) and data management tools provided
by NHERI’s DesignSafe CI web portal (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org). The
SimCenter’s computational tools will be designed to integrate modeling and
simulation from the source of a hazard through to assessment of its impact and
consequences across multiple scales, e.g., from detailed assessment of damage
and repair of individual buildings due to a hurricane to regional impacts on
recovery of communities. The software will enable modeling of seismic, wind, and
hydrodynamic actions, simulating linear and nonlinear dynamic response to these
actions, assessing performance, and analyzing networks. The software framework
will aid analysis throughout the modeling and simulation process with advanced
tools for workflow management, machine-learning-assisted tools for modeling and
inventory development, statistical optimization tools for surrogate model
development and calibration, and methods for uncertainty quantification. Testbed
studies of regional natural hazard scenarios will drive development by
identifying key research needs and integrating needed tools. Test data, refined
numerical simulations, and user experiences will be used to build skills and
confidence in high-resolution computational models. Desktop application
interfaces will provide convenient user control to create computational
workflows that combine underlying software components and databases. The
software tools will enable unparalleled integration and interoperability of
applications empowering multi-disciplinary research teams to collaboratively
address the three grand challenges using the best HPC available. Information
about the SimCenter research and learning tools is available on the SimCenter
page on the NHERI web portal (https://simcenter.designsafe-
ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.