* 2131164
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: SaTC: Privacy Preserving Models Leveraging Mobility Data for Public Health
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Arash Mahyari, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,993.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of health applications on
mobile devices is becoming increasingly popular. With that popularity comes a
desire to use the mobility data that is generated for various public health
purposes, such as contact tracing during COVID-19. It is also used in more
complex applications that use machine learning to infer health risks. On one
hand, these models promise a transformative impact on targeted public health
interventions. On the other hand, results from these models could compromise the
privacy of an individual’s health status without directly using health data.
Even when the mobility data is de-identified, privacy can be compromised when
physical observations of persons’ locations augment the models’ results. People
who are considered visible minorities are particularly vulnerable if they come
from groups with a disproportionate prevalence of a certain disease. There are
ways to adjust privacy techniques that can help mitigate privacy risks, however,
they could compromise the accuracy of the models. There is a need for solutions
that can yield effective public health models while preserving privacy. Results
from this project will be the development of infection spread models that can do
just that – give accurate place-based data without compromising privacy for
health related applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
establish and understanding of effective approaches for co-designing privacy and
security techniques with infection spread modeling. These privacy protection
approaches would account for potential compromise through physical observations
in combination with queries to the models. We will also produce a synthetic
population for Northwest Florida designed for efficient updates through data
assimilation. Such synthetic-data-driven models have the potential to yield
accurate results while preserving privacy. The impact on research and education
will be seen in the developing of research capacity at FAMU as well as through
interdisciplinary research tasks to be conducted by undergraduate students that
are traditionally underrepresented in computing. Results from this project will
help expand the pathways into computing fields and other interdisciplinary
careers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.