* 2131533
* Collaborative Research: DASS: Agent Based Modeling at the Boundary of Law and Software
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Tschantz, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 205,000.00

This project studies how agent-based models (ABMs) of social contexts can
improve the design and regulation of accountable software systems. Agent-based
modeling is a social scientific research method that involves bottom-up modeling
of complex systems and computationally determining their emergent properties by
running simulations. The investigators use ABMs to model elements of the social
and regulatory environment in which a software system operates. The projectâ€™s
novelties are due to its interdisciplinary synthesis, applying ABMs from social
sciences to software specification and automated testing, as done in computer
science, to guide the crafting and enforcement of technology regulations, a
legal concern. The project's impacts are informing public policy and teaching as
well as providing an open-source software toolkit for the automated testing of
software systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software, regulation, and society
interact with unpredictable and sometimes undesirable dynamic feedback effects.
This project explores how ABMs and scientific simulation can address the gap
between legal requirements and software design by helping regulators, domain
experts, software designers, and other stakeholders assess the potential
societal implications of particular software and regulatory systems. The
investigators use ABMs for three tasks: (1) creating software specifications
using models of regulations and the social environment in which software
operates, (2) testing software systems for compliance using simulations of their
social impact, and (3) designing regulations that reflect these new tools. The
project develops these general methods for improving the design of accountable
software systems and advancing the understanding of the legal context of
software design through the exploration of two specific domains: the effects of
online advertising systems on housing segregation and the tradeoffs between
privacy and accuracy in contact tracing for infectious-disease
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.