* 2131504
* Community Responsive Algorithms for Social Accountability (CRASA)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 765,857.00

The Community Responsive Algorithms for Social Accountability (CRASA) project
will establish a model for accountability that can be applied across a
comprehensive range of algorithms being used in public policy in various
contexts. The project’s goals will be achieved through a three-year community-
based participatory research program focusing on Harris County, Texas,
incorporating input from stakeholders in local government, the legal community,
and industry. Relying on input from community stakeholders, this project will
develop an algorithm-accountability benchmark (AAB) that will be applied to a
variety of public policy algorithms used by governments, advocacy groups, and
corporations for design and evaluation. In co-operation with community partners,
CRASA will promote broad application of this benchmark approach in the public
policy sphere. The development and explication of specific standards through the
AAB will provide a clear and reproducible touchstone for development,
evaluation, and implementation of algorithms in public policy. CRASA will also
contribute to education and workforce development by producing a set of
educational materials on the use of algorithms that can be easily accessed by
legal professionals and the general public; by developing a multidisciplinary
undergraduate/graduate course for students on the ethics of artificial
intelligence; and, by training the next generation of scholars interested in
responsive and transparent algorithms for use in public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of algorithms in public policy has expanded
dramatically in recent decades. They currently play an active part in informing
policymakers in their decisions related to criminal justice, public education,
the allocation of public resources, and even national defense strategy. However,
standards of accountability reflecting current legal obligations and societal
concerns have lagged far behind their extensive use and influence. CRASA’s
community-based research strategy will answer questions about how to make the
use of algorithms more accountable, and, specifically, how benchmarks of
accountability can be established for these algorithms that will engender
legitimacy and public trust. The project’s overall research strategy involves
five objectives: Objective 1 – collect needed information through interviews
with stakeholders representing a wide variety of interests in the application of
public policy algorithms and establish a community advisory board that meets
regularly to guide and evaluate the research; Objective 2 – conduct a
comprehensive review of the quickly evolving legal precedents and academic
proposals being set forth for algorithm regulation; Objective 3 – design an
algorithm-accountability benchmark (AAB) that can be applied across policy areas
to evaluate and compare algorithms in terms of their accountability standards;
Objective 4 – conduct behavioral experiments, both within the legal community
and the general public, to evaluate public trust and understanding of the AAB;
and Objective 5 – develop a software scoring toolkit that will provide the AAB
score for any software and demonstrate its use in two application domains:
criminal risk estimation and facial recognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.