* 2131175
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: CPS: Develop Scalable and Reliable Deep Learning-driven Embedded Control Applied in Renewable Energy Integration
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Letu Qingge, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 134,320.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently deep learning has
succeeded mainly in image processing, language processing fields. However, in
the real-time control field, deep learning has just started to challenge the
dominant role of proportional-integral-derivative controllers in industrial
applications, e.g., real-time control of power converters for renewable energy
integration. Many urgent problems including training difficulty, the
implementation challenges on embedded devices, are curbing deep learning from
the development and implementation in embedded control settings. To overcome
these difficulties, this project aims to develop novel scalable training
algorithms and novel deep neural network controller architectures to fit the
strict requirement of embedded control settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
interdisciplinary project will develop scalable and reliable deep learning-
driven embedded control of power converters in real-time for integrating
renewable energy such as solar power. Specifically, this project aims (a) to
develop scalable, parallel, fast training algorithms for high sampling
frequency, and long-time duration trajectory learning using an high performance
computing or cloud platform that will significantly reduce training time from
several days, even weeks to several hours, (b) to develop novel deep neural
network architectures that can be implemented in embedded devices, e.g., Digital
Signal Processors / Field-programmable Gate Arrays without compromising the
neural network generalizability and extra computing power and storage
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build and enhance
interdisciplinary and inter-institution collaborations between two Minority
Serving Institutions: Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville and North Carolina
A&amp;T State University. The project will attract, retain, and educate more
minorities particularly Hispanic, African-American, and female students to
attend Ph.D. programs. The developed new training algorithm and new
architectures for embedded control can be extended to other fields, e.g.,
bioinformatics, image, robotics, etc. The developed technologies will result in
deep learning-driven intelligent control for grid integration of renewable
resources and help solve the urgent need to integrate more renewable energy into
the power grid in the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
repository (data, code, simulations, etc.) generated from the project will be
deposited with the digital repository at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville and
North Carolina A&amp;T State University and ensure that the broader computer
science and sustainable energy research community have long-term access for a
minimum of three years prescribed by the National Science Foundation. Public-use
data files can be accessed directly through the project websites (
https://sites.google.com/view/dr-xingang-fu/home and
https://sites.google.com/view/letuqingge/home ) via the digital repository on
both campuses. Restricted-use data files are distributed after removing
potentially identifying information that would significantly impair the analytic
potential of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.