* 2131156
* CISE-MSI: RCBPP-RF: SHF: Towards Efficient, Reliable, and Secure Chaotic Communications in Wearable Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Mehrdad Aliasgari, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 297,448.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable and portable sensors are
finding their way into everyday life, not only as tracking devices but as
diagnostic and treatment devices. Wearable wireless devices require efficient
secure communication solutions that meet the resource-limited requirements of
such devices. To facilitate secure communications for low-power, implantable,
portable, or wearable sensors, the encryption process must be integrated
directly with the sensorâ€™s underlying hardware. Chaotic circuits can be used to
secure communication of resource-limited devices. Chaotic systems are highly
complex, unpredictable, and sensitive to their initial condition. However, they
can be used to generate predictable responses if certain requirements are met.
Chaos can be utilized to hide data under noise, thus providing data
confidentiality if used in wireless communication. On the other hand,
applications of chaos in secure wireless communication have been limited to
laboratory research. Lack of solutions that maintain both ends of communication
(transmitter and receiver) synchronized in real-world applications has limited
the use of chaotic communication to research
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To eliminate these issues and provide an
efficient, reliable, and secure on-chip chaotic ciphering transmitter and
receiver, this research aims to accomplish the following objectives. Phase 1:
Delivering a chaotic low-power transmitter and receiver capable of real-time
ciphering of sensory signals. Phase 2: Securing the underlying hardware of
chaotic communication against piracy and duplication by adopting a provably
secure logic locking framework specifically designed for such systems. Phase 3:
Developing efficient smart and machine learning algorithms to provide a dynamic
matching of the transmitted and received signal. Phase 4: IC prototyping and
implementing the design in the physical form to ensure the functionality of the
design. This research brings researchers from the Department of Electrical
Engineering and Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science in
California State University Long Beach to provide a logic locked transmitter and
receiver that can code and decode the signal using chaos in an efficient and
reliable manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The financial burden of healthcare has
been preventing many, most among minorities and underrepresented groups from
monitoring their medical condition and seeking treatment. Wearable technology
has seen an unprecedented increase in adoption in the last decade and can reduce
the cost of healthcare. It can provide accessible care if security is
implemented on devices at the design. If such devices are designed with
efficient security, the public confidence, and subsequently their adoption, will
increase. California State University, Long Beach is a minority serving
institute ranked number four for diversity among United States colleges. By
engaging diverse students in designing, implementing, and testing secure
solutions for wearable health devices, this project aims to expand participation
in computing and communication research. Furthermore, secure wearable devices
can enhance trust and adoption of such health-monitoring devices and increase
access to affordable healthcare and improve health
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general progress of the projects, results, and
datasets will be shared publicly through the website and Git repository. The
obtained results from this research will be disseminated in the form of
publications, technical presentations, design reports, educational materials,
dataset, and source code, and will be hosted publicly for the length of this
project and beyond, on the investigator's website and Git
repository.&lt;br/&gt;The project Git repository:
https://github.com/ahedaya/csulb_nsf_cise_msi&lt;br/&gt;The project Website:
https://avahedayatipour.com/research/hardwaresecurity&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.