* 2131582
* Engineering an inorganic carbon highway to improve C3 photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Maureen Hanson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 798,040.00

Photosynthesis remains a target for genetic engineering that exhibits great
potential for enhancing crop yield, in addition to its important role in
reducing atmospheric carbon dioxide. Photosynthesis provides most of the worldâ€™s
biomass through carbon fixation. By learning how to provide increased
bicarbonate to the carbon-fixing enzyme Rubisco in a model plant, technology is
being developed that can be applied to crop plants. This project uses synthetic
biology approaches to increase bicarbonate supply to Rubisco, and consequently
enhance photosynthesis, in a model plant. Trainees are engaged in
multidisciplinary projects involving genetics, biochemistry, and molecular
biology. Undergraduates from diverse groups are gaining research experience
during the academic year and summer months. A new effort to educate the public
is occurring through instructive videos on a website and Youtube channel.
Collaboration with a Public Broadcasting Service station is planned to create a
professional video explaining the use of synthetic biology to enhance
photosynthesis and the role of plants in removing carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere. The video is to be made available through PBS Learning Media for
K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C3 crop plants, which constitute
approximately 85 percent of plants, including food crops like soybean and wheat,
lack the ability to concentrate carbon dioxide near Rubisco. Synthesis of a
carbon-concentrating mechanism (CCM) in crop plants, based on ones that exist in
cyanobacteria and algae, has the potential to substantially increase yields.
Installation of a microcompartment-based CCM requires not only the actual
construction of the microcompartment within the chloroplast, but also the
provision of additional bicarbonate that can be converted into carbon dioxide.
In order to assess whether bicarbonate transporters from microorganisms can
function in the chloroplast, their encoding genes are being transformed into a
mutant background in which chloroplast carbonic anhydrase has been removed. The
absence of carbonic anhydrase in the mutant causes an impaired, bicarbonate-
deficient, phenotype that is predicted to be rescued by a functional bicarbonate
transporter. The transformed plants are being analyzed not only for the rescue
of the bicarbonate-requiring phenotype, but also for effects on photosynthesis,
growth, reactive oxygen species, stromal pH, and fatty acid synthesis. In
addition to providing an essential step in the transformative engineering of C3
plants with carbon-concentrating mechanisms, modeling predicts that yield can be
enhanced by the mere incorporation of inorganic carbon pumps into chloroplasts,
even before a full microcompartment-based CCM is
installed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.