* 2131801
* I-Corps: Algorithm to detect stroke during cardiovascular surgery and reduce the time to effective clinical intervention
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Parthasarathy Thirumala, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to detect
stroke during surgery and reduce the time to effective clinical interventions.
Available approved, lifesaving, mechanical clot removal therapy is not routinely
administered for stroke due to delays in detection. This delay has prompted the
recommendation of neuromonitoring to detect strokes. Currently, in high-risk
cardiovascular surgery, a trained neurologist visually monitors
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals continuously and applies empirical criteria
to detect cerebral ischemia and stroke. However, such visual monitoring can be
mentally demanding, variable in quality, and limiting in scalability for the
neurologist who monitors many surgeries. Despite the availability of EEG
devices, they are not universally available at all medical institutions. There
is a clear need for scalable solutions that can support the neurologist to
improve stroke detection and the administration of timely lifesaving therapies.
Successful development of this project may translate to widespread adoption of
neuromonitoring in surgery for not only stroke but spinal cord and peripheral
nerve injuries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
software system that can display intraoperative electroencephalogram (EEG)
signals and use machine learning (ML) to detect stroke and alert the monitoring
neurologist in real-time. An artificial intelligence software system with ML
capabilities can meaningfully process massive sets of data quickly, accurately,
and symbiotically work alongside clinicians. The system relies on ML models
using EEG, and clinical and anesthesia data collected during carotid
endarterectomy (CEA). The initial ML models can also be used to detect ischemia,
a precursor of stroke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.