* 2131786
* Broadening Participation: 2021 MPS Workshop for Young Investigators
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Yoonseok Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 32,527.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at hosting a virtual
workshop for new and future principal investigators (PIs) in the NSF Directorate
for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS). Due to the unexpected nature of
the COVID-19 restrictions, the two full-day workshop is planned as an online
event on October 11 – 12, 2021. Since the first workshop in 2014, the main goal
of the workshop has been in two-fold: (1) to provide PIs’ who have just received
their first awards or who are attempting to obtain funding from the MPS programs
with valuable information and advice on the policies, procedures, and
opportunities available at NSF, with an emphasis on recruiting attendees from
underrepresented minority groups, and (2) to train a pool of future reviewers
for NSF in the designated group. The workshop targets involvement of a diverse
pool of new and potential MPS PIs to enhance their successful interactions with
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project is for a
workshop for a diverse pool of new and future principal investigators (PIs) in
the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS). The Workshop
will be conducted through an online platform. The workshop program is composed
of two main parts: informational presentations by NSF Program Directors and
invited speakers and mock panel review activities. The topics of presentations
are designed to provide the new and future investigators with information about
the NSF process. Specific topics will include merit review process, funding
opportunities in MPS and NSF policies and procedures. Over two days, the
participants will be engaged in the activities emulating the full processes of
panel review in breakout sessions guided by Program Directors. The project uses
an assessment planned to track the participants and to evaluate the efficacy of
the workshop training through the success rate in securing funding and
participation in the review process of the
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.