* 2131496
* Collaborative Research: DASS:  A Socio-Technical Framework for Handling Digital Evidence with  Security and Privacy Assurances
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Thomas Kadri, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 180,487.00

The ever-increasing use of digital devices in society is creating mounting
privacy risks. Above all, complementary desires from technology companies and
law enforcement to harness the vast troves of data stored on our devices are
complicating privacy interests in seclusion, autonomy, and anonymity. Though
data privacy has received significant attention from both technological and
legal angles, the two scholarly perspectives rarely combine to expose the
interdisciplinary dependencies and synergies inherent in this topic of growing
significance to our society. Using the context of digital evidence collection,
this project studies legal and technical angles to privacy and security
concerns. From the technical side, the investigators study how the data can be
searched in a more targeted fashion and how data can be kept from unauthorized
alteration. From the legal side, new technical capabilities will motivate new
scholarship on related topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rise of digital
evidence in criminal proceedings triggers two principal issues guiding this
project. First, under the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution, judges often
limit device searches to specific data relevant to the investigation, despite
the complication that various types of data may be intermixed. Second, once law
enforcement has collected digital evidence, they must guard against tampering
and prevent privacy invasions by both “inside” and “outside” hackers. This
project addresses these two sets of challenges through the following
contributions: 1) Developing software that responds to legal directives
(including warrant-based and consent-based restrictions governing the scope of
digital searches) and retrieves only relevant evidence from a device containing
intermingled data, using a combination of metadata-based analysis and natural
language processing (NLP) techniques; 2) Addressing the ambiguity in natural
language directives and the accuracy limitations of automatic classification,
while considering legal and social consequences of violating privacy and
conducting unauthorized searches; 3) Providing security mechanisms that preserve
data confidentiality and detect data tampering; 4) Using blockchain technology
to create immutable logs of all accesses to, and modification of, data stored by
law enforcement; and 5) Further developing and applying formal verification
techniques that reason about the security of the protocols implemented. In
addition to enhancing digital forensics, the work is applicable to data
practices in both government and industry, particularly in dealing with
heterogeneous data and separating and securing data in contexts far beyond
criminal proceedings. The project impacts several existing and new classes in
terms of curriculum development, cutting across digital forensics, security, and
data sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.