* 2131099
* EAGER: Mechanism of toxin activation and function in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Jodi Camberg, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 288,550.00

All biological organisms are exposed to environmental stress conditions, which
lead to physiological responses at the cellular level. In bacteria,
environmental stress can cause the production of proteins that alter metabolism,
the production and maintenance of cellular components, growth, and
survivability. A class of proteins comprising this physiological response to
stress in bacteria includes toxin-antitoxin (TA) systems. These TA systems are
produced, activated, and inactivated in the bacterial cell to control the toxin
activity and modify the cellular response to stress. TA systems have also been
implicated in biofilm formation, colonization, virulence, and antibiotic
tolerance with implications in environment and health. However, our
understanding of how TA systems are regulated is limited. Overcoming this
barrier would allow for the development of new strategies to control TA system
activity, thereby targeting the TA-related functions, such as tolerance to
antibiotics or biofilm development. This work will utilize an integrated
genetic, structural, biochemical and biophysical approach to study these
important biological regulatory systems. A second outcome of this work will be a
detailed understanding of how proteins, including degradative enzymes, destroy
TA system components. More broadly, this project will support the training of
students in this advanced, multidisciplinary field, and prepare them for a
future career at the forefront of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The model TA system of MqsRA includes
the ribonuclease toxin, MqsR, and its cognate antitoxin, MqsA. MqsR activation
leads to cleavage of messenger RNAs at specific sequence sites. Acting as a
regulatory switch, TA system activity is elicited by proteolysis of the
inhibitory antitoxin, thus altering the antitoxin-toxin ratio and allowing the
free toxin to become active. These studies will elucidate the recognition
determinants for degradation of MqsA by two cellular proteases that enable MqsR
activation. Further, this work will determine the mechanism of protease-
regulated activation of toxin in live cells and evaluate roles of key stress-
induced chaperones in modifying MqsA susceptibility. This approach will
incorporate multidisciplinary strategies and techniques to discover the
biochemical, molecular, and cellular determinants for TA system regulation to
inform survival strategies in bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.