* 2131143
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Realizing Enhanced Authentication in the Mobile Era
* CSE,CNS
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Jie Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 11/30/2024
* USD 325,000.00

Mobile devices are an integral part of our lives, but can pose serious security
and privacy threats, such unauthorized access to security-sensitive user data
and services. This project explores human physiology to discover new biometrics
of the human speech production system to enhance user authentication on mobile
devices. These novel biometrics are captured and inferred using a variety of
sensors that are present on mobile devices. The project also investigates the
feasibility to deploy the discovered biometrics on mobile devices to improve
security. The work leads to a new type of practically deployable biometric
traits for mobile authentication. The outcomes of this project can be adopted by
industry and could have a societal impact on facilitating a variety of security-
sensitive mobile services and applications. The research activities are
integrated into the Florida State University's Computer Science education
program and include curriculum development, involvement of underrepresented
minorities in computing, and K-12 educational
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the sensing capabilities of
mobile devices to capture new biometrics of users for enhanced mobile
authentication. The work innovates by targeting physiological and behavioral
characteristics of the human speech production system, such as bone-conducted
vibration and articulatory gestures, for mobile device user authentication. The
project develops novel sensing techniques to capture the discovered biometrics,
and systematically investigates the practicalities of implementing the novel
biometrics on mobile devices in terms of hardware and context variability.
Understanding the impact of device hardware and context variability helps
strengthen the discovered biometric traits, by adapting them to drifts in
contexts and behaviors. The discovered biometrics are evaluated and integrated
with existing mobile authentication methods under a multimodal and multifactor
authentication framework. The outcomes of this research can deepen our
understanding of mobile devices authentication by considering human speech
signals and the sensing capabilities of mobile
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.