* 2131853
* RII Track-4:NSF: Amplification of drought effects on vegetation by anthropogenic warming
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Matthew Dannenberg, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 01/31/2024
* USD 220,480.00

Droughts are among the world’s costliest natural disasters, causing severe
damage to both social and ecological systems. Human-caused warming increases the
“dryness” of the atmosphere and, all other things being equal, increases
evaporation rates from plant and soil surfaces, which in turn increases the loss
of soil moisture and worsens naturally occurring precipitation deficits. Drought
reduces the photosynthesis and productivity of plants, including in both natural
and agricultural ecosystems, but the extent to which human-caused ecological
change has amplified the effects of drought on plant productivity still remains
unclear. This EPSCoR RII Track-4:NSF Fellowship will combine state-of-the-art
satellite and ground-based plant observations with observed and modeled climate
data to examine how much the past century of climate change has worsened drought
effects on plants, focusing specifically on the relative contributions of
natural- vs. human-caused effects during two recent severe droughts: the
2012-2015 California drought and the 2012 Midwest drought. The project will
improve our understanding of the extent to which the effects of drought on
Earth’s ecosystems are amplified by climate change, and it will also improve
educational outcomes through training of a postdoctoral researcher and
development of new climate change-related laboratory exercises for courses at
the University of Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Droughts are among the world’s
costliest natural disasters, causing severe damage to both social and ecological
systems. Anthropogenic warming exacerbates natural precipitation deficits
through heat-induced increases in evaporative demand, which further dries soils
and stresses vegetation. Anthropogenic increases in the frequency and severity
of droughts likely exert large, but still poorly constrained, impacts on
ecosystem function, including photosynthesis and growth of plants (“primary
production”). While drought clearly reduces vegetation health and primary
production, the relative contributions of natural variability and anthropogenic
forcing remain unknown. Using the severe 2012-2015 California and 2012 Midwest
droughts as case studies, this project will quantify the proportion of drought-
induced primary production loss that was directly attributable to anthropogenic
climate change, including attribution to specific climatic drivers (temperature,
vapor pressure deficit, soil moisture, and solar radiation). The primary
hypothesis of this proposal is that anthropogenic contributions to drought-
induced loss of primary production were even greater than anthropogenic
contributions to loss of soil moisture due to the direct negative effects of
higher temperatures and evaporative demand on stomatal conductance and
photosynthesis. This hypothesis will be tested using state-of-the-art remote
sensing techniques (e.g., solar-induced chlorophyll fluorescence) and climate
change attribution methods. The ultimate goal of this research is to develop an
empirical “global change ecology” attribution framework that will be portable to
other ecological systems and other impacts of climate change, including follow-
up work focused on the effects of climate change on nationwide changes in
primary production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.