* 2131806
* Investigations Into Dynamic DNA Recognition and Processing During Eukaryotic Nucleotide Excision Repair
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Benjamin Garcia, Baylor University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,108,750.00

DNA undergoes continuous damage from endogenous and environmental sources.
Unrepaired DNA damage interferes with cellular functions such as replication and
transcription, often resulting in mutations and genome instability. Nucleotide
excision repair (NER) is a major DNA repair pathway that removes structurally
diverse lesions caused by UV, fuel combustion, industrial pollutants, cigarette
smoke, etc. in DNA. Defects in NER can cause hyper-UV sensitivity and increase
mutations that lead to diseases including cancers in humans. This project aims
to obtain detailed molecular and structural understanding of critical steps in
the initiation of NER. Technical innovations in this project will be applicable
to many other systems involving complex and dynamic protein-DNA interactions.
The research will provide cross-disciplinary training opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate researchers and enhance the biomedical research
environment at Baylor University through close collaboration with the University
of Pennsylvania medical school. Outreach activities will include participation
in an Advanced Instrumentation Workshop at Baylor, held for faculty and students
from local colleges/universities with limited access to high-level
instrumentation; development of a research-based biology curriculum ‘Guardians
of the Genome’ in collaboration with a high school in Texas, and public
demonstrations through the NSF-funded ‘Portal to the Public’ program at Baylor’s
Mayborn Museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NER is an essential genome maintenance
mechanism whose molecular machinery is conserved in all eukaryotes ranging from
yeast to humans. Though much is known about the biochemical steps of NER, little
is known at the structural level due to challenges in preparing key multiprotein
complexes (e.g., TFIIH and Rad4 (yeast homolog of mammalian XPC)) on suitable
NER lesions for structural studies. Building on the team’s prior successes and
by combining cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM), cross-linking/mass spectrometry
(XL-MS), and fluorescence lifetime (FLT)-based conformational analyses as well
as yeast genetics, this project aims at comprehensive understanding of NER
initiation through dynamic 3-D views of the complex structures and their
transitions. Specifically, the project will address: (1) How TFIIH-Rad4 first
starts unwinding the DNA on bona fide NER lesions, (2) How holoTFIIH is
activated for NER by disengaging the transcription-specific TFIIK kinase module,
and (3) How the TFIIH-Rad4 complex transitions to lesion verification stage.
This research using the yeast system will also open new doors to understanding
various NER-linked phenotypes in humans and shed light on how NER may be
modulated in vivo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Genetic Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.