* 2131373
* STTR Phase I:  Enhancing wind-energy industry competitiveness using self-powered blade monitoring sensors
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Soobum Lee, ACTIVECHARGE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project seeks to provide an integrated monitoring solution for
wind turbine blades. Continuous and reliable monitoring within the blade has
been a challenge, primarily due to the lack of reliable energy for the wireless
sensor (e.g., batteries need to be replaced and can be expensive and
logistically difficult to replace inside the blade and power lines inside the
blade are hard to install and require frequent maintenance). The proposed
solution seeks to overcome current technical challenges by providing a long-
lasting, maintenance-free, self-powered, integrated solution for wind turbine
blade monitoring and analytics. If successfully commercialized, the solution can
be deployed for autonomous sensing and smart maintenance scheduling based on big
data analysis. This project may contribute to significantly and permanently
reducing existing blade monitoring costs, decreasing downtime for manual
monitoring and battery changes and reducing catastrophic failures with better
monitoring information. By reducing the operational costs, the solution may make
large-scale wind energy more competitive, reducing the worldâ€™s dependence on
environmentally-harmful sources of energy. In addition, the technology may
reduce the risk of injury to humans as compared to current operational
processes, making wind energy safer to operate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR
Phase I project proposes to develop an integrated, self-powering sensor node for
wind turbine blade monitoring by overcoming the following technical hurdles:
lack of reliable energy for the sensor/transmitter system deep inside the blade,
logistical challenges to replacing batteries inside the blade for a large number
of sensors at different intervals, and difficulites with long wire-runs inside
the blade as those are hard to install and require frequent maintenance. To
handle these technical hurdles, this project aims to prototype an integrated,
self-powered, wireless sensor node and perform field tests. This project plans
to: (1) develop a mechanism for the harvester module that reliably produces
electrical voltage and power regardless of the blade rotational speed, (2)
develop a power management circuit with autonomous sleep/wakeup and without
impedance tracking to increase charging efficiency, and (3) perform indoor and
in-field test for verification of power harvesting and data transmission
performance. This technolology seeks to address the fundamental weaknesses of
vibration energy harvesters while integrating various components (e.g., energy
harvester, sensor, transmitter, receiver, and analytics software) for an
optimized solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.