* 2131079
* Building reconfigurable photonic materials and devices by light-guided self-assembly of nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Zijie Yan, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 07/31/2024
* USD 457,795.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An attractive prospect of
nanoscience is the ability to build novel electronic and photonic materials with
nanoscale building blocks. Chemically synthesized nanoparticles with well-
controlled size and shape allow one to tailor the properties of a material or
structure. Being able to reassemble nanoparticles into new shapes will allow
scientists and engineers to build multifunctional materials that can respond to
stimuli. Reconfigurable assembly is common in living systems but still rare in
artificial nanomaterials. For example, the lens of an eye changes to adjust
focus or the iris contracts in the presence of bright light. However, current
approaches for the assembly of nanoparticles mostly lead to structures with
fixed size and shape. This project addresses this need by using light to
assemble nanoparticles into reconfigurable shapes in a controlled manner. This
will be achieved by shaping a laser beam into structured optical fields and
studying interactions with nanoparticles. The research team will measure the
optical, electronic, and mechanical properties of nanoparticle arrays, aiming to
demonstrate new applications such as light-driven nanomotors and biosensors. The
project will also enable a new remote-access education platform named
“iPhotons”, an internet-accessible Platform for Holographic Optical Tweezers and
Optical Nanomaterial Simulations. The iPhotons platform resembles the research
system, so many techniques derived from the research activity can be transferred
to this platform. Undergraduate and graduate researchers, especially those from
underrepresented groups in STEM, are supported to develop the research
techniques, build the iPhotons, and assist remote users. Therefore, the iPhotons
benefits not only university researchers, but also K-12 students and the public
through existing outreach programs. Together, this project advances fundamental
sciences in materials and photonics, and promotes teaching, training, and
learning to a wide range of people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds reconfigurable photonic
materials and devices by light-guided assembly of colloidal nanoparticles, and
further reveals their collective properties and potential applications. The
research addresses a fundamental challenge in nanoscience, which is the
reconfigurable self-assembly of nanoparticles into desired architectures in a
controlled way. The research team uses the momentum of a laser beam to induce
and control the electrodynamic interactions (i.e., optical binding) of
nanoparticles. A combined experimental and computational approach is used to
understand the nanoscale optical binding and realize reconfigurable light-guided
assembly. First, the team investigates the influence of the size, shape, and
material of nanoparticles to their optical binding interactions and self-
assembly behaviors. Second, the team enables self-assembly of nanoparticles into
reconfigurable assemblies (i.e., optical matter) with synergized intensity,
phase, polarization, and wavelength of light. Advanced holographic beam shaping
methods are used to sculpt the optical landscape of a laser field and control
the assembly of nanoparticles. Third, the team measures the collective photonic
properties of the optical matter, such as surface lattice resonances, second
harmonic generation, and surface-enhanced Raman scattering. Lastly, the team
demonstrates new applications of optical matter clusters as optomechanical
nanomotors and biosensors. In sum, this project establishes a new technology for
reconfigurable assembly of nanoparticles, enriches the photonic world of
discrete plasmonic nanoparticle arrays, and enables reconfigurable optical
matter as multifunctional photonic materials and
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.