* 2131061
* Collaborative Research: NSF-BIO/BBSRC: The amphibian skin microbial-immune interface and its impact on infection outcome
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Leon Grayfer, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 12/31/2024
* USD 276,018.00

The immune system is one of the primary ways animals fight pathogenic
microorganisms. Animals also live with millions of non-pathogenic microorganisms
(their microbiomes) which cause them no harm. Accumulating evidence indicates
that immune systems establish intimate relationships with these microbiomes,
which may make the difference between life and death for an animal exposed to a
pathogen. Amphibians exemplify the importance of studying interactions among
microbiomes, immune systems and pathogens. Amphibians across the globe are dying
from infection by the chytrid fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd). Bd
infects the skin of amphibians and causes death by disruption of essential skin
function. Amphibian skin microbiome and immune system components have been shown
to independently relate to Bd infection outcomes. Yet, the interactions among
host microbiomes, host immune systems and the pathogen Bd remain poorly
understood. This microbial-immune interface is likely critical to determining Bd
infection outcomes. The proposed research is unique and innovative because the
investigators will combine laboratory experiments using three amphibian species
that differ in Bd susceptibility with state-of-the-art molecular and analytical
approaches. In this project, which is a collaboration between researchers at the
Smithsonian Institution, George Washington University and George Mason
University (US) and Bangor University (UK), the investigators aim to define the
mechanisms controlling the microbial-immune interface and its effect on Bd
susceptibility. They expect to demonstrate that amphibian skin microbiomes and
host immune responses are interconnected, multi-facetted systems rather than
discrete host and microbial entities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis guiding the proposed studies is that the interdependence of amphibian
skin microbiomes and resident immune cell populations critically define Bd
infection outcomes. The interdisciplinary research team will integrate microbial
ecology, comparative immunology, meta-transcriptomics and proteomics at multiple
experimental scales. They will combine these comprehensive system-level datasets
with network analyses and structural equation modeling to examine the amphibian
skin microbial-immune interface and its effect on amphibian susceptibility to
the disease chytridiomycosis, caused by Bd infection. They will address their
hypothesis by: 1) determining how skin microbiomes affect skin immune cell
populations, 2) defining how skin-resident immune cells affect skin microbiomes,
3) resolving the contribution of the microbial-immune interface in Bd infection
outcomes. They predict that key microbial-immune interactions strongly impact Bd
susceptibility. Their findings will garner the much-needed understanding of the
microbial-immune interface and how these interactions impact disease outcomes.
Theirs will be the first study to simultaneously evaluate the relative
contribution of the microbiome and immune system to chytridiomycosis in a causal
framework. Vertebrate animals, including humans, are host to symbiotic microbes
and complex immune system components. The resulting insight from these
investigations will have broad applicability to a variety of other animal
systems. This collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National
Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.