* 2131889
* RAPID: Response to the 2021 Earthquake Swarm and Volcanic Eruption in Reykjanes, Iceland
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Christopher Hamilton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2022
* USD 78,471.00

It is exceptionally difficult to capture the early phases of an eruption,
especially in a remote area. The Fagradaldsfjall eruption in Iceland is unusual
in that it was preceded by an earthquake swarm that lasted for nearly a month.
This provided the opportunity to investigate the potential eruption site,
collect high resolution (centimeter-scale) preliminary DEMs of the most probable
eruption sites, generate associated DEMs and orthomosaics using UAS, as well as
obtain the necessary permissions to access the area in the event of the
eruption. Consequently, when the eruption began, its opening phase and
development since have been monitored. Pre-eruption surveys of valleys that are
most likely to become lava flow paths are being mapped. Maps are also being
constructed of the surface expression of specific seismic events to determine
links between surface fracture patterns and earthquake source mechanisms. Active
lava emplacement processes are being measured to establish better constraints on
effusion rates, lava emplacement dynamics, lava thermo-rheology, and lava
cooling. In addition to providing information that will be useful for lava-flow
hazards, the project is funding the research of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021 earthquake swarm on the Reykjanes
peninsula has generated &gt;50,000 earthquakes since 21 February and on 3 March
tremor was identified, signaling magma movement. In the following days, the
magma came within 1 km of the surface and an eruption began at 8:45 pm GMT on
March 19 in the hilly Krísuvík region, which is located &lt;50 km southwest of
Reykjavík. The proposed effort constitutes an immediate response to the
earthquake swarm and eruption to collect data for the scientific community. A
Ground-Control Point (GCP) network will be established, including 60 aerial
targets located using Differential Global Positioning System (DPGS) measurements
and the installation of three meterological stations for continuous
environmental measurement. These are needed to establish geodetic control for
UAS and traditional aerial surveys as well s constrain environmental conditions,
which is vital for thermal remote sensing. Once the GCP is established,
Unoccupied Aircraft System (UAS) observations shall be obtained and used to
generate 8–16 cm/post digital elevation models (DEMs) and 2–4 cm/pixel
orthoimages, depending on local ground elevation. Data are being archived to
ensure that GCP information and UAS observations are made freely available to
the public via the University of Arizona’s ReDATA system, which is a Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) archive that enables rapid
release of data, with digital object identifiers (DOIs). The research of a
graduate student is being funded, and the information will be useful to local
authorities for hazard assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.