* 2131489
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Livestock Management Practices
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Sarah McClure, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 31,100.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread and propagation of
domesticated plants and animals by the world’s earliest farming societies
restructured landscapes into ecological niches suitable for agriculture. The
scale of today’s global agricultural industry has raised legitimate concerns
about the carbon footprint of food production, and researchers have sought to
explain why and how changes in the scale of these processes occur. Many debates
have focused on increasing population size as a key factor in the
intensification of production; but the relationship between population size and
intensification is likely more complicated. Archaeological evidence indicates
that non-industrial farming economies through the millennia engaged in a range
of subsistence strategies at both small and large scales, sometimes pursued in
parallel. Moreover, subsistence farmers make decisions about the level of
investment per unit land on the scale of individual field and cropping systems.
Therefore, intensification of production may be less a reflection of external
pressures such as increasing population size and more directly shaped by how
farmers cope with the risk of crop or livestock products falling short of
subsistence needs. Within this broader context, this research will examine how
changes in the scale of production and land use can occur through the adoption
of innovative technologies that enable increased yields per unit land farmed or
livestock raised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dairy fermentation was a key innovation
that emerged millenia ago. Processed dairy foods such as cheese, yogurt, and
butter can be stored for longer than raw milk and more easily transported making
them vital resources for minimizing the risk of starvation during times of food
scarcity. The earliest evidence for fermentation technology appeared
approximately 7,000 years ago and was gradually adopted by small-scale farmers.
These farmers resided in permanent open-air farms where they grew wheat and
barley, and herded small numbers of goats, sheep, cattle, and pigs. However, it
is unclear how livestock were managed and what, if any, changes followed the
adoption of dairy fermentation technology that would have incentivized increased
use of milk. This project will use stable isotope analysis of livestock bones
and teeth from six archaeological sites to assess change or stasis in animal
diet, breeding, and mobility. The investigators will provide hands-on training
in archaeological excavation, zooarchaeological analysis, and preparation of
bone and tooth samples in a laboratory setting to undergraduate students at a
Hispanic Serving Institution. Student assistants will also have opportunities to
coauthor peer-reviewed journal articles and collaborate on conference
presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.