* 2131222
* RAPID: Phosphorus Molecular Biogeochemistry during a Rapidly Changing Nutrient Load in Tampa Bay, FL
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Matthew Pasek, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 71,507.00

In late March 2021, a reservoir containing 500 million gallons of wastewater
from a fertilizer production plant began leaking into nearby Tampa Bay, Florida,
and then was drained into the bay when the reservoir looked to be in danger of
catastrophic failure. This drainage added over a year’s worth of phosphorus (P)
and nitrogen to the bay in a two-week period. The effects of this rapid addition
of these critical nutrients on the local ecosystem will be investigated by
specifically focusing on changes to the molecular chemistry of phosphorus. This
in turn will help understand how life adapts to rapid changes to the local
environmental nutrient load. Given that such rapid infusions of nutrients are a
growing problem in many water bodies throughout the world, understanding the
biological response to such events could in turn help mitigate future
problematic phosphate infusions. Much of the research for this project will be
conducted by graduate students at the University of South Florida as part of
their scientific training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biogeochemical response of
algae and microorganisms within the bay to this rapid change in nutrient load
will be investigated. This will be accomplished by analyzing water and
particulates along a cross section of Tampa Bay, from the north side that has
yet to be infiltrated by a high P nutrient load, to the south where the
discharge occurred. Samples will be taken both at the surface and at depth, and
will be taken over the course of one year, which is estimated as a possible
residence time of this high nutrient load. Samples will be analyzed primarily by
31P NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy), which provides an in-depth
analysis of the bulk molecular P chemistry, distinguishing between various P
molecules such as inorganic P compounds (e.g., orthophosphate), polyphosphates
(e.g., pyrophosphate), organophosphate monoesters (e.g., lipid phosphates),
organophosphate diesters (e.g., DNA), and phosphonates (e.g.,
methylphosphonate). Total phosphorus will be determined by ICP-OES (inductively
coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry). Spatial and temporal data on the
molecular products of a rapidly changing nutrient load will provide a better
understanding of how organisms adapt to this changing system. For instance,
rapid growth may simply result in more biomolecules such as orthophosphate
monoesters and diesters being produced, and as such, the P released by this
discharge is unlikely to persist in the environment as P flushes out. However,
if the phosphorus is instead stored within refractory polyphosphates and
phosphonates, then this may implicate a longer P residence time, as these
molecules indicate a longer-term storage of P by microorganisms. The overarching
goal will be to better constrain how microbes incorporate excess phosphorus into
their biochemical molecules for long-term storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.