* 2131855
* I-Corps: Real-Time Indoor Air Quality Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Alexander Mamishev, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is developing an
air quality management system which reduces indoor air pollution through
heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) automation. The proposed
project has potential applications in both consumer and enterprise markets.
Indoor air quality is a great concern among individuals with respiratory
sensitivities and allergies, as well as residents of cities with high levels of
air pollution. An indoor air quality management system could increase the
quality of life for these individuals. In addition to consumer applications, the
proposed project has potential uses in workplace the importance of mitigating
outbreaks of airborne disease. The real-time air quality management solution can
be integrated into an existing HVAC system to help mitigate hazardous exposure
by detecting and eliminating airborne contaminants. The project aims to evaluate
the commercial potential in saving energy costs, addressing regulatory needs,
improving worker productivity, and eliminating airborne virus
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is a data-driven
intervention method that monitors aerosol concentration in real-time and can
alert users and systems about elevated levels of airborne contamination. This
information can be used to initiate either a manual or automated mitigation
response. The proposed system consists of hardware and software components. The
hardware component is a network of sensors that monitor particulate matter (PM),
volatile organic compounds, and related variables, such as temperature and
humidity. On the software side, web-based analytics software processes the data
from the sensors. The sensor data can be aggregated to create a 3-dimensional
mapping of the indoor air quality and the particulate matter levels. The sensor
network gathers time- and space-resolved aerosol concentration data using a mesh
of low-cost, Internet of Things (IoT) enabled PM sensors to assess the aerosol
persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.