* 2131178
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: The Role of Material Culture in Reconstructing Social Connectivity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Randall McGuire, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 20,299.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For nearly a century,
archaeologists have debated the extent and nature of cultural interaction
between prehispanic populations living in adjacent regions. Despite a general
recognition that interactions occurred, the intermediary region remains poorly
defined. Language differences and limited literature availability have also
prevented broader understandings of regional prehistory. To address this gap,
researchers are conducting the first analysis and comparative study of relevant
ceramic samples. These provide scientists with one of the best tools for
reconstructing prehistoric interactions. The goal is to understand not only how
pottery changed across time, but how its pottery designs reflect changing
relationships among populations. The investigators utilize museum collections
and radiocarbon dating to achieve these goals. This binational collaborative
project will present findings to both English and Spanish speaking audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contemporary archaeologists apply the term “connectivity”
when broadly discussing complex cultural interactions across wide geographic
regions. Pottery analysis is a powerful tool for measuring cultural connectivity
because ceramics were abundantly produced in multiple regions. Pottery
production was regulated through formalized apprenticeship. This
master/apprentice relationship resulted in the frequent replication of pottery
designs and was instrumental in visually reinforcing group identity. The project
investigators are producing a database that systematically compares pottery
motifs against those from neighboring regions. This systematic comparison
provides a unique method that measures the extent, and nature, of cultural
connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.