* 2131047
* Simulating Space Weather Extremes: A Workshop to Identify Research Needs to Improve Power Grid Resilience to Geomagnetic Activity; Fall 2021 in Washington DC
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Ryan McGranaghan, Orion Space Solutions (OSS), LLC
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 11/30/2022
* USD 49,999.00

Space weather can create picturesque auroras but poses a potential hazard to
technology on which modern society relies. It is essential for space weather
researchers, forecasters, end-users (e.g., utility operators) and the emergency
management community to work together to understand and mitigate this natural
hazard. This project will convene a 3-day workshop in Fall 2021 in Washington
DC, in which a mock space weather event will be used to step through the
modeling, prediction and forecast, communication, and response stages involving
every community in the space weather-to-power grid domain. The workshop
organizing committee has members representing each major link in the information
flow. Students and early-career space weather professionals will be actively
involved in the activities. A workshop report summarizing the state of the
practice for power grid response to space weather will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simulation will make use of federally funded
solar wind, geomagnetic index, and geoelectric field data and models, and an
open-source software tool for performing assessment of geomagnetic disturbances’
impact on power grids. A hackathon will help identify and build tools that
support better communication and data analytics for the space weather-to-power
grid community. The workshop outcomes will identify research and development and
operational gaps regarding space weather effects on the electric power grid and
help improve the Nation’s response to extreme space
weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.