* 2131162
* Collaborative Research: Photonic Chip-Scale Time Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Qing Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 154,221.00

Garden variety crystals like salt grains and snowflakes, or silicon crystals
forming the backbone of modern-day electronics all consist of large numbers of
atoms or molecules. As orderly and symmetric as water molecules sit in a
snowflake, the hexagonal crystal represents not symmetry but its breaking
through the reduction of the perfect symmetry of empty space into the discrete
symmetry of an array of molecules. While a small number of atoms can form
molecules with new physical and chemical properties by chemical bonding, only a
truly large number (~10^23, hundreds of thousands of billions of billions) of
such interacting building blocks coming together can form crystals. The
resultant crystals possess yet again unique properties, giving rise to their
utility. About a decade ago, scientists started theorizing time crystals –
systems consisting of a large number of interacting building blocks which break
symmetry, not in space but in the time dimension. It was shown that, paralleling
solid-state spatial crystals, time crystals offer desirable characteristics
(e.g., temporal robustness), as well as totally new physical effects (e.g.,
avoiding loss of crystalline order when typically heating is expected to destroy
a crystal). These inherent time crystal properties are crucial for future
applications such as quantum computation where quantum bits of data are expected
to preserve their information over time and after several reading operations.
Experimental demonstrations of time crystals have thus far remained scarce and
particularly limited to isolated systems which are not conducive to real-world
applications. They have also been largely confined to “small” crystals,
typically with only 2 temporal elementary cells. The proposed research aims to
surmount these limitations by realizing time crystals in non-isolated systems
using photons in miniaturized nonlinear optical devices. This platform empowers
investigation of unexplored aspects of time crystals and demonstrating their
application in precision timekeeping. Additionally, it accommodates “big” time
crystals, hence offering the possibility of realizing temporal analogues of
condensed matter physical effects and addressing open questions using the mature
photonic technology. For further impact, our proposed program includes
scientific professional education outreach and workshop components which will
develop and deliver a curriculum to aspiring high school students and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will demonstrate discrete time crystals
in dissipative Kerr nonlinear cavities. Leveraging the flexibilities afforded by
nanofabrication of integrated photonic structures, time crystals will be
realized and investigated in silicon nitride microring resonators pumped by
polychromatic lasers. Dispersion engineering and judicious design and pumping of
the resonator will ensure realizing big time crystals. The state of the created
time crystals will be controlled and transition between different phases will be
achieved by means of frequency modulation and sweep. Stabilization of time
crystals will be achieved by self-injection locking two lasers to two non-
adjacent same-family optical modes of the microring resonator and tracked
through monitoring the phase noise of the beatnote between the pump lasers
versus that of the generated subharmonics. The frequency division inherent to
the realization of discrete time crystals in this platform results in the
reduction of the phase noise. The system can be used for frequency reference
transfer by locking the pump lasers to external frequency references. Successful
demonstration of the proposed platform combining concepts from photonics and
condensed matter physics significantly accelerates the investigation of time
crystals as a new phase of matter and reveals some of their practical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.