* 2131859
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Towards Secure Federated Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Michael Reiter, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2026
* USD 599,999.00

This project will provide the security foundations for the emerging paradigm of
federated learning. Federated learning has seen large-scale deployment in
diverse societal applications because it enables many clients (e.g.,
smartphones, IoT devices, and edge devices) to collaboratively learn from a
machine learning model. With help of a cloud server, the process allows analysis
without having to share private data. While there are already many studies on
improving the accuracy and communication efficiency of federated learning, its
security is much less explored. In this project, the investigators will bridge
the gap by exploring new security attacks to federated learning and developing
new secure federated learning methods that reduce the risk that the analyses and
models can be manipulated by outside actors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three objectives targeting the security of federated learning. First, the
research team will systematically investigate the security vulnerabilities of
federated learning. In particular, they will explore security vulnerabilities in
the training phase of federated learning, such as poisoning attacks and backdoor
attacks. Second, the team will develop provably secure federated learning
methods to prevent poisoning attacks and backdoor attacks. Specifically, methods
will be developed that ensure a bounded number of malicious clients cannot
attack the machine learning model in a provably secure federated learning method
no matter what poisoning and backdoor attacks they use. Third, the team of
researchers will develop methods to detect malicious clients and efficiently
recover a machine learning model from attacks. The investigators will aim for
real-world technology transfer, incorporate the results of this project in both
new and existing undergraduate and graduate courses, and develop and train
undergraduate and graduate researchers with significant experience for
developing secure federated learning systems, including recruiting minority and
under-represented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.