* 2131399
* I-Corps: Digital Phenotyping to Predict and Prevent Burnout in the Workplace
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of prediction software to prevent young adult burnout in the
workplace. Currently, digital lives play a major role in mental health. This
project aims to develop technology to analyze online behavior to predict and
address burnout in the workplace. Burnout is cited as a primary source of
disability in the workplace. Burnout prediction and prevention enabled with
artificial intelligence may allow companies to be more productive and may allow
better employee mental wellness. The proposed technology is focused on the young
workforce due to the higher impact of mobile technology on their mental health.
The proposed technology is based on analyzing mobile phone user interactions and
behaviors and correlating them to mental health. The initial application of the
technology is the game development industry where burnout is common due to the
high cognitive demand on development teams to produce video games and to meet
deadlines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a software platform using digital phenotyping and artificial intelligence to
measure behavior, cognition, and mood to design effective clinical mental health
interventions for young professionals working in highly stressful environments.
Digital phenotyping is a process that involves collecting sensor and sociability
parameters, as well as keyboard, voice and speech data from off-the-shelf
smartphones. Predictors of anxiety and depressive relapses include disrupted
sleep, reduced sociability and physical activity, and changes in mood.
Intonation in language and cognitive function may be measured via digital
phenotyping and analyzed. The proposed technology may deliver metrics to predict
possible burnout and other mental health problems, and propose artificial
intelligence-based solutions for prevention of burnout in the young
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.