* 2131973
* I-Corps: Device for improving lymph circulation in patients with lymphedema
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Linda Koehler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a device for the treatment of patients with lymphedema. According
to the World Health Organization, lymphedema affects over 250 million people
worldwide while 5-10 million Americans suffer from chronic lymphedema. Secondary
lymphedema is most common and often occurs after cancer surgery and/or after
receiving radiation therapy. Upper extremity lymphedema occurs in up to 40% of
breast cancer survivors and lower extremity lymphedema develops in up to 70% of
gynecological cancer survivors and 20% of prostate cancer survivors. The
proposed technology will be designed as a wearable medical device that will
stimulate lymphatic circulation and improve the soft tissue composition. The
proposed device will apply alternating pneumatic pressure to squeeze out lymph
fluids and improve the function of lymphatic vessels. The goal is to improve
lymphatic flow as compared to current gold-standard treatment (i.e., compressive
garment) and improve the lives of patients suffering from the debilitative
effects of lymphedema.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a medical device for the treatment of patients with lymphedema by
alternating negative and positive pressure gradients to stimulate lymphatic
circulation. Previous research showed the underlying pathophysiology of
lymphedema development and the structural alterations of the lymphatic system in
patients with breast cancer. Preliminary results of bench tests with a prototype
confirmed the technical and physiological feasibility of the proposed approach.
The proposed device will apply alternating pressure gradients to redirect
lymphatic fluids from the interstitial tissue to the lymphatic ducts. This
process will enable healthy lymphatic vessels to expand and absorb lymph fluid
as compared to current compressive methods that only use pneumatic pressure to
squeeze out lymph fluids. The proposed technology may enable the opening of
damaged lymphatic vessels and improve the absorption of lymph fluid from
lymphedema affected tissues. Moreover, this technology may improve soft tissue
composition and prevent fibrosis development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.