* 2131144
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: RCBP-RF: SaTC: Building Research Capacity in AI Based Anomaly Detection in Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Dongwon Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between
Tuskegee University (TU), a HBCU institution, and the Pennsylvania State
University (PSU), an R1 research-intensive institution, is to jointly promote
research and education excellence in cybersecurity through the research and
development of advanced network intrusion detection solutions to accurately and
quickly detect intrusion attacks -- i.e., unauthorized activities on a network
that involve stealing valuable resources and/or jeopardize the security of the
network. In particular, the team’s solutions will be based on an AI based
anomaly detection framework, treating intrusion attacks as rare or anomalous
observations that deviate from other observations, exploiting recent
advancements in machine learning, natural language processing, and data science
techniques to detect these deviations. Based on the research results and
collaboration efforts, the project team will improve TU’s research capacity in
cybersecurity, machine learning, and data science, and enhance the curriculum
for teaching these topics and latest findings to undergraduate and graduate
students at both TU and PSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the team will
explore how to advance existing anomaly detection systems (ADS) through
investigating ways to exploit and advance state-of-the-art methods in data
science and machine learning in the context of network intrusion detection. For
instance, the team will explore the recent successes in detecting subtle
misinformation using advanced techniques (e.g., data augmentation via generative
adversarial networks, co-attention networks, few-shot learning, and adversarial
examples) by the PSU team and extend/apply them to other intrusion detection
tasks. The improved ADS to be developed will include (1) novel strategies for
collecting, labeling, enhancing, and augmenting data for advanced analytics, (2)
solutions for data representation, feature/representation learning, and
classification of system behaviors, and (3) an implementation framework for
developing ADS tools. The team expects the new techniques to help achieve state-
of-the-art accuracy in network intrusion detection with low false-positive
rates. Further, the project will provide research opportunities for people from
historically underrepresented groups in computing that will enable students to
pursue graduate studies in cybersecurity and machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Computer
and Information Science and Engineering Minority-Serving Institutions Research
Expansion Program (CISE-MSI) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.