* 2131269
* CISE-MSI: RCBP-ED: CNS: Data Science and Engineering for Agriculture Automation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sabine O'Hara, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,892.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data science is an
interdisciplinary field in which statistical, computer science, and mathematical
concepts overlap for the acquisition, analysis, and extraction of valuable
insights from large datasets. Similarly, data engineering promotes the flow and
accession of data through the developing and application of software tools,
interfaces and mechanisms. Together, tools from these fields are often applied
to other domains (e.g., medicine, agriculture, urban planning) to generate new
understanding from data. But insights gained through data science and
engineering tools are far superior when applied in a transdisciplinary and
collaborative approach that includes expertise in both the data tools and the
fields to which they are being applied. To develop better insights into
improving the state of nutrition-associated disorders in urban “food deserts,”
the Department of Computer Science and Information Technology at the University
of the District of Columbia will expand its capacity to train Accelerated
Bachelor’s/Master’s students using an integrated training model in data science
and engineering (IMDSE). This new program will build research capacity through
transdisciplinary education program that systematically integrates data science,
data engineering, and agriculture automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IMDSE
program will catalyze scientific discovery and innovation by training students
in data science and engineering and urban aquaponics automation. Aquaponics
automation focuses on creating sustainable food production in urban areas and
requires knowledge and application of deep machine learning, cloud computing,
data science and engineering technologies, internet-of-things technologies,
sensor and actuator technologies, wireless communications, and web programming,
as well as agriculture, agronomy, nutrition, biology, public health, and
environmental sciences. This IMDSE program will be a first and original
foundation for training undergraduate and graduate students with both
experiential and transdisciplinary expertise in targeted interdisciplinary and
convergent research areas. While the initial target is on agriculture
automation, other research areas requiring insights from big data science and
engineering will be included as the program grows into a national-scale
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.