* 2131515
* DASS: Principled Software Design and Accountability
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Jane Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 10/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

This research project sets out a new approach to designing software that is
accountable to law, referred to as Principled Software Design and Accountability
(PSDA). Legal principles will be distilled from legislation or the common law
and augmented by a series of concrete questions whose answers will guide
software developers through the process of designing legally compliant software
systems. The research will engage diverse stakeholders including legal experts,
regulators, sociologists, and software developers, and will explore the
integration of PSDA into software design and analysis techniques. By developing
techniques aimed at accountability, design solutions will be modeled within
their legal context to enable stakeholders to analyze compliance to legal
principles. In the future, PSDA could play a major part in shaping the role and
responsibilities of software engineers and enabling the rise of a new type of
software specialist, skilled in the development of PSDA software, its
applications, and its performance assessment. The proposed research maps out
this new role and the ensuing education and training required. In addition, the
project will develop and disseminate tools to support accountable design, and
will deliver pedagogical materials through a new course in interactive
Principled Software development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary
nature of the work, and the need to engage legal experts, psychologists, and
software engineers creates a challenging research space which will be explored
through focus groups, grounded theory, and design research techniques.
Delivering PSDA requires weaving together a holistic, multi-disciplinary
solution supported by deep-learning technologies to provide full life-cycle
traceability and the creation of persistent, tamperproof records of PSDA flows
for creating digital reports. PSDA logs will be built upon relationship-
preserving auditable flows, representing design decisions and their rationales,
and capable of generating legally compliant paper documents that bind to the
digital thread to provide full lineage and rationale behind PSDA
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.