* 2131902
* RII Track-4:NSF: Structures of Membrane Protein Assemblies Resolved by Cryogenic Electron Microscopy
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Alex Vecchio, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 219,836.00

Visualizing a protein’s 3D structure at atomic resolution is essential to
understand its function. Historically, a technique called X-ray crystallography
was preferred to obtain atomic-level structures of proteins. However,
crystallography is undesirable for studying large and dynamic protein assemblies
or proteins that reside in lipid membranes. But because proteins with these
traits are key to many biological processes, new techniques to visualize their
atomic structures are required to understand their cellular functions. An
advanced form of microscopy called cryogenic electron microscopy (cryoEM) is
ideal for studying these challenging proteins, and recent advances have made it
capable of achieving atomic resolution. This fellowship will support the PI and
research team in acquiring hands-on training in cryoEM by experts at the Pacific
Northwest Center for CryoEM (PNCC), a state-of-the-art user facility operated by
the Oregon Health &amp; Science University and the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory. Upon completion of the fellowship, the researchers will be cryoEM
specialists, and apply this new knowledge to visualize structures of the large
membrane-embedded protein assemblies they study in atomic-level detail. Further,
the fellowship will bolster research and education in the molecular life
sciences at the University of Nebraska (NU) by importing cryoEM expertise there.
This expertise will be passed to other researchers and students across Nebraska
via lab-based and in-class experiences that will impart the theory and practice
of this state-of-the-art structural technique to them. As no institution in the
state has cryoEM capability, infrastructure, or expertise, this fellowship has
potential to be transformative to Nebraskans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s
group use the specialized training in cryoEM to propel their structural biology
capacities in new and transformative directions. CryoEM will enable the PI’s
group to resolve 3D structures of the small membrane protein-comprised
supramolecular machines they study that will help define the mechanistic
principles that drive self-assembly of these proteins. These membrane protein
assemblies warrant in-depth comprehension because they control two key
biological processes in animals—fortification of epithelial intercellular spaces
called tight junctions, and synthesis of fatty acids that produce lipids vital
to membrane organization. The fellowship will function by establishing a
collaborative training ecosystem between the PI’s group and PNCC, with the
primary goal to acquire deep knowledge of the cryoEM workflow, which includes
sample preparation; negative stain EM; grid screening and evaluation; image
collection; image processing and particle classification; 3D model building and
refinement; and structure determination by cryoEM. This cryoEM expertise will
foster new independent and collaborative research in Nebraska by creating a core
of specialists at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) that will train
additional NU researchers, allowing many groups to use cryoEM and national
centers like PNCC to determine structures of other important macromolecular
systems. Educational objectives to teach future generations the theory and
practice of state-of-the-art structural techniques like cryoEM will also be
realized by integrating this training into the advising activities and
undergraduate biochemistry courses the PI conducts at UNL. Because UNL, NU, and
other regional institutions currently lack abilities in cryoEM, this fellowship
will provide an essential knowledgebase that will have wide-reaching impacts on
the research and educational trajectories of many individuals and groups
throughout Nebraska and the Great Plains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.