* 2131524
* DASS: Designing Accountable Artificial Intelligence Services for People with Diverse Sensory Abilities
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Raja Kushalnagar, Gallaudet University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2024
* USD 378,080.00

This project addresses the accessibility of information and communication
technologies that include Artificial Intelligence (AI) services. These AI
services are only as good as the data theyâ€™ve been fed, which often reflects
historical or current biases either in the collection of data or in the data
itself. In general, people with diverse visual and auditory disabilities are not
well-represented in these datasets because although many people have some
disability, the number with any one disability is usually a small percentage of
the population. These disparities in representation can lead to disproportionate
impacts of AI-based services on people with disabilities, and though regulations
to protect people with disabilities exist, implementing them in AI-based systems
and validating that the systems comply with those regulations in both the letter
and spirit of the law are important, unsolved problems. To this end, the
research team will develop evidence-based measurements, benchmarks, and
guidelines for technologies that use AI services to ensure they comply with
accessibility laws and are unbiased for people with visual or auditory
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use an interdisciplinary
approach that integrates human-centered, social, and legal perspectives for
interviews with, and surveys of, several groups of stakeholders critical to the
design and validation of these systems. These include: 1) users with visual or
aural disabilities, 2) information and communication technology developers that
use AI services for accessibility, and 3) commercial AI services providers. The
team will also survey the landscape of law and regulatory policy for using AI
services for accessibility, as well as current practices around considering
accessibility in developing these technologies. The project team will use the
findings from these activities to analyze the design of AI-based technologies in
terms of the types, collection, and access to data used to build these models,
as well as in terms of the use cases, model performance, and transparency around
the models themselves. Together, this analysis will help the team establish
meaningful benchmarks and guidelines aimed at ensuring that AI-based information
and communication services are fair for and comply with regulations that protect
people with visual or auditory disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.