* 2131507
* Collaborative Research: NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: Secure Wireless Powered Backscatter Communication for IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kai Zeng, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 280,000.00

Wireless powered backscatter communication (WPBC) has emerged as a promising
technology to support long-term, low-cost, and low-complexity Internet-of-Things
(IoT) device communications and networking. Ensuring WPBC security is crucially
important to drive its wide applications, e.g., smart cities, smart wearables,
smart agriculture, smart skins, mobile payment, and supply chain. However,
resource constraints on backscatter devices and the broadcast nature of radio
transmissions render the securing of WPBC challenging. Aiming to enhance the
resource-constrained WPBC network security, the PIs propose novel techniques
that exploit physical layer properties of WPBC and machine learning technologies
to achieve efficient key agreement, anti-jamming communication, and robust
device authentication with joint consideration of energy efficiency, security,
and communication performance. The proposed research is expected to greatly
advance the understanding of the design tradeoff between communication and
security performance goals in WPBC networks. Under-represented students will be
actively involved in the proposed research activities through senior design
projects, summer interns, and outreach programs. Research results will be
integrated in teaching and disseminated through publications, presentations, and
a project website. A significant amount of experimental data will be collected
and shared to the wireless communication and networking
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three major research thrusts are proposed in
this project. Thrust 1 investigates efficient and scalable key generation
schemes between/among wireless powered backscatter devices. Unique challenges in
backscatter communication and resource constraints will be efficiently addressed
by transceiver designs and optimization. The energy efficiency of the proposed
schemes is expected to outperform traditional cryptography-based schemes (e.g.,
Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange) by one to two orders of magnitude. Thrust 2 studies
anti-jamming schemes based on multi-armed bandit (MAB) online learning
frameworks to effectively harvest jamming energy to achieve reliable and
efficient WPBC in a multi-channel network. The proposed scheme will turn jamming
into an energy harvesting opportunity while achieving reliable communication
through learning the jammed and jamming-free channels online. The proposed
scheme will enjoy low computational and storage overhead. In Thrust 3, the
proposed device authentication schemes are expected to achieve high
authentication performance by exploiting new factors (i.e., incident signal
randomization, angle of arrival estimation) at the physical layer. They can be
integrated with higher layer cryptography-based authentication schemes to enable
multi-factor authentication with capabilities of detecting and tracing illegal
devices. A multi-channel WPBC testbed operating in sub-6GHz bands will be
developed based on the wireless identification and sensing platform (WISP) and
Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.