* 2131863
* RII Track-4:NSF: Tracking assembly intermediates of the Photosystem II oxygen-evolving complex
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* David Vinyard, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 151,647.00

Plants and some microbes use photosynthesis to efficiently convert solar energy
to chemical energy. However, the detailed mechanisms used in natural
photosynthesis are not fully understood. By learning how biology makes fuels
using cheap resources (sunlight, water, proteins, abundant metals), molecular-
level blueprints can be generated for catalysis strategies with industrial and
energy applications. This project aims to reveal the mechanism by which
manganese and calcium ions bind to a photosynthetic protein to make an active
site where molecular oxygen is released when water is oxidized. Protein samples
will be prepared in the PI’s home laboratory and then studied using advanced
instrumentation in the Solar Energy Conversion Group at Argonne National
Laboratory (ANL). The PI and one graduate student will gain hands-on experience
in spectroscopic techniques. Skills learned during this fellowship will advance
the development of this type of instrumentation at the home institution to
increase research capabilities and provide opportunities for future
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to reveal the chemical
mechanism of the assembly of the Photosystem II oxygen-evolving complex (OEC).
This metallic cluster is built in situ from free manganese ions, calcium ions,
and water without the use of protein transporters or scaffolds. Advanced
electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy tools available at ANL will
be used to characterize protein samples prepared to mimic various stages of OEC
assembly. The hosts at ANL will provide facility access, training, technical
expertise, and assistance with data analysis. Through this work, new insights
into the mechanism of OEC assembly will be produced and a new collaboration
between the PI and hosts at ANL will be established. The skills and knowledge in
advanced EPR methods gained by the PI will be used to improve the research
infrastructure in Louisiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.