* 2131826
* CNS Core: Small: Closing the Reality Gap for Learning-Augmented Network Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Junchen Jiang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Modern Internet applications rely on sophisticated algorithms and systems to
share network resources and deliver high quality of experience to each user
(e.g., fast loading of web pages and smooth high-resolution video streaming).
For instance, a video streaming system monitors the current speed of a user's
internet connection and constantly changes the video quality to ensure smooth
streaming at a high video quality. A key challenge of these systems is to ensure
desirable user experience under different network environments, including
different network speeds and different levels of network bandwidth changes. With
the recent advances in machine learning (which makes predictions from data
without following explicit instructions), many industry operators and
researchers are exploring a new approach that automatically trains these
algorithms as machine-learning models. While these learning-based systems show
good performance in network environments similar to those the algorithms are
trained in, they often do not perform well in new real-world network
environments. Therefore, as new learning-based systems are developed and
deployed every year, improving their generalization has become increasingly
pressing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create a reusable
framework to enhance the generalization of learning-based network systems. It
focuses on systems that use deep reinforcement learning (DRL), and to improve
their generalization, it applies formal tools from the machine learning
literature and makes them efficient and effective for network systems by
leveraging the traditional rule-based heuristics in the networking literature.
The insight is that compared to DRL policies, rule-based heuristics (though
suboptimal in some workloads) are less sensitive to differences between real
systems/workloads and the simulated training environments and are more trusted
by network operators. The project has three synergistic research thrusts. (1) It
explores the use of rule-based heuristics to identify an appropriate level of
randomization that should be introduced to the simulation-based training, in
order to make the simulator-trained policies perform well in the real world. (2)
To allow the offline-trained policies to generalize to a large and diverse
operational space, the project iteratively improves the trained policy by
periodically promoting difficult, yet improvable environments indicated by the
performance of rule-based heuristics. (3) To cope with environment drifts in
real network systems, the project proposes to run a fail-safe rule-based logic
to collect the feedback data and use it to re-train the DRL policy in an
unbiased and data-efficient fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.