* 2131711
* Discrete Variable Stiffness Actuators with Fast Stiffness Switch for Safe Human-Robot Interaction
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Richard Voyles, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 655,908.00

Human-robot co-working is at the human-technology frontier of the future of
work, one of NSF’s “10 Big Ideas.” Co-robots allow the full use of human
intelligence and robot precision and strength to improve the combined
performance as a team in various scenarios including manufacturing, logistics,
military, medical care, home companion and others. A fundamental challenge for
the development of co-robots is balancing high performance and ensuring human
safety. With respect to rigidity, achieving high performance (high accuracy and
payload) often relies on high stiffness co-robots, while safe interactions with
humans often requires low stiffness. This work conducts fundamental research on
compliant robot stiffness by researching a new concept of discrete variable
stiffness actuators and developing a systematic design methodology with high-
performance control algorithms, validated by experimental tests. Based on this,
a new generation of robot manipulators with switchable compliance for safe
human-robot co-working is envisioned in the near future. Moreover, the developed
compliant actuators will benefit the robotics industry with adaptable compliant
dynamics enabled by variable stiffness on walking robots, exoskeletons,
entertainment, medical and education robotics with human robot physical
interactions and needs of intrinsic safety. The developed technology will
enhance the US’s high-tech capability and benefit its economy. The integrated
research and education work will encourage and inspire young students to join
engineering majors through STEM workshops and hands-on activities. The early
engagement and curriculum introduction to K-12 underrepresented students will
contribute to preparing the future workforce with robotics skills, knowledge,
and interests for advanced manufacturing in the “Industry 4.0” era.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project discrete variable stiffness actuators (DVSAs)
contribute to the fundamental robotics research on developing compliant
actuators that are central to synergistic human-robot collaboration. The new
actuator concept avoids issues with existing variable stiffness actuators (VSAs)
relying on continuous stiffness change mechanisms and brings a discrete design
methodology for fast stiffness level selection, low power consumption, zero back
driving force in stiffness change, and compact designs. The project will deliver
(1) a design criterion in determining representative discrete stiffness levels
by covering both human and robot safety, (2) a design synthesis method in
developing discrete variable stiffness mechanisms for DVSAs, (3) detailed
discrete stiffness change dynamics modelling considering the mechanical
engagement process, (4) optimal control algorithms for DVSA operation stability
and human-robot safe interaction, (5) experimental and simulation data verifying
the design and control methods, and (6) open software and hardware platforms
including a modular DVSA actuator and a 3-DOF compliant
arm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.