* 2131887
* Collaborative Research: Workshop Series on the Next Generation Learning-Centered Environment for Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* Yimin Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 09/30/2023
* USD 87,986.00

This collaborative project aims to serve the national interest by calling for a
conversation to create a shared vision of the next generation learning-centered
environment for architecture engineering, and construction engineering (AEC)
education. The potential of emerging technologies for creating new opportunities
to improve AEC education is still under explored. A systematic investigation
into the relationship between humans, learning, and technology in varied social
contexts is still in the exploratory stages with respect to engineering
education, especially after the COVID-19 pandemic that has had tremendous impact
on the status quo. Thus, this 2-workshop series will explore relevant questions,
such as what does the next generation learning-centered environment look like
for AEC education? What is the role of emerging technologies in shaping the
environment? The two workshops will be organized in collaboration with the
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) and the American Society for
Engineering Education (ASEE). The main expected outcome is a shared vision of
the next generation learning-centered environment, including its
characteristics, grand challenges and opportunities, and a roadmap for research
and implementation. The project will help create a pathway to timely reflect on
new learning strategies, new technologies, industry and societal needs in AEC
curricula, and thus producing a more adaptive AEC workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will explore different aspects of
the next generation learning-centered environment, in particular, seeking
innovation in the following interrelated topics: 1) AEC curricula and industry
practice, 2) technology-generated artifacts and learning, 3) disciplinary gap,
and 4) digital inequity. Stakeholders of different backgrounds will be invited,
such as AEC educators and researchers, curriculum designers, industry
professionals, students, and representatives of accreditation organizations and
professional societies. The second two-day workshop will be organized as a
social innovation lab focusing on a blueprint for the implementation of the
vision for future learning environments. The primary outcome will be a research
and implementation agenda focusing on the human-technology frontier in AEC
education. The two workshops will be several months apart, during which the
project team will disseminate the outcomes of the first workshop, acquire
feedback from a larger stakeholder community, and plan for the second workshop.
In addition, the project team will actively recruit participants from community
colleges, minority serving institutions, and Non-R1 institutions. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.