* 2131613
* Reduction of Droop for Antimonide-based Mid-Infrared Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Linda Olafsen, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 359,607.00

In the past 60 years since the demonstration of the first laser, great strides
have been made in improving the efficiency of semiconductor lasers, including
the integration of numerous stages where light is generated at repeated steps
rather than at a single interface, multiplying the output power possible through
a cascade configuration. Even with these advances, these devices do not yet
operate at their theoretical ideal. The goal of this project is to identify loss
mechanisms that result in current not being converted to laser light and to
apply that knowledge to improving the design of future cascade semiconductor
lasers. This would increase output power and efficiency, particularly for
devices emitting in the mid-infrared portion of the spectrum, a range of
wavelengths important for applications in environmental monitoring, medicine,
and homeland security, including chemical sensing and infrared countermeasures.
The approach will include not only current injection, optical excitation, and
spectroscopy, but also the integration of two-dimensional sheets of graphene
with three-dimensional semiconductor alloys containing elements from the third
and fifth columns of the periodic table to create a top contact that is
simultaneously optically transparent and both electrically and thermally
conductive. Improving efficiency has the potential to substantially reduce input
power requirements and operating costs while increasing portability. Classroom
and laboratory activities proposed in this work, including creation of videos
and engaging lessons, will attract K-12 students to careers in electrical and
computer engineering and will contribute to retention of female and minority
students by exposing them to cutting edge research at the undergraduate and
graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interband cascade lasers employing type-II
band alignment in antimonide-based heterostructures have demonstrated recent
success at 3-6 micrometer wavelengths, an important spectral range for
applications such as chemical sensing, infrared countermeasures, and free-space
optical communications. However, there is a “droop” in efficiency when these
lasers are driven above threshold that reduces the maximum power obtainable in
continuous wave (cw) or single mode operation. The physical cause for the
limitations on output power at high temperatures is not understood. Identifying
the fundamental mechanisms that prevent carrier pinning will permit creation of
new wave function engineering approaches to increase the maximum output power of
these lasers at or above room temperature. This will increase the efficiency of
devices so that injected carriers above threshold will contribute to laser
output and not be lost to spontaneous emission or non-radiative recombination
mechanisms, and consequently substantially reduce input power requirements and
operating costs. Contacts will be optimized to collect spontaneous emission, and
the physical mechanisms of the limiting behavior will be quantified through
light-current, light-light, spectral, current-voltage, and pump-probe
measurements, all enhanced by the integration of split-ridge fabrication and/or
transparent graphene contacts. The high optical, electrical, and thermal
conductivity of graphene will not only aid in the collection of data but will
advance optoelectronic device development more broadly through the study of the
graphene-semiconductor interface. The results of this project will provide a new
understanding of the mechanism required to achieve pinning of the carrier
densities and ultimately to increase the high-temperature output power in these
lasers. This contribution is significant because it will enable the redesign of
the active and cladding regions of laser devices in order to increase the
maximum cw output power and result in more efficient high temperature operation.
Thus, antimonide-based semiconductor lasers would have the potential to be an
enabling technology for mid-infrared applications in homeland security,
environmental monitoring, and medical applications such as breath analysis for
early detection of asthma in children. Outreach activities include video and
curriculum development for K-12 students and teachers as well as for freshman
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.