* 2131282
* EAGER: Polymer Sponge Electrodes for Energy-Efficient Desalination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Matthias Young, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Current seawater desalination technology is energy-intensive and costly,
limiting our ability to generate clean water for an increasing global
population. In recent years, researchers have explored a new concept based on
the removal of salt from seawater using a battery-like device where salt water
flows into the device, salt ions bind to electrodes within the device, and fresh
water flows out. One would expect this technology, called capacitive
deionization (CDI), to maximize the energy efficiency of desalination by
recovering input energy through discharge of the electrodes—similar to charging
and discharging a battery. However, the performance of CDI devices has not yet
been competitive for seawater desalination. Researchers at the University of
Missouri will work to understand the origins of the poor performance of CDI
electrodes for seawater desalination and overcome these limitations to boost the
energy efficiency of CDI. The investigators will decouple and independently
study the two main factors thought to drive CDI inefficiency – low ion uptake
capacity and slow ion transport within CDI electrodes. Electrically conductive
coatings that bind large amounts of ions will be used to control the ion uptake
capacity of electrodes, while a soft, compressible electrode matrix will be used
to control the rate of ion transport within the electrodes using mechanical
compression during charging. This work will fill a critical gap in understanding
how electrode design aspects are coupled with physical processes to drive CDI
performance. The outcomes of this project will define the most promising avenues
for investigation in pursuit of the next generation of desalination
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a new modality of
CDI electrode that integrates high-rate, faradaic surface reactions for rapid
ion uptake within a soft, compressible sponge substrate for rapid ion transport
within the CDI electrode through mechanical compression of the sponge. To
generate these electrodes, researchers will employ established molecular layer
deposition (MLD) chemistry using sequential reaction of gas-phase precursors to
impregnate microporous polyurethane (PU) foams with electrically-conductive and
redox-active polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT) coatings. The project will (1)
study key synthesis aspects enabling the fabrication of compressible CDI
electrodes and (2) benchmark what level of CDI efficiency can be delivered from
compressible electrodes. Researchers will study the impact of PEDOT thickness,
foam void volume, and compression rate on the energy efficiency of ion uptake.
This work will help researchers understand and overcome the barriers limiting
the performance of existing CDI electrodes, potentially enabling CDI to
outperform current seawater desalination technology and providing low-cost,
clean water to help address global water scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.