* 2131777
* SBIR Phase I: Automated Clot Preventing Chest Tube
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Jake Pistiner, CIRCULATECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop
strategies to mitigate occlusion of thoracic catheters (chest tubes). A study by
the Cleveland Clinic determined that 36% of chest tubes were completely
obstructed at one point, with 86% of these clots existing in the thoracic
cavity, undetected by clinicians. The complications that result from occluded
chest tubes can include postoperative atrial fibrillation, hemothorax, and
cardiac tamponade. The team will design, develop, and commercialize a novel
chest tube to solve the high impact clinical need. This novel chest tube seeks
to reduce drainage-related complications following cardiothoracic surgery. The
novel system proactively manages fluid flow within the inner lumen of a catheter
in order to flush and drain the tube, reducing the incidence of blood
clogging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity seeks to develop a chest
tube that proactively provides fluid flow in order to prevent blood clot
formation associated with draining fluid and blood during cardiovascular
surgery. The product introduces a novel approach called dilutional coagulopathy
for addressing clotting issues, where sterile saline or anticoagulants is
proactively used to reduce thrombosis in an enclosed drainage spaces, rather
than rely on historical methods of chemical or mechanical barriers for reducing
or hindering clot formation. The project aims to develop prototypes using
biomaterials and fabrication methods suitable for eventual patient use, and
undertake the risks of demonstrating proof of concept and reduced clotting in an
animal model of post-surgical drainage complications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.