* 2131996
* RII Track-4:NSF: Enhanced Multiscale Approaches for Simulations of Multicomponent Fluids with Complex Interfaces using Fluctuating Hydrodynamics
* O/D,OIA
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Ulf Schiller, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 02/29/2024
* USD 179,061.00

Many natural and synthetic materials contain interfaces between different
components. Typical examples are emulsions and foams that are present in a range
of consumer products such as food, cosmetic, and pharmaceutical products.
Interfaces also play a central role in living systems such as cells and tissue.
In soft, deformable materials, the interfaces can respond to relatively weak
forces and this response can also be triggered by thermal fluctuations.
Understanding the behavior of fluctuating soft interfaces is important not only
for fundamental science but also for enhanced product formulations and the
design of functional materials. However, computational modeling of complex
interfaces remains challenging because a wide range of length and time scales
have to be considered. This project aims to develop computational approaches
that will enable simulations of complex interfaces with embedded macromolecules
or nanoparticles. The work will be performed in collaboration with the Center
for Computational Sciences and Engineering at Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory. The PI and a graduate student will leverage the leadership class
supercomputing facility at National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center
(NERSC) to develop advanced computational methods and perform large-scale
simulations of complex interfaces in multicomponent liquids. The Track-4
fellowship will enable the PI to establish long-term collaborations and new
expertise that will enhance the research and teaching capacity at Clemson
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RII Track-4 award supports the development
of multiscale simulation methods for fluctuating hydrodynamics in soft
interface-dominated materials. At the micro- and nanoscale, thermal fluctuations
can have a significant effect on the growth and transport properties of soft
interface dominated materials. These effects remain incompletely understood and
present a challenge for current simulation methods. The project aims to develop
mesoscale computational approaches that will enable investigations of thermal
fluctuations in multicomponent fluids with complex interfaces. The PI seeks to
implement heterogeneous particle-fluid interactions within the fluctuating
lattice Boltzmann method, which will enable investigations of the self-
organization of amphiphilic macromolecules at fluid-fluid interfaces. During two
extended summer visits to Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), the PI
and one graduate student will work with staff scientists at the Center for
Computational Sciences and Engineering (CCSE) and advance the development of
fluctuating hydrodynamics (FHD). The team will leverage the leading-edge
computing platforms and services at the National Energy Research Scientific
Computing Center (NERSC) to develop, test, and validate new algorithms for
heterogeneous particle-fluid interactions in multicomponent FHD and lattice
Boltzmann methods. Through the joint advancement of FHD approaches and code
frameworks, the PI group will establish a long-term partnership with LBNL that
will catalyze new directions for studies of fluctuating hydrodynamics in complex
fluids and soft interface dominated materials. The experience gained during the
fellowship will enhance the PIâ€™s capability to promote cross-disciplinary
initiatives to research and education in scientific computing at Clemson
University and in the State of South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.