* 2131691
* Collaborative Research: The Lost Pastures of Alaska's Last Megafauna
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Daniel Mann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 690,185.00

Rapid climate changes are now impacting the animals and plants that live in the
Arctic. Learning what happened when climate changed in the past can help predict
what could happen over the next 50 years: Which species will become extinct, and
why? Is there anything that can be done to protect Arctic species from the
impacts of climate change? The goal of this project is to understand what caused
the extinctions of giant, ice-age animals like woolly mammoth around the time
that the last ice age ended. Some people think they were killed off by people;
others say they died because of rapid changes in climate. No one knows for
certain, but everyone argues about it. It is not even known when, exactly, these
extinctions occurred: Was it 12,000 years ago, or 4000 years ago? This project
aims at pin-pointing when the last mammoth, the last steppe bison, and the last
tundra lion lived in Alaska. Once it is known for certain when they became
extinct, it will be possible to eliminate some of the proposed explanations. For
example, it may turn out that herds of mammoths still roamed across Alaska 4000
years ago. Because it is already known that the first people arrived in Alaska
around 14,000 years ago, if this project shows that mammoths and people
coexisted for 10,000 years, it makes it unlikely that people drove them to
extinction. The research proposed here will obtain more precise dates on when
the last ice-age mammals lived in Alaska using new methods based on the DNA that
is preserved in frozen ground where these animals once lived. All animals
(people included) continually shed DNA into the environment in their skin
fragments, hair, feces, and urine. Some of these tissue fragments are buried and
preserved in the ground. This is especially true in the Arctic where decay is
slowed by cold temperatures. The plan is to extract tissue fragments (think: fur
and dandruff) from the ground, and then use the DNA it contains to identify
which animal species it came from. Next, the soil layer containing this DNA will
be dated, and these new dates will be used to test ideas about what caused this
species’ extinction. By better understanding the causes of extinctions in the
past, the Arctic mammals that still survive can be better protected, species
like polar bears, musk oxen, and caribou. A major goal of this study is to
educate students and high school teachers about climate change, DNA, and ice-age
ecology. A particular effort will be made to involve students who are Alaskan
Natives. All data will be shared in archives that everyone has free access to,
and new discoveries will be shared through scientific publications, newspaper
articles, and public lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arctic ecosystems now lie
on the front lines of global change. There is an urgent need to better
understand how rapid changes in temperature, sea-ice extent, and land use could
impact large-bodied Arctic mammals like musk oxen, polar bears, and caribou. The
geological record preserves many examples of what happened to animals and plants
when climate changed rapidly during prehistory. Extinctions are of particular
interest, because understanding what caused extinctions in the past can help us
conserve the planet’s remaining megafauna, many of which are now endangered. A
wave of extinctions occurred in the Arctic around the end of the last ice age,
14,000 to 10,000 years ago. This is when most scientists believe that giant ice-
age mammals like woolly mammoth, steppe bison, tundra horses, and tundra lions
disappeared from mainland Siberia and Alaska; however, no one is sure what
caused these extinctions, and many explanations have been proposed. One reason
for this debate is that a key piece of information is still missing, namely:
When did these species actually go extinct? Unless it is known with precision
when an extinction occurred, the various hypotheses about causation cannot be
tested. Present understanding of when these extinctions occurred is based on a
few hundred radiocarbon dates scattered across the northern continents, and
there is a real possibility that the bones of the last woolly mammoth will never
be discovered. But now there is a new and better way to detect the presence of
now-extinct animals. All animals shed DNA into the environment in their skin
fragments, hair, feces, and urine. Some of this DNA is buried and preserved in
the ground, especially in the Arctic, where things decay slowly because it is
cold. The aim of this project is to extract the ancient DNA of extinct mammals,
use it to identify which species it belonged to, and then to date the soil layer
where it came from. These new dates can then be used to test ideas about what
caused this species’ extinction. In this study, emphasis will be placed on
educating students and high school teachers about climate change, DNA, and ice-
age ecology. A particular effort will be made to involve students who are
Alaskan Natives. All our data will be shared in archives that everyone has free
access to, and new discoveries will be shared through scientific publications,
international conferences, newspaper articles, and public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.