* 2131191
* CISE-MSI:RCBP-ED:CNS:Big Data and Cloud Computing Project Hatchery
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Winny Dong, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 280,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to build the national pipeline of skilled workforce in the critical
domain of Big Data and Cloud Computing technology. This workforce is crucial for
the future advances in Data Analytics and Artificial Intelligence based priority
areas of national interest. This project will provide Big Data and Cloud
Computing technology skill-building opportunities for multidisciplinary students
and faculty from underrepresented minority backgrounds at Cal Poly Pomona
(Minority Serving Institution, MSI) as well as local alliances of Hispanic
Service Institutions (HSI) and S-STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will engage students in Big Data and Cloud Computing technology training
and culminating projects early in their academic careers based on the Design
Thinking approach, which focuses on understanding individual or community needs
and creatively developing solutions to meet those needs. The project will use
the Design Thinking concepts to connect students’ STEM curriculum to solving
problems that benefit society using Big Data and Cloud Computing technologies-
with students directly observing how their projects positively impact a specific
community/end-user group. Students will see the potential impact of their
education right away, instead of at the end of their academic career. In
parallel, the project will provide research training and promote affinity groups
for MSI faculty from four-year colleges to work with faculty members from
research intensive institutions to foster research collaboration in Big Data and
Cloud Computing domain and pursue collaborative external funding for research.
The faculty exposure to the technology and resources supporting the Big Data and
Cloud Computing research will build the Cal Poly Pomona and other participating
HSI’s multidisciplinary capacity in this area to enable future research and
education in this domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.