* 2131355
* NSF Workshop on Seamless/Seamful  Human-Technology Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Cynthia Rudin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,777.00

This project will hold a workshop and publish a report addressing seams, that
is, significant junctures among people and technologies. Seams involve the ways
that different modalities, mechanisms, and situations of interaction are
connected. Researchers across fields will gather and collaborate to address and
formulate emerging research questions. Where do seams arise? How can they be
stitched together? How can consideration of seams enable developing new
relationships among people and technologies? When do we want our interactions
with technology to be seamless, that is, for the seams to be invisible to human
participants? When might we want seamful design, which makes seams visible,
reminding the humans of gaps? The workshop report will be published on the
workshop website, and in prominent archival venues, such as through the ACM and
IEEE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop and report authoring will involve
researchers across fields, including human-computer interaction, machine
learning and data science, haptics, internet of things, wearables, computer
graphics and computer vision, cognitive science, design, and computational
creativity to consider seamless and seamful design addressing and combining:
high-dimensional data analysis, computational creativity, interactive art,
interaction design, exploration of machine learning model spaces, communication
awareness, buildings and urban spaces, computational companions, and user
modeling. Research contributions are expected to take forms such as ideas for
new research initiatives, implications for design, frameworks, and
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.