* 2131538
* SaTC: CORE: Small: A Robust Framework with Rigorous Semantics and Security Guarantees for Election-Day Voter Check-in
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Alexander Schwarzmann, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The broad concerns surrounding the integrity and security of electronic election
systems used in the 2016 and 2020 Presidential Elections underscored the need
for a rigorous scientific approach to designing and implementing such systems.
While substantial research has been dedicated to electronic processing of
ballots, vote aggregation, and audits, the very first step that enables voters
to cast their votes on Election Day and that ensures the “one voter, one vote”
imperative has not been the target of sufficient research. Moreover, in 2018 the
Committee on the Future of Voting of the National Academies of Science,
Engineering, and Medicine expressed serious concerns and risks associated with
the use of electronic pollbooks. This project focuses on the problem of voter
check-in in elections, an area that received surprisingly little attention from
the community of researchers working on electronic election systems. The
project’s novelties are the development of a rigorous scientific foundation for
electronic check-in systems and the construction on that basis of a human-
centric reference implementation that reflects the legal requirements for such
systems. The project's broader significance and importance are potentially
substantial savings to the taxpayer by developing and making available the
technology ready to be used in constructing secure and trustworthy electronic
poll book systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project proceeds along three
dimensions: (a) socio-political, (b) software foundations, and (c) system
implementation and evaluation. The project advances the state of the art in
addressing the electronic check-in challenges, and the project includes the
development of a reference implementation, serving as a proof of concept and
used for evaluation purposes. The resulting system will be a secure and
trustworthy electronic pollbook solution whose main purpose is to ensure "one
voter, one vote" on Election Day. An electronic pollbook system is an inherently
a dynamic distributed system where multiple check-in devices and/or servers must
operate in concert in providing “one voter, one vote” guarantee, with security,
integrity and auditability, and despite possible failures and the resulting need
to dynamically reconfigure this distributed system on the fly. Such a system
represents a convergence of several difficult problems in distributed computing
as this includes: the need to reach consensus, the need to replicate for
availability and fault-tolerance, the challenge of guaranteeing data consistency
and longevity, the requirement for secure operation, the need to guarantee
correctness in all executions, the ability to dynamically evolve the systems
either because of failure or for reasons of performance. Equally importantly,
electronic pollbooks is not a theoretical endeavor, but an important component
of our democratic process in the digital age. This project develops and will
make available the technology for constructing electronic poll book systems that
are human-centric and that are based on rigorous research. The project involves
graduate students, who are mentored by the investigators, and who are involved
in research on the critically important problems of security and integrity in
electronic election systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.