* 2131080
* CISE-MSI: DP: CPS: Statistical and Artificial Intelligence-based Cyberattack Detection Models for Connected Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Mashrur Chowdhury, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,635.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project is also jointly funded by the CISE MSI
Research Expansion Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is motivated
by the necessity to promote U.S. competitiveness and develop talented and
skilled young professionals who have in-depth cybersecurity knowledge, focusing
on connected and automated vehicles and implementing these methods using
advanced computational techniques. Solving tomorrow’s cyberattacks on connected
vehicles requires today’s students to learn in multidisciplinary teams about the
evolving cyber threats and think broadly about detecting such attacks, which
will change daily. This project’s vision is to transform programs at Benedict
College using an integrated and scalable approach to produce students capable of
innovating in non-traditional, interdisciplinary teams to solve the unique
cybersecurity problems. It develops and evaluates detection models, focusing on
cyberattacks in the in-vehicle systems and the wireless network connecting the
vehicles with other vehicles, infrastructure, and services.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transportation cyber-physical systems consist of
mobile edges (e.g., connected vehicles), fixed edge devices, backend servers,
and in-vehicle systems, which run different safety, mobility, and environmental
applications. Due to the application requirements, the edge devices exchange
real-time, heterogeneous data with each other and with the backend servers
through different communication options. Attacks on connected vehicles
applications can have a significant impact on public safety. For example, once
the malware is injected, a critical safety application, such as the collision
warning, can malfunction and result in catastrophic consequences. Detecting
cybersecurity threats in real-time is challenging because of the dynamic
behavior of such attacks, especially in a connected vehicle environment where
the vehicles and pedestrians are in motion. To address these, change-point
models can potentially detect anomalies in real-time. Also, data-driven
artificial intelligence-based models can detect these attacks as these models
are adaptable to different attack types with known and unknown patterns. The
project tasks include the development and comparison of efficacies of the real-
time cyberattack detection strategies, which are based on change-point and
artificial intelligence models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.