* 2131815
* Collaborative Research: BEE: Integrating Evolutionary Genetics and Population Ecology to Detect Contemporary Adaptation to Climate Change Across a Species Range
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Seema Sheth, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2025
* USD 539,573.00

Plant and animal populations typically perform best in the particular
environments in which they evolved. However, climate change is now disrupting
the evolved fit between organisms and their environments, leading to population
declines. Natural areas loved by people and required by native species are being
drastically and rapidly changed as key species are lost. But, if there is
genetic variation in the ability to survive and reproduce in a changing climate,
then evolution may lift population growth enough to enable population
persistence. This study will provide policy makers and conservation managers
guidelines to evaluate the potential efficacy of such evolutionary rescue. The
PIs will measure population growth rates and the speed of evolutionary response
of Scarlet Monkeyflower to the major, multi-year drought that took place between
2011-2016 in the western United States. This project will also provide training
in ecological, evolutionary, and statistical concepts and approaches for high
school students, undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
researchers, including those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although adaptation by natural selection and
population trends (demography) are typically studied separately by evolutionary
biologists and ecologists, respectively, they are fundamentally connected by
fitness. In declining populations, individual fitness is generally low and
individuals do not replace themselves. However, heritable variation for critical
traits can allow adaptive evolution, boost fitness, and lead to increased
population growth rate. An important question is whether adaptation to changing
climate will be faster than the rate of demographic decline. This study will use
reciprocal transplant and resurrection studies spanning the native range of the
Scarlet Monkeyflower (Mimulus cardinalis) in Oregon and California to evaluate
natural selection during the 2011-2016 mega-drought. The PIs will determine if
natural selection during the drought led to increased population growth rate,
and whether this change was greatest in populations that started with the most
heritable variation for drought-related traits and
fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.