* 2131857
* DarkSide
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Cristiano Galbiati, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2025
* USD 4,998,169.00

Astronomical observations have provided strong evidence that the known matter
accounts for only a small fraction of the observed total mass-energy of the
Universe. A leading dark matter candidate is the so-called weakly interacting
massive particle, or WIMP, a predicted relic particle of the Big Bang. Direct
(non-gravitational) detection of dark matter would be a transformational
discovery of fundamental importance broadly to the sciences, opening new
investigations of the dark universe. Such first measurements of dark matter may
be possible via WIMP-nucleus collisions detectable at low-background, low-energy
threshold detectors capable of distinguishing a small number of nuclear recoils
from WIMP collisions over a long exposure period. Liquid argon has been
identified to have unique light emission properties that provide excellent
sensitivity for such WIMP collisions while providing strong background
suppression. This award provides support for the fabrication of a next-
generation WIMP dark matter experiment, DarkSide-20k. The DarkSide international
collaboration has pioneered the use of liquid argon with high radiopurity to
search for rare WIMP interactions. The DarkSide-20k detector, with a designed
fiducial exposure volume of approximately 20kT of low-background liquid argon,
will operate in the INFN Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso deep underground
lab. The US NSF DarkSide team is supported via this award to build the central
dark matter detector liquid argon time-projection chamber, including the
associated high-voltage delivery, cryogenic, purification and calibration
systems. The awarded activities involve transferable technologies that include:
the production of low-radioactivity underground argon for the experiment as well
as for nuclear test ban verification and radiometric dating; studies of
underground gas sources; development of low-background, large-area, single-
photon cryogenic silicon photomultiplier photosensors; liquid argon-based time-
of-flight positron emission tomography system for enhanced cancer screening,
and; the worldâ€™s tallest cryogenic distillation tower to improve availability of
stable rare isotopes for medical and energy applications. Also included are
training and education opportunities, including a summer school experience in
the Cortez-Durango region that will offer increased access to underrepresented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US DarkSide program led the DarkSide-50
experimental program that demonstrated the viability of background-free searches
in liquid argon. The DarkSide-20k experiment will extend the sensitivity of WIMP
dark matter searches in the cross-section vs. mass range to 4.6e-48 cm-squared
for the 90% confidence limit exclusion, and to 1.5e-47 cm-squared 5 sigma
discovery significance for a 1 TeV/c-squared WIMP mass after a 500t-yr exposure.
Unique US expertise in the construction of noble liquid detectors is leveraged
to ensure the success of this next generation detector. The scale of project,
and its resultant sensitivity, exceeds that of detectors currently operating,
leading to discovery, confirmation, or exclusion of the WIMP dark matter
hypothesis to the level where coherent scatters from atmospheric neutrinos
become an irreducible background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.