* 2131932
* Mid-scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Design and Construction of a New Generation of Ocean-Bottom Seismographs for the U.S. Academic Community
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 6,496,083.00

Understanding Earth processes, such as mantle dynamics and plate tectonics, and
the phenomena they produce, such as earthquakes, volcanoes, and planet-scale
elemental cycling, requires sustained deployments of seafloor instruments
because about 70% of Earth's surface is covered by the oceans. While data from
land-based instruments can tell us much about large-scale structure and
earthquake activity under the oceans, many questions related to the structure
and dynamics of mid-ocean ridges, hot-spots, subduction zones, and continental
margins can only be addressed by data acquired with Ocean Bottom Seismometers
(OBSs). Discovery is advanced by an efficient, effective means for scientists to
acquire ocean-bottom seismic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Bottom
Seismometer Instrument Center (OBSIC) at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
(WHOI) provides seafloor seismographs and at-sea technical support to all U.S.
investigators whose research would benefit from seafloor seismic observations.
OBSIC currently operates a fleet of 144 Ocean-Bottom Seismographs (OBS). The
existing fleet of OBS, however, is mostly old, heterogeneous, expensive to
maintain and operate, and inadequate to meet the current and future needs of the
seismological community. This award is to meet the demand of the U.S.
seismological community for a fleet of modern, uniform, high-performance,
seafloor seismic instrumentation that results in higher quality data and lower
experiment costs, and lower maintenance and operational costs. The award will
generate a proven design for a new generation of OBS and will result in 35
broadband/wideband OBS built to this new design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.