* 2131790
* Mid-Scale RI-1 (M1:DP): Preliminary &amp; Final Design of the 40T All Superconducting Magnet
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Gregory Boebinger, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 15,822,376.00

High magnetic fields are a valuable scientific tool for studying the properties
of newly discovered materials. Unique properties of new materials enable new
technologies to address current and future societal challenges. Currently, the
very highest continuous magnetic fields (up to 45 teslas, or one million times
the Earth’s magnetic field) are only available in high-powered magnets that cost
thousands of dollars of electricity for every hour of operation. High-magnetic-
field research on new materials is so important that the National High Magnetic
Field Laboratory (NHMFL) hosts thousands of scientists annually, but is unable
to meet the demand. By contrast, magnets that are entirely superconducting do
not dissipate heat and therefore do not need large amounts of electrical power
to operate. As such, superconducting magnets can provide high magnetic fields
virtually non-stop with a very low operating cost and low environmental impact.
However, commercial superconducting magnets are presently limited to 28 teslas.
The NHMFL built a world-record 32 tesla superconducting magnet in 2017. This
design project builds on that success by enabling the NHMFL to create a Final
Design for a 40 tesla superconducting magnet. Such a magnet will revolutionize
high-magnetic-field research, allowing researchers from throughout the
scientific community to study their new materials for as long as their
experiments require. Like the NHMFL’s world-record 32 tesla superconducting
magnet, this 40 tesla superconducting magnet will be able to operate at the same
time as the NHMFL’s high-powered magnets, greatly increasing the amount of time
available for experiments at high magnetic fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is completing a Final Design of a superconducting magnet capable of
delivering 40 teslas in a 34 millimeter bore at 4.2 K. The Final Design enables
the magnet to ramp from zero to 40 teslas in one hour or less to allow for high-
magnetic-field experiments requiring swept magnetic fields. The magnet will
advance research frontiers in quantum matter, including high temperature
superconductivity, Ising superconductivity, re-entrant superconductivity,
exciton condensation, non-Abelian quasiparticles, and topological matter in its
myriad forms. This Design Project includes significant computational and
experimental work to design, build, and test coils constructed from Rare Earth
Barium Copper Oxide (REBCO) tape in double-pancake form. Test coils subjected to
repeated cycling to high stress and repeated quenching from high current
illuminate the reliability of the design principles incorporated in the Final
Design of the 40 tesla superconducting magnet. Lessons learned from the test
coils allow the Final Design to be completed with high confidence in the
performance of an eventual 40 tesla superconducting magnet, construction of
which would be funded in a subsequent proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.