* 2131127
* SHF: Small: Architecting the COSMOS:A Combined System of Optical Phase Change Memory and Optical Links
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Ajay Joshi, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Todayâ€™s data-intensive applications that use graph processing, machine learning
or privacy-preserving paradigms demand memory sizes on the order of hundreds of
GigaBytes and bandwidths on the order of TeraBytes per second. To support the
ever-growing memory needs of the applications, Dynamic Random Access Memory
(DRAM) systems have evolved over the decades. However, DRAM will not be able to
support these large-capacity and -bandwidth demands in the future in an
efficient and scalable way. While there is research on a number of alternate
memory technologies (such as phase-change memory, magnetic memory, resistive
memory, etc.), there is no clear winner among these technologies to replace
DRAM. Moreover, none of these alternate memory technologies nor DRAM efficiently
complements the silicon-photonic link technology that is expected to replace
high-speed electrical links for processor-to-memory communication in the near
future. This project aims to address the problems arising from limited memory
capacity and bandwidth, which are significant limiting factors in application
performance, through a unified network and memory system called COSMOS. COSMOS
integrates Optically-controlled Phase Change Memory (OPCM) technology and
silicon-photonic link technology to achieve a "one-stop-shop" solution that
provides seamless high-bandwidth access from the processor to a high-density
memory. The project goes beyond solely using OPCM as a DRAM replacement, and
aims to demonstrate the true potential of OPCM as non-volatile memory and in
processing-in-memory (PIM) design scenarios. At a broader level, the project
seeks to improve the performance of many societal data-driven applications in
various domains, including healthcare, scientific computing, transportation, and
finance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project are to design
the first full system architecture for COSMOS, and then demonstrate its benefits
using realistic application kernels, when OPCM is used as a DRAM replacement, in
an OPCM+DRAM combination with persistence properties, and in OPCM as PIM
scenarios. To achieve these ambitious goals, the project is organized into the
following three research thrusts and a cross-cutting thrust. Thrust 1 designs a
full-system architecture using OPCM and silicon-photonic links to address the
memory capacity and bandwidth requirements of data-centric applications. Thrust
2 investigates the use of COSMOS for PIM, where the stored data is processed at
the speed of light. Thrust 3 aims to create mechanisms and methods for
application developers and the Operating System to profile and instrument
applications for making effective use of COSMOS. The Cross-cutting Thrust builds
a simulation methodology to accurately evaluate the benefits of OPCM as DRAM
replacement as well as for combined OPCM+DRAM and OPCM as PIM
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.