* 2131263
* CISE-MSI: DP: SaTC: Dynamically Enforcing User-Oriented Geospatial Restrictions for Drone Fly-Overs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Tianxing Chu, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2024
* USD 486,455.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unmanned aircraft systems, a.k.a.
drones, have recently become quite popular for commercial and recreational
purposes. However, no effective solutions exist to restrict drones from flying
over sensitive spaces such as homes, schools, hospitals, temporally-restricted
areas, etc., either as final destinations or while in-transit. This introduces
serious concerns related to: (i) privacy, e.g., drones taking pictures and/or
record video without explicit consent; (ii) cyber-security, e.g., drones used as
platforms for launching cyberattacks; (iii) safety, e.g., drone collisions that
may result in human affectations and financial costs. To address these concerns,
this project is developing No-Fly-Zone, an open-source framework that regulates
drone fly-overs by providing the means to: (i) identify and delimit sensitive
physical spaces; (ii) specify and enforce restrictions on drone flights; (iii)
calculate flight plans for drones passing over sensitive spaces; (iv) limit
airspace drone occupancy by orchestrating flight plans. Ultimately, No-Fly-Zone
involves a cutting-edge research agenda that has an impact across educational,
public, and commercial interests, and informs governing agencies on drone
operations in the National Airspace System. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
goals just mentioned, No-Fly-Zone introduces novel methodologies for: (i)
modeling and delimiting protection zones over sensitive spaces by leveraging
Light Detection and Ranging (lidar) and Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar
(InSAR); (ii) understanding and writing so-called fly-over policies by
leveraging Attributes and Space-Sensitive Access Control; (iii) storing,
retrieving, and evaluating fly-over policies by leveraging a cloud architecture
based on Distributed Hash Tables; (iv) developing navigation plans for drones by
leveraging Multi-Criteria Decision Making (MCDM) and Pareto Front (PF) to model
power consumption, payload capabilities, environmental parameters, protected
zones, and fly-over policies; (v) orchestrating navigation plans by means of
safety bubbles, which leverage Sense and Avoid (SAA) and Beyond Visual Line-of-
Sight (BVLOS) to model risks based on weather conditions, occupancy limits,
population density, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.