* 2131749
* AGS-PRF: Hydroclimate Response of the Southwestern United States (US) to Past and Future Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) Weakening
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Sophia Macarewich, Macarewich, Sophia Isabel
* Fellowship Award
* Soumaya Belmecheri
* 12/31/2022
* USD 86,168.00

The U.S. Southwest is a drought-prone region that hosts several growing
population centers, which are already characterized by marginal water
availability. Most models predict that climate change will exacerbate water
scarcity in the region but simulating hydroclimate dynamics in the Southwest
remains a challenge for coarse-resolution global climate models due to the
complex regional topography. This project will address this challenge through
the simulations of the rainfall variability and associated atmospheric dynamics
in the Southwest during a climate extreme period (between 18 to 14.7 thousand
years before present). In addition, a second set of model simulations will
investigate the end-twentieth century rainfall response in the Southwest under
projected scenarios of Atlantic Meridional Overturning weakening, a major ocean
current system. This will be accomplished using a novel multi-scale Earth system
modeling approach that will resolve both fine-scale dynamical features over
complex regional terrain and interactions with large-scale features of the
climate system. These modeling components will (1) provide an opportunity to
identify the atmosphere’s response to past climate changes and for improved
understanding of the dynamical mechanisms involved in present and future
rainfall changes in the region; and will (2) advance the understanding of the
future impacts of a projected decline in Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation (AMOC) on hydroclimate in the U.S. Southwest. The addition of water
isotope tracers in the modeling framework will permit investigation of AMOC
teleconnections with Southwest hydroclimate through direct comparisons with
regional hydroclimate proxies (e.g., speleothems). Collectively, the modeling
components explore a past and a future interval of climate change to better
understand the dynamical mechanisms involved in present and future precipitation
changes in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
include a greater understanding of the role of Atlantic Meridional Overturning
in regional hydroclimate by investigating linkages between AMOC and rainfall in
past and future climates. The research and outreach activities will provide
scientific and professional development for an early career scientist. This
includes scientific collaborations and networking, mentoring and science
communication with water stakeholders in the region. The outreach activities
will facilitate open discussions between scientists and Southwest water managers
and stakeholders to ensure that research holds value beyond academic circles.
Additionally, the PI will engage and facilitate the discussions on mental health
in Geosciences and STEM through graduate seminars and lab-
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.