* 2131866
* Mid-Scale RI-1(M1:DP): Next Generation Radar Designs
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Steven Wilkinson, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,763,357.00

Associated Universities Inc. (AUI), the manager of the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory (NRAO) and Green Bank Observatory (GBO) for NSF, and Raytheon
Technologies, Inc. will partner on an integrated technical design for important
new scientific and space domain awareness radar capabilities for the United
States. They will develop detailed conceptual designs for (a) a high-power high
frequency phased-array radar transmitter for the Green Bank Telescope (GBT), and
(b) a medium-power phased-array modular transmitter system for deployment on
antennas under design for the next-generation Very Large Array (ngVLA) and other
radar-capable facilities. Successful designs are intended for use by these and
other more speculative activities still to be defined. The project includes a
focus on broadening participation by under-represented minorities (URM) and the
public in radar astronomy and related STEM fields. It includes research and
training experiences for URM students, middle and high school science lesson
plans, and multimedia public outreach materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-power
radar observations provide unique information about natural solar system
objects, including planets, near-Earth asteroids and other nearby objects, and
about human activities in space, including spacecraft structure, performance and
navigation, both nearby and beyond Earth. New technical directions and
operational approaches have been presented to the current Planetary Science and
Astrobiology Decadal Survey for discussion. They include more powerful
transmitters, flexible phased-array transmit hardware, and antenna arrays as
transmitters and receivers, and they all promise increased sensitivity and
better operational readiness. The design work between NSFâ€™s NRAO and GBO, and
Raytheon, their industrial collaborator, is an essential first step to a
transformative future across multiple disciplines. These technologies will drive
advances in planetary defense, technology transfer and commercialization, and
benefits for local communities surrounding observing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.