* 2131810
* I-Corps:  Viral vector platform technology for cell type-specific gene delivery
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Daniel Schmidt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a precision gene therapy technology for the treatment of genetic
diseases and cancer. Gene therapy is a technique that modifies a person’s genes
to treat the cause of the disease, rather than the symptoms. It may offer the
possibility to reduce or eliminate the frequent hospitalizations, invasive
transplants, and expensive or side-effect-prone therapies that are an everyday
reality for current patients. Viral vectors are a type of gene therapy
technology currently used in several therapies that are either approved by the
FDA or are undergoing clinical trials. Viral vectors that are safe to use in
humans have several limitations including the types of diseases they may treat,
high cost, and months-long hospital stays for patients. The proposed technology
may address these limitations and represents a significant step towards creating
cost-effective and adaptable therapeutics for patients with genetic disorders
and cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of user-configurable, viral vector platform technology for cell
type-specific gene delivery for gene therapy applications. The platform uses a
genetically engineered Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) that has been modified to
remove its ability to cause infectious disease and to carry therapeutic genes
into human cells. In addition, this AAV has been engineered to allow the
attachment of antibodies that direct AAV infection towards cell types and
tissues that express the receptor recognized by the antibody. Using the proposed
technology, it is possible to target different tissues by “arming” a pre-made,
non-infective AAV with a different antibody. Pilot studies using the same batch
of pre-made AAV with four different purchased antibodies showed the ability to
selectively transduce cells expressing different surface receptors. Composite
AAVs structurally separate precision delivery and therapeutic payload, allowing
each to be engineered independently. Furthermore, antibodies have emerged as an
approved class of therapeutic agents to numerous human diseases including
cancer, auto-immune diseases, and diseases with a hematopoietic origin.
Leveraging existing antibodies for precise targeting of gene delivery may
represent a new mode of action for these drugs, further driving the impact of
the proposed technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.