* 2132243
* I-Corps: Flow-aided aerial vehicle navigation and control
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Silvia Ferrari, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is the development of technology to
extend battery life in unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs). Small unmanned aerial
vehicles have been utilized in a wide range of fields, including
aerophotography, delivery, surveying, and surveillance in confined spaces.
However, the utilization and duration of flight of small UAVs is often limited
by the allowed on-board battery capacity, especially in extreme windy conditions
when UAVs need to make extra effort to reject disturbances and remain robust.
The proposed technology solves the UAV navigation and control problems in
turbulence by traversing turbulent flows using minimal time and energy. The new
technology may enable more UAVs to operate in conditions beyond their current
capabilities and could make UAVs more commercially viable. In addition, the new
product fits well with the current trend towards convenient, contact-free,
autonomous drone delivery services. The development of efficient UAV navigation
and control strategies in wind may benefit the drone delivery industry in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
energy-harvesting control algorithms to extend battery life in unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs). Inspired by principles from particle transport theory in fluid
dynamics, the proposed technology provides intelligent control algorithms that
enable the aerial vehicle to leverage beneficial flow structures, such as
turbulent eddies, rising thermals, and tailwinds, and navigate in highly
turbulent environments with significantly less expenditure of time and energy.
An implicit model following (IMF) controller was developed to make the aerial
vehicle follow the dynamic behavior of settling inertial particles undergoing
the fast-tracking effect and extract energy from turbulent flows. Given on-board
flow measurements, the controlled aerial vehicle tends to travel under
advantageous tailwinds more often, while avoiding adverse headwinds
autonomously. Compared to existing control techniques, the innovation of this
technology is that prior knowledge of the exact flow parametric model is not
required, and controlled aerial vehicles may harvest energy from wind gusts
instead of using battery power to compensate for external wind
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.