* 2132343
* EAGER: SUPER: Coupling High-Energy Phonons into High-Tc Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Charles Ahn, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project supports research
and education activities to create a more robust superconductor with the help
from light elements on the periodic table. Superconductivity - the lossless
transmission of electricity in a solid-state material - most commonly relies on
the formation of electron pairs due to an attraction provided by atomic
vibrations. In most bulk superconductors, this vibration is too slow to maintain
the electron pairing at everyday temperatures - lots of electrons with little
glue. Compounds with light elements naturally contain the fastest atomic
vibrations, but the highly vibrative nature also prevents the formation of a
stable, compact crystal lattice that can conduct electricity - a lot of glue
with few electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this EAGER project is
to use advanced synthesis to create a stable and compact crystal lattice
enriched with light elements such as hydrogen, carbon and lithium. This would
provide both sufficient electrons and pairing glue simultaneously, therefore
strengthening superconductivity to weather ambient conditions. One way is to
create preferred light-element occupation sites in existing layered bulk
superconductors via selected large molecule intercalation. The other is to grow
high-temperature superconductors on light-element substrates layer-by-layer.
Both methods are aimed to create atomic confinement of light elements in
proximity to pre-existing superconducting electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the education of three graduate students, cohesively working
across the full cycle of synthesis, characterization and theory. The intuitive
and generic conceptual approach is to be developed as an important teaching
example in upper division college physics curriculum. This project also offers a
demonstration of the modern materials design pipeline, which will be used to
develop research projects of undergraduate and public-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
project supports research and education activities that investigate the possible
use of high-frequency phonons from light elements to boost superconductivity in
existing high-temperature superconductors. In particular, lithium and hydrogen
rich compounds will be used to boost the transition temperature and critical
supercurrent of copper- and iron-based superconductors. Unlike traditional
methods, which often result in uncontrolled light element placement and
structural damage to the treated material, this project aims to better regulate
the process with i) a dopant-assisted light-element intercalation in bulk
materials, and ii) light element substrate-enhanced superconductivity in thin
film superconductors. The first method creates preferred light-element
occupation sites in existing layered bulk superconductors via selected large
molecule intercalation. The other method aims to grow high-temperature
superconductors on light-element substrates layer-by-layer. In practice, via
both approaches, a highly ordered solid state structure with enriched light
element composition is to be created and stabilized under ambient conditions.
This project examines the effectiveness of the general framework of “hybrid”
superconductivity, achieved via targeted combination of favorable
superconducting contributors - strong pairing and strong conduction. The
proposed bulk and thin-film synthesis complement each other in terms of
tunability and applicable characterization methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project supports the education of three graduate students, cohesively working
across the full cycle of synthesis, characterization and theory. The intuitive
and generic conceptual approach is to be developed as an important teaching
example in upper division college physics curriculum. This project also offers a
demonstration of the modern materials design pipeline, which will be used to
develop research projects of undergraduate and public-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.