* 2132093
* EFRI E3P: Supercritical Extraction for the Elimination of End-of-Life Plastics (SCE3P)
* ENG,EFMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Vijaya Rangari, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,076,331.00

Multilayer plastic packaging is critical to keeping a wide range of food
products, including meats, juice pouches, cheeses, and prepared foods, safe
during transportation and storage. To function, multiple materials are used
together to meet requirements that individual materials cannot. However, most
multilayer food packaging winds up in landfills because current recycling
processes cannot separate the various components. In this project, researchers
will use high pressure and high temperature to turn gases into supercritical
fluids that enable separating the materials used in typical multilayer food
packaging. The higher value of the resulting purer material streams will improve
the economics of recycling multilayer structures. The process will be designed
to allow straightforward implementation on equipment commonly found at existing
recycling plants. The work will include a thorough assessment of both the
economic and environmental impacts of increased recycling rates for multilayer
packaging. If successful, the project will result in new technology that
increases the recyclability of plastic waste, reduces the amount of plastic
waste entering landfills, and limits the environmental impact of food packaging.
The project will also enhance education, diversity, and workforce development by
combining efforts from a large four-year university, a historically black
university, and a two-year community college in a highly interdisciplinary
approach to addressing the research questions. Graduate and undergraduate
students participating in the research will cross-train at the partner
institutions and develop community outreach activities on polymers, recycling,
and related science for use at open houses and area
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to valorize the multilayer
polymer waste stream through a process designed to reclaim high-value barrier
polymers from multilayer food packaging and simultaneously recycle the
polyolefins. The investigators hypothesize: 1) supercritical CO2, in combination
with cosolvents, will improve the extraction of ethylene vinyl alcohol (EVOH)
and polyxylylene adipamide (MXD6) from multilayer systems by increasing the
polymer concentration in the solvent phase and enhancing the solvent's ability
to penetrate the multilayer structure via plasticization, 2) modifying extrusion
equipment to use supercritical fluids offers several advantages including
enhanced layer separation and dissolution kinetics and reduced costs including
overall recycling energy and recycling facility retrofitting expenses, 3) the
materials reclaimed by this process will be suitable for use in closed-loop
recycling, and 4) the proposed technology will increase overall recycling rates,
having a net positive environmental impact. The work will increase our
thermodynamic and kinetic understanding of the phase behavior of commercially
important plastics and their mixtures in supercritical CO2 with cosolvents.
Fundamental understanding of how solvent choice, processing conditions (e.g.,
temperature and pressure), and extruder screw design impact partition
coefficients and polymer extraction kinetics will be gained. A combination of
techno-economic analysis, life-cycle assessment, and economic and environmental
impact analysis will be used to establish the potential impact of recycling
multilayer food packaging on the environment and determine the need for policy
instruments to promote the recycling of these
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.