* 2132037
* RII Track-4: NSF: Inhibition of Catalytic Deactivation Mechanisms during CO2 Utilization
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,02/28/2023
* James Dorman, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/28/2023
* USD 95,200.00

The ability to convert CO2 and methane into fuels can further enable the
hydrogen economy. This ability can also promote US energy independence while
limiting the emission of greenhouse gases. However, the controlled conversion of
these gases into basic building block chemicals is currently performed at high
temperatures, promoting the long-term degradation of the catalyst. This project
aims to understand how deactivation pathways can be prevented using a
nonreducible thin-film over-layer that confines surface species to active sites
and limits unwanted reactions. Understanding these processes is fundamental to
the development of new, catalysts with increased stability that can lower
reaction temperatures and decrease overall energy consumption. Specifically, the
PI will partner with Oak Ridge National Laboratory to observe the formation and
movement of reacting surface molecules and the impact of these phenomena on the
evolving catalyst structure and its degradation. Additionally, this NSF EPSCoR
RII Track-4 fellowship project provides hands-on training in state-of-the-art
characterization tools. The skills developed during this project will be used to
enhance the current suite of tools at Louisiana State University to probe other
industrially relevant reactions that are important to the regional economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing CO2-based feedstocks impacts numerous
industrially relevant chemical processes, such as dry reforming of methane. To
maximize conversion, catalysts are engineered for high surface areas and metal
site dispersions. However, the reaction conditions needed to overcome
thermodynamic equilibrium limitations result in the instability of catalyst
structures prone to coking and undesirable side reactions. The mechanisms behind
metal ripening and their subsequent effects are poorly understood, and in some
studies, large changes in metal dispersion can have little effect on catalyst
performance. The PI hypothesizes that metal clusters deposited on a catalyst
substrate can be stabilized using a porous, nonreducible thin film to limit
metal surface diffusion and growth and adsorbate spillover. Limiting
substrate/metal ripening reduces coke-derived deactivation and maintains high
metal dispersions responsible for the catalytic activity. This hypothesis is
based on recent literature, which shows that porous shell layers can withstand
ripening at some conditions. The proposed work will be performed in
collaboration with Oak Ridge National Lab (ORNL), leveraging their in-operando
characterization techniques and high-resolution aberration-corrected electron
microscopes. Access to these unique capabilities will facilitate hands-on
training with a superior electron microscope in preparation for LSU’s
acquisitions of STEM, operando infrared, and chemisorption analyzers vital in
understanding surface chemistry. This experience will strengthen the PIs
research profile, specifically in the area of operando surface chemistry, and
enable the study of other energy-intensive industrially relevant
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.