* 2132133
* EFRI E3P: CAS: Transformative Upcycling of Polymers by Activating Chemistries
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Tibor Szilvasi, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,015,900.00

This project envisions a transformative “upcycling” of common end-of-life
plastics (ELPs) by depolymerization (i.e., deconstruction) mechanisms that are
achieved using “activating” chemistries. These activating chemistries are
straightforward, scalable chemical reactions that modify the waste polymers such
that the subsequent depolymerization products are much more valuable and useful
than products obtained through conventional recycling or established
depolymerization chemistries. This project focuses on enabling depolymerization
and upcycling of two of the most difficult to recycle polymers - poly(vinyl
chloride) (PVC) and polyurethane (PU) materials. The global demand for PVC and
PU products continues to grow despite the lack of any viable recycling methods
for these materials. This project will develop novel methods for converting
waste PVC to small molecules that have existing uses as chemical intermediates,
consumer products, solvents, and other end-uses. Similarly, polyurethane (PU)
materials will be broken down into more valuable molecules via reactions that
yield carbon-carbon double bonds in the final products. Oligomers (the products
of partial depolymerization) derived from PVC and poly(ethylene terephthalate)
(PET) will be used to form thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs). Unlike thermoset
elastomers, TPEs can be melted, molded, reprocessed, are potentially easier to
recycle, and are much more valuable than typical thermoset elastomers and
plastics. The project provides highly interdisciplinary research training for
graduate and undergraduate students and creates an annual summer immersion
experience for high school students in Tuscaloosa, AL. The summer immersion
experience is expected to instill a personal investment in helping to eliminate
ELPs from the environment and to explore the students’ interest in pursuing
engineering as a career. A synergistic activity for high school students aligned
with the American Chemical Society Project SEED is planned at Iowa State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Engineering Directorate's
Division of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities and the Division
of Chemistry, this project will recover the intrinsic value “locked away” within
ELPs by using activating chemistries that enable new depolymerization products
from ELPs. These enabling technologies will incentivize recovery rather than
disposal (which is a particular concern for “hard to recycle” materials such as
PVC and PU), reduce dependence on petroleum resources, and prevent plastic
wastes from polluting the environment. The project will create transformative
new avenues for upcycling common ELPs via activating chemistries and subsequent
depolymerization into value-added small molecules, including methods that
recombine these molecules into more useful and durable polymer products. A
fundamental understanding of how to convert these wastes into valuable small
molecules will be gained through an integrated experimental-computational
approach that examines the proper conditions for PVC and PU activation and
depolymerization. The synthesis of TPE materials via partial depolymerization of
PET and PVC and subsequent recombination of these oligomers promises to create
much more valuable and useful polymer materials from waste. The research plan
emphasizes understanding reaction mechanisms and selectivity, product
analysis/identification, separation of the depolymerization products of PVC and
PU, and characterization of TPE materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.