* 2132021
* RII Track-4 NSF: Novel Structure and Properties of Hybrid Electrolytes for Lithium Metal Batteries
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Yue Zhou, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 229,612.00

High-performance and high-safety lithium-ion batteries are highly demanded to
enable the fast development of wearable electronics, electric vehicles, etc. The
hybrid electrolytes in battery cells such as lithium metal batteries have been
studied recently to have the potential to meet the requirements. However, the
extant works still suffer from the trade-off between mechanical strength and
ionic conductivity, as well as the fundamental understanding of how those
properties influence the performance of the assembled cells. This NSF EPSCoR RII
Track-4:NSF fellowship project will provide an opportunity to collaborate with
researchers at the California Institute of Technology (Caltech) to perform
fundamental studies on hybrid electrolytes by integrating experimental and
simulative efforts. The long-term collaboration is expected to improve the
infrastructure in a sustainable way on the research capacity in the energy
storage, high-performance computing, and education in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) field. This project will also encourage
underrepresented minorities to pursue science and engineering-related projects
based on several programs on campus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
this EPSCoR RII Track-4:NSF fellowship project is to develop a new understanding
of the coupling mechanism between the properties of the novel hybrid
electrolytes and the electrochemical performance of the Li metal battery by
elucidating the process-structure-performance correlation of the hybrid
electrolytes quantitatively. By partnering with researchers at Caltech, density
functional theory-based first-principles calculations and experimental studies
will be integrated to fundamentally investigate the interaction of the
components in the hybrid electrolytes as well as the interaction with the
lithium salts to understand their effects on the performance of the hybrid
electrolytes. Driven by the simulative studies, advanced manufacturing
techniques will be developed to fabricate unique hybrid electrolytes with the
nonisotropic and tailored nanostructure. It holds the great potential to break
the trade-off between high mechanical properties and high ionic conductivity in
hybrid solid electrolytes. That, in turn, will provide effective strategies for
the energy storage community to design and fabricate hybrid electrolytes with
desired properties for safe and high-performance Li metal
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.