* 2132293
* I-Corps: Air purification technology using germicidal ultraviolet radiation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Nausheen Shah, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to bring the
public health benefits of hospital grade air purification to a broad customer
base, from personal protective equipment (PPE) to room air disinfection. The
COVID-19 pandemic has increased awareness and demand for airborne pathogen
purification which will likely continue long-term. Currently available
solutions, from fitted N-95 masks to powered air purifying respirators (PAPRs)
are often either too cumbersome, too restricting, too uncomfortable, or too
expensive for widespread use. The proposed technology could be used as a module
to enhance or to be an alternative to pre-existing PAPRs for industrial markets.
Applications requiring high-level air purification have often required cost
prohibitive, customized, upper room ultraviolet (UV) germicidal irradiation (UR-
UVGI) systems. The proposed technology provides an economical, standard, plug-
and-play solution with comparable germicidal efficacy, making hospital-grade air
purification practically achievable for a host of public spaces such as schools,
offices, restaurants, and transportation hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will further develop an ultraviolet (UV) based air disinfection
technology which amplifies UV-C radiation to germicidal levels capable of
purifying flowing air. The UV-C is generated using light emitting diode (LED)
sources to prevent harmful by-products, while providing radiation doses that
maximize damage to pathogen nucleic acids. The current level of air disinfection
is governed not only by the incident radiation but by the residence time
distribution of air in the irradiated zone. Inhomogeneities in radiation or
airflow cause a significant bottleneck in disinfection efficiency. Further, the
radiation incident on the flowing air needs to be sufficient, given the power
limitations of UV-C LEDs. The proposed project uses a number of cavities, with
particular geometrical and reflective properties, to provide amplified, uniform
incident radiation and mixing conditions to allow for integrated and serial
disinfection, ameliorating current issues. A collection of disinfecting cavities
can be configured to accommodate the required level of air disinfection or the
clean air delivery rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.