* 2132160
* RII Track-4:FAST: Numerical Simulations of Bose-Einstein Condensates in Microgravity (NumeriCAL)
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Christopher Herdman, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 244,362.00

When cooled to extremely low temperatures, certain types of atoms can form a
quantum mechanical phase of matter known as a Bose-Einstein Condensate (BEC). In
a BEC, the wave-like nature of matter becomes macroscopically apparent, as a
large number of atoms occupy the same quantum mechanical state. Experiments have
demonstrated the macroscopic quantum mechanical behavior of BECs, including the
interference of matter-waves, quantum superpositions of matter on macroscopic
length scales, and quantum mechanical vortices. BECs have the potential to be a
platform for quantum technologies such as ultra-sensitive quantum detectors and
quantum computers. NASA's Cold Atom Laboratory (CAL) is a unique experimental
system that allows for BEC experiments to be performed on the International
Space Station. Recently, CAL has been used to create and manipulate BECs in the
microgravity environment of Earth's orbit. This project aims to further the
characterization, understanding, and development of these fundamental
experiments by developing numerical simulations of the BECs formed in CAL
experiments. This work will be done in collaboration with undergraduate student
trainees and the CAL experimental team at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
These simulations will facilitate future CAL experiments in probing fundamental
physics in ways that are not achievable in terrestrial experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop numerical simulations of
ultracold atom experiments performed in NASA's Cold Atom Laboratory (CAL) on the
International Space Station. The unique experimental capability of the CAL
instrument enables probing quantum many-body systems in new regimes of
temperatures and densities and allows for matter wave interferometry with higher
sensitivity than can be achieved in terrestrial experiments. Recently, CAL has
been used to create and manipulate Bose-Einstein Condensates (BEC) in the
microgravity environment of earth’s orbit. Future experiments involving CAL and
related technologies could include high precision tests of fundamental physics
such as searches for dark energy, tests of Einstein's equivalence principle, and
gravitational wave detectors. However, the compact design and atom-chip based
technology used in CAL can lead to undesired field gradients and local
perturbations to the trapping potential, which can limit the range of accessible
temperatures and lead to asymmetries and fragmentation of the BEC. The PI will
develop path integral Monte Carlo simulations of trapped ultracold bosons that
model CAL experiments. These simulations will help characterize the CAL
experimental system, interpret experimental data, and develop future
experiments. Numerical studies will address fragmentation of the BEC,
limitations to the accessible temperatures &amp; densities, immiscibility in
binary BEC mixtures, and loss of symmetry in bubble-BEC experiments. These
numerical simulations will aid the CAL experimental team in pushing the limit of
their experiments and advance investigations of fundamental
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.