* 2132823
* Collaborative Research: Self-Identification for Robot Manipulation under Uncertainty Aided by Passive Adaptability
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Aaron Dollar, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2025
* USD 399,032.00

This grant supports research that will contribute novel knowledge at the
intersection of robotic manipulation and active perception, promoting both the
progress of science and the advancement of national prosperity. To enable
general-purpose robots that can offer sophisticated physical interactions with
the world, the capability of robots to work under limited perception is
essential. However, as traditional approaches sequentially formulate perception
and manipulation into decoupled system components, robot manipulation skills
have been passively constrained by the perception system. This award supports
research to establish a new paradigm for enabling the interactions between
perception and manipulation, and will fundamentally transform the roles of both
to actively facilitate each other. The key concept, termed as self-
identification, is a process where robots start to manipulate objects without
full knowledge of the system, or even of itself, while in the meantime creating
opportunities for the perception component to acquire necessary information that
were impossible otherwise. In turn, the manipulation capability is significantly
upgraded with the extra information obtained. As this new ability can improve
many real-world robot applications, such as industrial production, household
services, and healthcare applications, the results from this research will
benefit the U.S. economy and society. This research involves several topics
ranging from computer science, mechanical engineering, and sensor technology, to
control theory and artificial intelligence. The multi-disciplinary framework
will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups and positively impact
the engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages various
types of passive (or low-level) adaptability in robot manipulators, especially
that coming from mechanical compliance (springs or soft structures), low-level
impedance control, or underactuated mechanisms, to allow the robot to conduct
exploratory motions that are externally observed and used within an adaptive
estimation scheme to self-identify the system. The robot-object-environment
system will be actively reconfigured while maintaining the desired states and
stability in an essentially open-loop way, while external observations of these
changes are used to generate online estimations and controllers. Essentially, it
changes the traditional paradigm from “sense, plan, act” to “act, sense, plan”,
with an emphasis on efficient and effective task execution under limited
sensing. The research team will establish generic self-identification frameworks
for model-complete, model-incomplete, and model-free manipulation systems to: 1)
compensate for limited perception abilities, where needed, to accomplish tasks
that are traditionally infeasible; 2) maximize their perception capabilities to
further improve the system’s task-awareness and robustness; and 3) incorporate
the results or the entire process of self-identification into manipulation
planning and control to enable robust manipulation under physical and sensing
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.