* 2132566
* RAPID: The effusive to explosive transition of La Soufrière, St. Vincent: Insights from petrology and hygrometry
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Holli Frey, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2022
* USD 15,691.00

The on-going eruption of La Soufrière provides the unique opportunity to
understand and evaluate a volcanic event as it is occurring and evolving in
almost real-time. Unique to this study, mineral hygrometry will be applied to
assess the pre-eruptive water content dissolved in the melt, as recorded by the
crystallization of phenocryst rims and/or microlites in scoria from the first
eruptive phases on April 9th and 10th. If a buildup of volatiles is driving the
eruption, one would expect to see that reflected in the water content recorded
by the mineral phases. One can also readily determine if magma mixing was an
eruption trigger by comparing the zoning profiles of co-existing minerals, as
magma mixing and degassing result in contrasting patterns. Using crystal size
distribution and textures of microlites will enable decompression pathways to be
estimated and ascent rates of the explosive phase better understood. The magma
chamber conditions just prior to the eruption can also be estimated. When
combined with similar data from the effusive 2021 lava dome or lithics entrained
in the explosive deposits, the causes of the differences in eruptive style can
be established. This effort will be useful to the authorities monitoring the
eruption. It is a substantive international collaboration and will fund the
research of undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In late December 2020, a lava
dome began extruding in the summit crater of La Soufrière, a stratovolcano on
the eastern Caribbean island of St. Vincent, after exhibiting no volcanic
activity since 1979. On April 9th, 2021, the eruptive style transitioned to an
explosive phase, with multiple Plinian events in the first few hours of
eruption. Based on the recommendation of the UWI Seismic Research Centre (UWI-
SRC), the official agency for monitoring the ongoing eruption, the government of
St. Vincent issued an evacuation of the red zone (&gt;16,000 people) less than
24 hours prior to the eruption. The transition from effusive to explosive
behavior was abrupt and it is unclear what mechanism triggered the ash venting
phase, which has severely affected St. Vincent with significant ashfall (also
affecting neighboring Barbados and St. Lucia), pyroclastic density currents, and
lahars. Throughout the changing eruption styles, La Soufrière has been
extensively monitored using seismicity, ground deformation, gas emissions, and
remote sensing by the UWI-SRC. Based on gas emission and water geochemistry data
obtained by the PIs during the effusive phase, we hypothesize that the magmatic
system was not degassing, leading to a buildup of volatiles which eventually
triggered the eruption. Using various petrologic tools, this hypothesis shall be
tested and the likelihood of similar behavior in the future shall be assessed.
This effort will be useful to the authorities monitoring the eruption. It is a
substantive international collaboration and will fund the research of
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.