* 2132227
* RII Track-4:NSF: Enhancing Structural Science in the Rocky Mountain Northwest  Through Microcrystal Electron Diffraction (MicroED)
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Daniel Decato, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 154,755.00

Revealing the atomic makeup of molecules, and their subsequent 3-dimensional
structure, is at the crux many research programs. Methods for mapping the atomic
structure of molecules are diverse, yet recent advancements have inspired
innovative techniques making more complex structural studies possible. This
fellowship will enable training in a rapidly developing cryo-electron microscopy
(CryoEM) method called microcrystal electron diffraction (MicroED). MicroED maps
molecules using the same diffraction phenomena as X-ray crystallography.
However, MicroED employs electrons which permits data collection on crystals
about a billionth of the size needed for X-ray diffraction. Using such
vanishingly small crystals helps address a common obstacle of small molecule and
macromolecular X-ray crystallography—achieving sizable single crystalline
materials. This feature will motivate further refinement of MicroED methods, and
the technique will ultimately become a common option for structure elucidation
studies. The training will be reinforced by the curation of education materials
that will benefit future generations of structural scientists and promote the
value of this emerging technique.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of
this proposal is for the PI to acquire the ability to lead and conduct MicroED
experiments to elucidate molecular structures. Through remote learning and
collaborative visits to the National Center for CryoEM Access and Training
(NCCAT), the PI and two trainees will obtain comprehensive instruction on the
entire process of MicroED analysis from fundamental theoretical aspects through
to data presentation. The project will be research driven, focusing on both
halogen bonding oligomers and the resistance to inhibitors of Cholinesterase 8A
(RIC-8A) protein. The small molecule and macromolecular studies reflect the
diversity of MicroED studies and will ensure that a diverse range of researchers
may take advantage of the PI’s new MicroED skillset. The results and educational
materials will be disseminated though outreach, publications, and workshops,
exposing the technique to audiences of varied expertise. The PI will ultimately
provide MicroED services, enhancing the research efforts of structural
scientists at the University of Montana and surrounding EPSCoR institutions for
years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.