* 2132700
* SII-Center: SpectrumX – An NSF Spectrum Innovation Center
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2026
* Robert Weikle, University of Notre Dame
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jon Williams
* 08/31/2026
* USD 14,285,734.00

The worldwide growth of wireless communication, navigation, and telemetry has
provided immense societal benefits including mobile broadband data, Internet of
Things, mobile healthcare, and intelligent transportation systems. This award is
a grant to establish a Spectrum Innovation Initiative: National Center for
Wireless Spectrum Research (SII-Center) to ensure United States leadership in
future wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science and
engineering through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. An SII-
Center will promote transformative use and management of the electromagnetic
spectrum, charting a trajectory to ensure United States leadership in future
wireless technologies, systems, and applications in science and engineering
through the efficient use and sharing of the radio spectrum. An SII-Center will
also educate and develop an agile workforce needed to support industries of the
future which rely heavily on wireless technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award funds the establishment of the first national center for wireless spectrum
research, SpectrumX. The vision for SpectrumX is to be an inclusive
multidisciplinary and increasingly interdisciplinary center that applies
convergence research and team science to promote coexistence among disparate use
cases in the radio spectrum, particularly including “public good” use cases for
science and defense. In particular, SpectrumX will pursue its initial research
strategy in scientific receiver hardware with interference measurement and
mitigation capabilities; instrumentation of the radio spectrum in terms of
advanced sensing networks; collecting and sharing accurate regulatory, usage,
and economic data; flexible use rights that align incentives with efficient
outcomes; and distributed, data-rich, and cloud-ready system designs for more
efficient spectrum management and utilization. The project team is led by the
University of Notre Dame, bringing together broad and synergistic research
capabilities from a team of 41 founding researchers and staff from 27
universities, including 14 minority-serving or majority non-white institutions,
and partnerships across industry, government, and academia. The Center will be
an information and innovation hub connecting stakeholders. SpectrumX has a
Broadening Participation plan aimed to increase awareness of cultural competence
for all center participants to ensure that Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion are
woven into the core of the Center’s values and culture. SpectrumX will develop
spectrum-related curriculum for Grade 6 through master’s students and has an
Education and Workforce Development Plan to offer flexible pathways for
researchers and students from diverse backgrounds, disciplines, and levels of
maturity to engage in spectrum innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.