* 2132355
* Mechanistic Understanding of Oriented Attachment Crystallization Processes for Lead-Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Yangchuan Xing, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 09/30/2025
* USD 397,209.00

Lead-halide perovskite crystals have emerged as promising and affordable
materials for high-performance optoelectronics applications because of their
bright photoluminescence (PL) and narrow photoemission bandwidth (the color of
the emitted light). Their PL activity arises from quantum confinement effects
that occur when the crystal dimensions shrink below 20 nanometers. These small
crystals, however, have been found to be unstable under ambient conditions since
they are extremely reactive when illuminated and exposed to moisture or oxygen.
On the other hand, large crystals typically demonstrate a relatively low PL
activity due to undesirable crystal defect generation and weakened quantum
confinement effects. If a solution to the stability problems could be resolved,
lead-halide perovskites would lead to transformative technologies in many
commercial optoelectronic devices, including LEDs, lasers, solar cells, and
display panels. In this project, larger and more stable crystals with tunable
optoelectronic properties will be grown using an unconventional crystallization
approach. Called oriented attachment, the liquid-phase process works by
assembling the nanocrystals into larger crystals while retaining the desired
quantum confinement properties by the resulting interfaces between the assembled
nanocrystals. Because of the large number material and processing choices and
the lack of understanding of the oriented assembly process, this research
program will combine modeling and experimentation to uncover the physical and
chemical mechanisms behind the assembly process. The project will provide
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, as well as
underrepresented students. Plans also are in place to involve K-12 science
teachers in the project, to expand the outreach to their training of the next-
generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed
research is to understand the oriented attachment crystallization mechanisms of
CsPbBr3 lead-halide perovskite nanocrystals to control the defects of
Ruddlesden-Popper faults and grain boundaries as well as the crystal morphology
of 2-dimensional nanoplates or 3-dimensional nanocubes. The research is
motivated by preliminary experimental results demonstrating that assemblies of
lead-halide perovskite nanocrystals can generate planar defects that lead to
quantum confinement in the larger (but still nanoscale) assembled crystals.
While assembled crystal morphology, dimensionality, and defect structures can be
used to optimize its stability and quantum yield, these attributes cannot be
controlled in a systematic manner without a fundamental understanding of
oriented attachment crystal growth mechanisms, particularly translational and
rotational motions of the nanocrystals during the assembly process. Through a
modeling/experimental partnership, the research team will develop mechanistic
models of the interaction force/torque between non-spherical lead-halide
perovskite precursor nanoparticles. This model will be used to investigate the
crystallization mechanisms and how they depend on the molecular-level details of
the ligands attached to the nanocrystal surfaces. This nanocrystal interaction
model then will be incorporated as a rate expression in a population balance
model to study the dynamics of the oriented attachment crystallization process
to predict the time-evolution of assembled crystal morphology, dimensionality,
and defect density. A new upper-level undergraduate/graduate course will be
developed based on the fundamental knowledge obtained from the proposed research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.