* 2132918
* ASCENT: Ferroelectric-based Compute-in-Memory Dynamical Engine (Ferro-CoDE) to Solve Hard Combinatorial Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Mircea Stan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,498,658.00

Not all computing problems are created equal. At the heart of many, increasingly
important, applications ranging from the design of intelligent machines that can
explain their decisions, to electronic design automation for tamper-proof
integrated circuits, lies a class of combinatorial optimization problems that
remain an unconquered bastion of traditional digital computing. As a case in
point, solving the archetypal Boolean satisfiability problem, integral to many
such applications, requires exponentially increasing energy and computation time
that makes its practical deployment at large scales unfeasible. The proposed
research aims to address this challenge through a cohesive across-the-stack
effort that spans from the formulation of a physics-inspired computational model
to designing a supporting hardware ecosystem that encompasses novel engineered
materials and devices, circuits, and their subsequent system integration. The
foundational principle of the Ferroelectric-based Compute-in-Memory Dynamical
Engine (FerroCoDE) is based on exploiting the inherent efficiency of physical
phenomena in nature (namely, maximization of entropy production) by creating
unique synergies between physics and computation. To execute these computational
models efficiently, the team of researchers is developing a new hardware
platform that converges the unique capabilities of dynamical systems with
compute-in-memory architectures, enabled through fundamental innovation in
ferroelectric materials and their device functionalities. The FerroCoDE platform
will enable orders-of-magnitude improvement in computational efficiency enabling
the deployment of relevant applications at a scale and in (energy-constrained)
environments that are presently challenging to achieve using present day
computers. Furthermore, to broaden the impact of this work, the team will
develop a publicly accessible online platform, OscWorks, for applying
oscillator-based computing in education and research. Additionally, the team
will engage with K-12 and undergraduate students through various initiatives
such as workshops, online seminars, and research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The systems challenge that is being
addressed by this ASCENT project is to design, fabricate and demonstrate a
Ferroelectric Hafnium Oxide (HfO2) based Compute-in-Memory (CiM) Dynamical
Engine (FerroCoDE) that leverages the rich non-linear analog dynamics of
oscillators in conjunction with the area and energy efficiency of ferroelectric
CiM architecture to accelerate the computationally hard maximum satisfiability
problem. The FerroCoDE exploits a novel formulation of the satisfiability
problem as the direct maximization of entropy in the compute engine which is
being developed through a vertically integrated materials-to-systems effort that
focusses on: (i) Development of phase- and crystallographic-texture-engineered
HfO2-based ultra-thin ferroelectric and antiferroelectric films with tunable
properties; (ii) Design and fabrication of a novel non-volatile 1FeFET-1FTJ
memory cell and array to enable in-memory programming and evaluation of the
satisfiability clauses; and energy efficient AFE oscillator arrays (iii)
Building synergistic convergence between the hardware and algorithm; (iv) System
engineering, with emphasis on developing learning algorithms to optimize
dynamical system initialization, development of annealing schedules and hardware
scalability. (v) Development and demonstration of a FerroCoDE prototype on
PCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.