* 2132286
* Regulatory Mechanism for Cellular Dedifferentiation in C. elegans Germline
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Brett Keiper, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 01/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Throughout their lifespan, stem cells make several critical fate decisions: the
initial decision between self-renewal (remaining pluripotent) and
differentiation, and then the subsequent decision between whether to continue in
the differentiation path or to return to an undifferentiated state, i.e., to
engage in a form of dedifferentiation. Defects in cellular machineries governing
differentiation decisions can result in loss of a specific cell type,
overpopulation of undifferentiated cells, or overt growth of cancer cells. Over
the past decade, the molecular mechanisms related to the initial decision have
been described in major model organisms. However, an understanding of the
underlying determinants of the subsequent decisions is vague at best. The long-
term research objectives are to elucidate the mechanisms that cause
differentiating cells to return to an undifferentiated state, and to develop an
animal model to interrogate these mechanisms in the living organism. A molecular
understanding of this cellular event holds promise for the development of
powerful tools in stem cell biology, regenerative medicine, and oncotherapy. The
project also includes a component in which traditionally underserved populations
of students in North Carolina (minority high school students, community college
and undergraduate students) will be actively involved in the basic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses three key questions
concerning the fundamental molecular controls of a known dedifferentiation
mechanism: (1) How do differentiating cells maintain their state or return to
undifferentiated cells? (2) What regulatory network is involved in this cellular
process in vivo? (3) Is aberrant regulation of this network associated with
oncogenesis? Using the nematode C. elegans germline as a model system, the
investigators have previously reported that PUF-8 (an RNA-binding protein) and
LIP-1 (a dual-specificity phosphatase) are required to (a) maintain the meiosis
(differentiating state) of spermatocytes, and (b) prevent their
dedifferentiation into mitotic cells (undifferentiating state) by inhibiting
MPK-1 (an ERK homolog) signaling. Further studies found that the
differentiation/dedifferentiation decision is regulated in part by cell cycle
regulators (CYB-1 and X-ray) and mRNA decay factors (CGH-1 and CAR-1). In this
project, the researchers will investigate two hypotheses: In the absence of
PUF-8 and LIP-1, (1) spermatocyte dedifferentiation requires cell cycle arrest
and the activation of cell survival pathways (Objective 1), and (2) inactivation
of mRNA decay factors induces the ectopic translation of mRNAs that initiate
spermatocyte dedifferentiation (Objective 2). To accomplish this goal, the
researchers will take multidisciplinary approaches, including RNAi screening,
genetic/functional analysis, CRISPR/Cas9-based genome editing, X-ray-based
biophysical analysis, and high-resolution polysome profiling. Findings from the
study will not only elucidate the fundamental mechanisms of the
differentiation/dedifferentiation decision in vivo, but they will also provide a
novel working platform for the identification of therapeutic targets for
dedifferentiation-mediated cellular regeneration and
tumorigenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.