* 2132040
* Technology Developments to Advance Antarctic Research: A Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Amanda Staudt, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 07/31/2023
* USD 215,063.00

Research in the Antarctic region poses tremendous challenges due to the region’s
remoteness, isolation, and extreme weather. The U.S. Antarctic Program is
responsible for helping the scientific community find ways to overcome these
challenges, and operate safely and effectively in this unique terrain. The
proposed workshop activity will help NSF identify and explore a variety of
cutting-edge technological advances that facilitate Antarctic research and the
logistics that support this research. The types of technological developments
that may be explored include, for instance, those related to new environmental
sensors; data and communications technologies; electronics, batteries, and power
systems for cold-weather environments; transportation and housing; and
‘autonomous’ instruments that can operate without human presence. Advances in
these areas will allow Antarctic research to be carried out in a way that is
more efficient, safe, and reliable, and over a greater spatial/temporal range,
while minimizing costs and environmental impacts. The types of research that
such advances would enable can benefit society in numerous ways—for instance,
leading to better predictions of how sea level rise will unfold over time;
greater capacity to monitor and foresee disruptive space weather events;
stronger understanding of changes in biological and ecological communities that
can ripple across food webs; and insights into the capacity of the Southern
Ocean to absorb carbon and heat and thus drive the rate of climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help NSF better address Antarctic challenges, the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine proposes to organize a
workshop that will explore how cutting-edge technology developments can be
harnessed to build a stronger foundation for expanding scientific discovery--at
lower cost, with a smaller environmental impact, and with greater safety and
efficiency--across all fields of Antarctic and Southern Ocean research. A
committee will be convened to organize an online/virtual workshop forum that is
designed to solicit broad community input to this topic—drawing upon insights
from within and beyond the Antarctic research community. The workshop will
explore opportunities to advance areas such as: observing systems for
geological, biological, atmospheric, cryospheric, oceanic environments;
astronomy, astrophysics, space weather research sensors; data and communications
technologies; low-temperature electronics and system components, batteries, and
power systems for cold-weather environments; remote logistics; and robotics and
autonomous instrument engineering. This effort will build upon the extensive
networks of expertise and contacts from the Academies’ Polar Research Board, and
several other relevant National Academies Boards. National Academies' staff will
author a workshop proceedings, which will provide an overview of the information
shared, and a general synthesis of key ideas arising in the
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.