* 2132843
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: A New Paradigm for Distributed Information Processing, Simulation and Inference in Networks: The Promise of Law of Small Numbers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Farhad Shirani Chaharsooghi, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,962.00

The ability to access, process, and store distributed data in a reliable,
efficient, and secure manner has become indispensable in everyday lives. A
variety of emerging applications such as augmented reality, autonomous vehicles,
and cloud computing heavily rely on handling large amounts of distributed
information. The pandemic has further accentuated the global need for
technologies that enable communication, collaboration, education and scientific
discourse whilst maintaining physical distance, and this has increased awareness
of the critical nature of the communication network infrastructure. The
exponentially increasing demands for faster data processing and higher
communication rates pose new challenges. This project addresses these challenges
by developing novel approaches and techniques for distributed information
processing, randomness generation, data storage and transmission, and inference.
The project will tightly integrate research with a significant education and
outreach program consisting of two focus areas: (i) Training students in
interdisciplinary research, and (ii) Broadly disseminating research outcomes in
the forms of new curricular development and student involvement. A concerted
effort will be made to broaden the participation of women and under-represented
minority students in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on
two research thrusts that are expected to provide a deeper understanding of the
fundamental laws that govern the processing of information. In the first thrust,
a new framework is developed based on two conceptual innovations: (i) A
characterization of the fundamental memory structure of information processing
functions using a novel notion of dependency spectrum, and (ii) Development of a
new law of small numbers, which describes a fundamental interplay between the
dependency spectrum and distributed cooperation. In particular, the project
uncovers a trade-off between the correlation-preserving ability of distributed
information-processing functions --- which is necessary for distributed
cooperation --- and their ability to efficiently perform individual information-
processing tasks. The second thrust addresses two application scenarios. (i)
Building upon the concept of dependency spectrum, novel techniques are developed
for distributed data compression, and transmission of information in
interference and broadcast networks. (ii) The fundamental limits and practical
design of distributed randomness generation algorithms are derived. These
innovations lead to significant improvements over the state of the art both in
terms of characterizations of asymptotic performance limits and constructive
practical algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.