* 2132573
* NSF-AoF: CNS Core Small: Lean-NextG: Learning to Network the Edge in Next Generation Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Leandros Tassiulas, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 406,081.00

Artificial Intelligence (with its subset known as Machine Learning, ML) and
wireless networking (in its most recent generation, 5G, and beyond) are two
disruptive technologies paving the way for the world of tomorrow. The synergy of
these technologies is expected to benefit a wide range of application domains,
such as healthcare and environmental sustainability, that attract increasing
attention as the world moves on from the COVID-19 pandemic. In spite of this
potential, the existing frameworks for distributed ML used by these applications
fail to fully utilize the different types of network resources when managing the
data they use for training models. Furthermore, judiciously selecting important
subsets of data and making them available where they are needed the most
continues to be open an problem. This project aims to develop the theoretical
foundations for the in-network management of the training data to address the
above challenges and enhance the performance of the distributed ML models and
corresponding applications. Towards this, it combines tools from supervised and
reinforcement learning, deep neural networks, and network optimization. Building
on ongoing testbed and experimentation activities, the theoretical framework is
implemented and experimented with real-life wireless testbed components. The PIs
will also engage in various outreach activities targeting K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a new distributed Machine
Learning (ML) methodology that departs significantly from the current practice
of Federated Learning (FL) by enabling devices at the network edge to share
training data to each other as part of an overall fivefold data management
strategy that includes collecting, discarding, caching, processing and
transferring of data. These are additional degrees of freedom in optimizing data
management that can help improving the performance of the ML models and the
corresponding applications while at the same time exploring the entire gamut of
tradeoffs between the different types of resources in the edge network.
Specifically, the following three interdependent research thrusts are proposed:
(i) an optimization framework for data management that shifts the attention from
"where the data is collected"' to "where the data is processed" this way
facilitating the co-design of solutions to related learning and networking
problems, (ii) an extension of these solution methods by learning the importance
of the available data and optimizing their management decisions accordingly, and
(iii) a testbed implementation and experimentation with various applications
including one for environmental sensing and another for network slicing aimed at
augmented reality and virtual reality used in tele-
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.