* 2132131
* RII Track-4:NSF: Unveiling the structure and thermodynamic stability of pre-nucleation clusters and their role in multistep nucleation
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jonghyun Lee, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 257,035.00

Nucleation influences the subsequent crystallization process which impacts our
daily life. However, its mechanism remains poorly understood due to limited
characterization. The purpose of the research is to identify what occurs at the
early stage of nucleation of salt solutions. The proposed work will overcome the
current barriers using innovative experimental apparatus enabled by the
fellowship. The results of this project will advance the current knowledge on
what occurs in the early stage of nucleation, which will lead to a better
understanding of the nucleation mechanism of salt solutions. The fellowship
project will result in new multidisciplinary collaborations among Iowa State
University, the University of Iowa, Ames Laboratory, and Oak Ridge National
Laboratory. One doctoral student will acquire skills in molecular dynamics
simulation and gain extensive hands-on experience. Two undergraduate students
from the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE) will join the project
and present their work at the SHPE National Convention. Three existing outreach
programs at Iowa State University will be leveraged to share the fellowship
project with K-12 students, teachers, and parents. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
growing number of materials, including proteins, electrolyte solutions,
biominerals, and colloids, have been observed to nucleate in multistep forming
pre-nucleation clusters (PNCs) prior to nucleation. It is apparent that PNCs
play a critically important role in multistep nucleation (MSN), yet their nature
is poorly understood. The rationale for the proposed research is that a
mechanistic understanding of MSN is likely to provide new opportunities to
develop a method to control the nucleation and growth of desired crystal phases.
For this reason, the project aims to identify the structure, thermodynamic
stability, and role of PNCs in an aqueous NaCl solution. The PI team will
overcome the current experimental obstacles by integrating the solution
electrostatic levitator (SEL) developed by the PI team with neutron scattering
at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The long-term goal of the project is to
develop a predictive framework to anticipate and control the MSN in various
aqueous solutions. The proposed research will lead to a vertical-step
advancement towards elucidating the mechanism of MSN in electrolyte solutions
and would give deeper insights to better understand the MSN in other material
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.