* 2132400
* Global Search for D" Discontinuity Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Michael Thorne, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 343,014.00

Approximately 1600 miles beneath the surface of our planet a sharp contrast in
Earth properties, called the D" discontinuity, has been shown to exist in more
than 100 studies. However, geoscientists still don’t have great knowledge of
what this discontinuity physically represents. This is for two primary reasons:
most seismic sensors used to detect this discontinuity are spatially restricted
to those on land (only 30% of our planet is covered by land) and our current
technology only allows us to detect this discontinuity from the deepest of
earthquakes; extra noise in the seismic recordings have previously hindered our
ability to use shallower earthquakes. Shallow earthquakes, however, are more
numerous and occur in many more places on the Earth than deep earthquakes, so if
shallow earthquakes could be utilized, they would greatly improve the coverage
of the Earth in which we can search for the discontinuity. As such, this project
seeks to develop new technology that allows geoscientists to sense the subtle
seismic signals associated with this discontinuity using shallow earthquakes. In
addition, the project will develop a new modeling capability that will allow a
better understanding of what the materials making up this discontinuity are with
greater accuracy. Being able to determine where and what the D” discontinuity
represents is critical because it likely plays a large role in the ongoing
processes inside the Earth. For example, depending on where and what the D"
discontinuity is, could strongly affect the whole mantle convection process and
control where we observe volcanic activity from hot spot volcanoes such as
observed in Hawaii, Iceland, or Yellowstone. This research will be the focus of
research for postdoctoral scholar at the University of Utah. This project will
furthermore fund 2 years of undergraduate research experience for one student
and will additionally support a research experience for one student as a part of
the MS for Secondary School Teachers program at the University of Utah. All data
collections and results from the extensive data analyses performed in this study
will be shared openly on the University of Utah’s hive data repository and all
software developed to carry out the array bootstrap technique described in this
proposal will be made freely available through
GitHub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic array processing techniques are designed to
enhance low amplitude seismic wave arrivals and are ideally suited for searching
for laterally variable, low contrast seismic discontinuities. Yet only a limited
number of studies have taken advantage of the vast amounts of seismic data
available using these array processing methods. In addition, when using standard
array processing approaches, one often observes potential arrivals that could be
associated with known or unknown discontinuity structure but may also be due to
correlated noise conditions on a subset of receivers. Here the investigators
propose the development and application of a new array processing methodology.
In particular, they group seismic stations into virtual subarrays, and compute
velocity seismograms (vespagrams) for each subarray using a bootstrap resampling
approach ultimately attaining multiple vespagrams for each subarray. For each
subarray, the investigators automatically identify (1) seismic wave arrivals,
(2) 95% confidence limits in travel-time and slowness, and (3) estimates on the
likelihood that the arrival is not due to noise. They further demonstrate that
they can image Dʺ discontinuity seismic arrivals using this methodology for
shallow earthquakes which has the potential to increase data coverage of the
lower mantle substantially. The investigators further develop a Bayesian
inversion scheme to model the seismic velocity profile associated with their
observations which provides further estimates of the errors, uncertainties and
trade-offs associated with the observations. By combining the results from many
subarrays, they further develop confidence constraints on discontinuity
structures. With this approach the investigators hope to identify, catalog and
map laterally variable yet consistent SH-wave seismic discontinuities in the
bottommost 1,000 km of the mantle and to provide constraints on the depth range
and seismic velocity structure at which these discontinuities exist based on
error estimates and forward modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.