* 2132396
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Variation in Island Adaptations
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Lori Wright, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2023
* USD 25,205.00

This project will investigate the origins and development of island subsistence-
based economies. In this dissertation proposal a case study is presented in
which two Atlantic islands were likely colonized multiple times by more than one
cultural group. The islands also have varying environmental characteristics and
human subsistence adaptations. The archaeological study of ancient islanders
reveals novel information regarding the many ways in which humans adapt and
prosper, as islands present often limited, marginal, and vulnerable landscapes.
Research on one island shows the arrival of Iron Age peoples who brought with
them grains, herding animals, and other cultural elements. In addition, recent
excavations on the other revealed a Roman factory where marine gastropods,
Stramonita haemastoma, were exploited for commercial purposes to obtain the
highly prized royal purple dye. These findings may suggest that the human
settlement occurred due to the expansion of ancient seafaring trading networks
with the intent to exploit coastal natural resources. Archaeology confirms the
islands to have been a nexus of cultural exchange and
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evidence from ancient material culture,
linguistics, and genetics suggest the presence of a heterogenous sociopolitical
and economic landscape in the archipelago; however, there is little scholarly
consensus as to who exactly peopled the islands and why. A major obstacle to
answering these questions is the deficit of reliable chronologies for the entire
region â€“ a problem that will be tackled in this current research by developing a
series of radiocarbon chronologies. The project will use stable isotope ratios
of carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, and strontium coupled with ancient DNA markers from
archaeological human remains to better understand local adaptive strategies,
social organization, and landscape management methods. The research will address
unresolved questions such as the role of coastal resources in the aboriginal
economies. Through exploring diet and mobility, researchers will deepen into the
issue of understanding aboriginal modes of production within such culturally
diverse island communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.