* 2132389
* EAGER: SUPER: Light and Warm Superconducting Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Alex Frano, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research has outlined a
possible pathway to room-temperature superconductivity based on hydrogen-rich
materials exposed to very high pressures, which would be a transformative
technological development. The required high pressures (similar to those at the
Earth’s core) present major technical challenges for practical use and
applications. In this project, a new approach is proposed in which hydrogen-rich
“quantum” materials are designed which could exhibit high-temperature
superconductivity without the application of pressure. This project, supported
by the NSF’s Division of Materials Research, is to synthesize multi layers of a
quantum material, a photosensitive material, and a hydrogen-rich material, which
under the right conditions would favor high-temperature superconductivity. From
an educational standpoint, this project exposes students to modern condensed
matter physics, to state-of-the-art experimental and calculational tools, to
materials synthesis and characterization techniques, and to the scientific
research process. The research team assembled here has a long-standing interest
and record of outreach activities that showcase the beauty and importance of
quantum materials, superconductivity and modern solid-state physics. The PIs,
two of which are Hispanics, are engaged in fostering diversity and inclusion in
the technological work force and also in encouraging underrepresented groups to
pursue careers in physics and STEM disciplines. From the societal standpoint,
this research contributes important clues about the mechanism of high-
temperature superconductivity and its potential applications. A better
understanding of this phenomenon may lead to materials with higher
superconducting transition temperatures, which would yield important
technological benefits to the nation. This would substantially improve the
transference and storage of energy, create new forms of environmentally friendly
transportation systems, and provide a new platform for novel computational
schemes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project, supported by the Division of Materials Research, outlines a new
approach in the search for new superconductors based on hydrogen-rich materials.
Prior research has claimed the discovery of near-room-temperature
superconductivity under very high pressures in hydrogen-rich materials or at
very short timescales in photo-excited quantum materials and heterostructures.
This project aims to develop high-temperature superconducting heterostructures
which are stable at ambient pressure by combining a quantum material
(Q-material) with a material which contains a high concentration of hydrogen
(H-material). This way, the Q-material contains the charge carriers and the
H-material provides the coupling for superconductivity. This judiciously
designed heterostructure combines the favorable properties of both ingredients
and may exhibit novel properties as a whole or at the interface. In addition, to
boost the superconducting properties such as the charge carrier doping, a hybrid
heterostructure containing a photoconducting material subject to the appropriate
electromagnetic radiation will be used. The combination of these thoroughly
investigated individual materials and phenomena provide a potential path towards
room temperature superconductivity at ambient pressure. From an educational
standpoint, this project exposes students to many aspects of modern condensed
matter physics, to state-of-the-art experimental and calculation tools, to
materials synthesis and characterization techniques, and to the process of
scientific research and publication. The research team assembled here has a
long-standing interest and record of involvement in various outreach activities
that showcase the beauty and importance of quantum materials, superconductivity
and modern solid-state physics. The PIs, two of which are Hispanics, are engaged
in fostering diversity and inclusion in the technological work force and also in
encouraging underrepresented groups to pursue careers in physics and STEM
disciplines. From the societal standpoint, this research contributes important
clues about the mechanism of high-temperature superconductivity and its
potential applications. A better understanding of this phenomenon will lead to
materials with higher superconducting transition temperatures, which, along with
other technological applications, would substantially impact the transport and
storage of energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.