* 2132252
* Micro-Casting of Titanium Alloys Using 3D-Printed Self-Boiling Molds
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Kornel Ehmann, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 02/28/2025
* USD 469,421.00

Because of their high specific strength and corrosion-resistance, titanium
alloys are widely used in various applications such as high-value medical
products, e.g., artificial joints and bones, implants, and surgical tools, etc.
However, conventional machining and forging processes typically used in their
manufacture are limited in mechanical properties and productivity. This award
supports fundamental research of a novel casting method for titanium-alloyed
parts and cast features ranging from microns to tens of millimeter by using a
new type of functional molds, namely, self-boiling molds, produced by three-
dimensional (3D) printing. The manufacturing innovation is accomplished through
the mechanisms of boiling heat transfer that facilitate heat transfer control at
all points of a mold wall to adjust the cooling rate, thus, manipulating the
cast microstructures. The impact of this research on US industry will be a
competitive technology for controlling key properties of cast titanium
components, principally for medical applications, in conjunction with 3D
printing functional molds. The spillover effects of this innovation will, as
anticipated, have an impact on the casting industry as a whole. Equally
important, the project will provide a multidisciplinary training platform in
materials, casting and 3D printing for graduate and undergraduate students for
next-generation workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is a fundamental understanding of the self-boiling mold
methodology to actively control the temperature history of molten alloys at
various locations of a cast part and, thereby, its microstructure and mechanical
properties. The analytical foundation for predicting the relationship between
the cooling rate of the molten metal influenced by the characteristics of a
ceramic mold and boiling medium will be pursued and established along with
methods for designing molds of the required cooling rates that assure the
desired microstructure distribution. First, the characterization of different
self-boiling mold topologies will be studied on a specially designed testbed to
establish the relation between boiling modes and mold wall properties and
construction, a key factor for determining the cooling performance of the mold
wall. Second, the determination of the cooling rates for a given microstructure
distribution will be addressed through the formulation of a numerical model
based on the Cellular Automaton method. Specially designed sapphire molds will
be used for model verification through the visualization of the nucleation
process, molten metal flow and temperature measurements. Next, a model-based
determination of the self-boiling mold’s properties for a designed cooling rate
distribution will be devoted, verified by experiments using the testbed. At the
end, self-boiling mold fabrications using 3D printing (based on direct ink
writing), sintering and impregnation methods will be conducted followed by
micro-casting performance evaluations, demonstrated on micro-laparoscopic
forceps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.