* 2132470
* EAGER: SUPER: Light and Warm Polariton Driven Superconductors (PoDS)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Hui Deng, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project aims to utilize
light to control electron flow, so as to turn an electronic material into a
conductor of zero resistance--a superconductor--under readily accessible
conditions. Superconductivity at accessible temperatures and pressure has been
one of the key research objectives in quantum physics and materials science.
Once realized, it would have enormous impact on society, from energy efficiency
of the electrical grid to thermal management of integrated chips and reduced
electrical consumption. The team will perform a combined theoretical-
experimental study to explore a new pathway toward this goal, utilizing coherent
light (lasers) to "drive" electrons into a superconducting state, via
integrating novel quantum materials with specially designed photonic structures.
In addition, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained on a wide range
of state-of-the-art theoretical and experimental tools and techniques through a
close theory-experiment collaboration at the cross-disciplinary cutting edge of
condensed-matter physics, quantum optics, low-dimensional materials, and nano-
photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity is a crown jewel of modern
condensed-matter physics. Although the fundamental mechanism of a Bardeen-
Cooper-Schrieffer superconductor has been understood since the 1950s, higher
critical temperature continues to be a grand challenge, as we have been mostly
at the mercy of material properties given by nature. In recent years, however,
technologies have been developed to exert unprecedented control over materials
to alter or even to engineer their properties. Motivated by recent theoretical
discoveries of new superconducting mechanisms, breakthroughs in van der Waals
heterostructures, and advances in sophisticated photonic structures, the team
will explore a potentially more versatile and practical pathway toward high Tc--
polariton driven superconductors--where a highly controllable, high-temperature
polariton superfluid provides a new mechanism for Cooper-pair formation. The
project will develop the fundamental understanding and key technologies for a
new type of superconductor controllable by light, including how to use an ultra-
light superfluid to introduce and control strong pairing potentials between
electrons in the proximity, effects and limitations of electron band dispersion,
and the influence of dimensionality on superconductivity. It will advance
multiple research frontiers spanning materials science, quantum photonics,
condensed-matter physics, theoretical physics, and potentially particle physics
through the deep connection between the Anderson-Higgs mechanism in
superconductors and the Higgs mechanism in particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.