* 2132606
* BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Synthetic Control of Pattern Formation and Morphogenesis in a Purposefully Rewired Vertebrate Cell
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* William Bement, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2025
* USD 835,577.00

The goal of this project is to synthetically (artificially) control the behavior
of the cell "cortex"—the outermost layer of the cell. It is the cortex that
normally powers many fundamental biological processes, both within single cells,
and in tissues and organs. Completion of the project will result in four
important research outcomes: first, it will test current ideas about how living
systems execute such processes as cell division, cell movement, and cell shape
change. Second, it will provide new tools and technologies that permit
manipulation of cell behavior in living organisms. Third, it will provide the
means to promote new, and potentially beneficial cell behaviors. Fourth, it will
result in the development of new computational approaches for the analysis and
understanding of complex cell behaviors. Successful completion of the project
will also lead to several important educational and training outcomes. This
project, which is a collaboration between researchers at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison (US) and the University of Edinburgh (UK), will support the
training of two postdoctoral researchers and one graduate student in cell,
molecular and computational biology, further preparing them for careers in
science. Moreover, an additional four-six undergraduate students will be trained
in cell and molecular biology, preparing them for careers in science or
medicine. Finally, four under-represented and financially underresourced high
school students will be trained in cell and molecular biology for two
consecutive summers and provided with additional training on how to succeed in
college. The training is anticipated to provide these students with the
analytical and quantitative skills needed to excel in science, technology,
engineering, and medicine related majors and, presumably, eventual careers in
these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cell cortex is responsible for responding
to a variety of internal and external signals with the appropriate mechanical
behavior. Such behaviors include cell division, cell locomotion and short or
long-term cell shape changes. This team and others recently discovered a
dynamical process—cortical excitability—that a variety of cell types harness to
drive distinct mechanical behaviors. Cortical excitability is outwardly manifest
as propagating cortical waves of actin assembly and complementary waves of the
various macromolecules that control actin assembly. Cortical excitability is
itself controlled by coupled fast positive feedback and delayed negative
feedback. We will develop the means to synthetically induce cortical
excitability in cells that do not normally display it, namely, frog oocytes, and
employ high-resolution live cell imaging to capture the detailed features of
excitability. The induction will be based on synthetic protein constructs
engineered to produce either fast positive feedback or delayed negative
feedback. These constructs will be capable of generating different cortical
excitability regimes either globally (ie throughout the entire cortex) or
locally (ie in distinct regions of or patterns in the cortex). By combining
different synthetic constructs, we will drive simple cell shape changes (ie
furrowing) or complex cell shape changes (ie gastrulation), allowing us to test
basic ideas about cell shape control. In addition, by iteratively combining
experiments with computational modeling of the results, it will be possible to
develop both a quantitative, mechanistic understanding of processes such as cell
division and morphogenesis. This research will be of interest to those working
in a broad variety of scientific disciplines, ranging from cell and
developmental biology to computational modeling, to physics. Moreover, because
the data generated will be extraordinarily rich in information, we anticipate
that it will serve as a resource for many other researchers interested in
dynamical behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative US/UK project is
supported by the US National Science Foundation and the UK Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.