* 2132714
* I-Corps: Wearable Soft Robotic Glove for Hand Assistance and Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Wenlong Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a soft robotic glove for hand rehabilitation and assistance for
recovering stroke patients. Currently, there are over seven million stroke
survivors in the US and two-thirds of them experience loss of hand functions.
Physical therapy is essential to restore the use of their hand/finger(s), but it
may not be affordable or accessible for many stroke patients. The goal of the
proposed wearable soft robotic glove is to enable safe, low-cost, customizable,
and dexterous hand assistance in daily tasks, making it easy to use outside
clinics. This technology has the potential to change how rehabilitation is
administered to patients by enabling therapeutic exercises to be done anytime
and anywhere, making rehabilitation more convenient for patients, reducing the
workload of physical therapists, and lowering the overall cost of healthcare.
The proposed technology can also be used to rehabilitate impaired users with
various types of neurological diseases, or assist healthy users to prevent
injuries and improve task performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of novel, fabric-reinforced, textile actuators.
These actuators are pneumatically driven and can be fabricated using lamination
and sewing for fast prototyping and mass production. These actuators exploit
unique capabilities including: zero initial stiffness, full collapsibility, high
power-to-weight ratio, puncture resistance, and high stretchability. The
actuators can perform the functions of bending, twisting, contraction,
elongation, as well as combinations of these motion profiles to support
versatile hand activities. Computational models are developed based on the
finite element method and experimentally validated to predict the kinematic and
force/torque outputs of the actuators. The predictions allow for design
optimization and customization. The users' intents are estimated online using
measurements from the onboard soft stretch sensors, which allows volitional
control of each soft actuator to support the hand motions. Multiple prototypes
of soft robotic gloves have been fabricated. Preliminary results have shown
that: 1) users can easily don and doff the gloves by themselves, 2) actuators
can be precisely aligned to the human fingers, and 3) the assistive torque can
be dynamically adjusted by controlling the pressure inside the
actuator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.