* 2132578
* I-Corps: A High Energy Lithium Metal Battery Enabled by Atomic Layer Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Xiangbo Meng, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
lithium metal battery (LMB) technology that is superior to state-of-the-art
lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Technical bottlenecks in current LIBs are one
limitation on the widespread adoption of electric vehicles. In this context,
higher energy density batteries are needed to improve the driving range of
electric vehicles. At the same time these improved batteries must also have an
affordable cost, long lifetime, and reliable safety. The proposed LMB technology
in this I-Corps project can potentially meet all these requirements. Successful
development of this new LMB technology has the potential to boost the market
share of electric vehicles and help the adoption of renewable energy
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a high-energy
lithium metal battery LMB technology, which consists of a lithium (Li) metal
anode and a layered LiNi0.8Mn0.1Co0.1O2 (NMC811) cathode. The Li anode enables
an extremely high capacity, 10 times higher than that of the graphite anode in
lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). The NMC811 cathode is more cost-effective while
enabling a higher capacity than that of the currently utilized LiCoO2 in LIBs.
This project utilizes two nanocoatings conformally deposited using atomic layer
deposition on the Li anode and NMC811 cathode. These coatings can significantly
improve the lifetime and sustained high capacity of the Li anode and NMC811
cathode.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.