* 2132491
* EAGER: SUPER: Collaborative Research: Stabilization of Warm and Light Superconductors at Low Pressures by Chemical Doping
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Eva Zurek, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
experimental research and education aimed to result in the rational design and
synthesis of materials that are superconducting at ambient temperatures and
pressures. Superconductors can be used in many important technologies, including
cables that transmit power without loss, electromagnets in magnetic resonance
imaging machines and wind-turbines, extremely sensitive sensors, and as qubits
in superconducting computers. Unfortunately, superconductivity in a material
normally takes place at cryogenic temperatures, which is a major hurdle for
applications. Recent major breakthroughs have shown that near room temperature
superconductors can be made in materials that contain light elements, but only
at pressures that surpass one million times atmospheric pressure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One class of known high pressure superconducting materials
is based on cage-like structures made from hydrogen that are filled with metal
atoms. The team will perform computations based upon quantum mechanics to
pinpoint the best chemical species that can be added to these cage-like
structures so that they retain their good superconducting properties even at
lower pressures. Key to uncovering the most promising dopants will be the
calculation of chemical pressure maps. Subsequently, diamond anvil cells and
large volume presses will be employed to synthesize high-quality crystals of
select compounds whose structures and properties will be experimentally
determined. Analogous work will be performed on cage-like structures made from
boron and carbon atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students will be exposed
to a multi-disciplinary atmosphere, and learn how to communicate with
experimentalists and theoreticians from different backgrounds. They will
participate in outreach activities including mentoring undergraduates,
especially from minority and underrepresented groups, and university open house
events. The tight feedback loop between experiment and theory will provide a
roadmap for future materials-by-design research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and experimental research
and education aimed to result in the rational design and synthesis of materials
that are superconducting at ambient temperatures and pressures. First-principles
calculations of chemical pressure maps will be used to uncover the most
promising chemical dopants for achieving high superconducting critical
temperatures in light element systems stable at low, and even ambient pressures.
The pressure-dependent stability, superconducting properties and spectroscopic
signatures of these compounds will be calculated, and related to the chemical
pressure maps. At the same time, novel pathways within laser heated diamond
anvil cells and large volume presses will be used to synthesize high-quality
crystals of the most promising candidates. Synchrotron single-crystal x-ray
diffraction, Raman spectroscopy and transport properties will be measured, and
compared with theoretical results to aid in structural, compositional, and
physical property characterization. Electrical conductivity will be measured to
verify superconductivity. This project will transform the way in which light
element based high-temperature superconductors are designed, synthesized, and
characterized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will focus on compounds related to
the known binary superhydrides that contain clathrate cage-like structures
because superconductivity has been measured in many of their members. The first
class to be studied are boron/carbon analogues of the superhydrides because the
replacement of the hydrogen atoms by light p-block elements that form strong
covalent bonds will render some of these phases stable at normal pressures while
retaining properties that are crucial for superconductivity. The second class
are ternary superhydrides derived from the known binaries. Chemical pressure
maps will reveal which elements have the correct radius to achieve a denser
packing than in the binary hydride, while at the same time keeping the extended
hydrogenic lattice required for the large electron phonon coupling. Experiments
will map out the phase diagram by x-ray diffraction and Raman with laser heating
under pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students involved in this project will be
trained in state-of-the-art theoretical and experimental techniques, and be
exposed to a multi-disciplinary atmosphere where they learn to communicate with
scientists from very different fields. The creation of materials that are
superconducting at normal temperatures and pressures will have a tremendous
impact on the electrical grid infrastructure, medical technology, renewable
energy and lead to new innovations. The tight feedback loop between experiment
and theory will advance the field of materials by design. The PIs will
communicate with the popular science media about the breakthroughs made in this
field, thereby educating the public and motivating future
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.