* 2132026
* EAGER: Inexpensive and Rapid Detection of Per- and Polyfluoalkyl Substances in Drinking Water Supplies Using Macrocycle-Functionalized Gold Nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Christina Remucal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) consist of over 4,000 synthetic
chemicals that are used in the manufacturing of a variety products including
non-stick cookware, food wrappers, and fire-fighting foams. PFAS are commonly
referred to as "forever chemicals" because they are extremely difficult to break
down and become persistent once released into the environment. PFAS have emerged
as contaminants of great concern for human and ecosystem health due to their
toxicity, mobility, and high tendency to accumulate in environmental media
(e.g., soils and water) and living organisms and plants. One of the major routes
for human exposure to PFAS is via the ingestion of drinking tap water. However,
current analytical assays and tools used to measure PFAS concentrations in water
(e.g., sample preconcentration followed by liquid chromatography and mass
spectrometry) are expensive, time-consuming, and restricted to specialized
laboratories. The goal of this high-risk high-reward EAGER project is to develop
a novel analytical tool for the inexpensive and rapid detection and
quantification of PFAS in water samples based on a new Surface Enhanced Raman
Spectroscopy (SERS) platform. The successful completion this project could lead
to the development and validation of a rapid, cost effective and more efficient
analytical tool to detect and quantify PFAS in drinking water sources. Further
benefits to society will be achieved through student education and training
including the mentoring of one doctoral student and two undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chronic exposure to PFAS through the ingestion of
drinking water has become a global health concern. The overarching goal of this
high-risk high-reward EAGER project is to develop an inexpensive and robust
method to quantify PFAS in drinking water. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigators (PIs) propose to leverage and integrate recent advances in
plasmonics and supramolecular chemistry to 1) extract and concentrate PFAS
molecules from water samples onto macrocycles (MCs) functionalized gold (Au)
nanoparticles (NPs) immobilized within a bacterial cellulose (BC) matrix, and 2)
use laser illumination to excite the PFAS laden MC functionalized Au NPs to
generate hot-spot normalized surface-enhanced Raman spectra. The collected Raman
spectra are subsequently analyzed by an optical spectrometer to identify the
extracted PFAS molecules and estimate their concentration in the tested water
samples. To validate their new analytical method, the PIs propose to investigate
PFAS detection and quantification under environmentally relevant conditions
including in the presence of dissolved organic matter. The successful completion
of this project could lead to the development of a compact and modular device
for rapid and onsite PFAS quantification in drinking water supplies. Ultimately,
the PIs hope that their new analytic approach could shift the liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry-based paradigm currently used by
government and industry to monitor the contamination of drinking water sources
by PFAS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.