* 2132385
* EAGER: Exploring Multi-Modal Deep Learning Systems for Sustainable Connected and Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sudeep Pasricha, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 295,602.00

Autonomous vehicles have received a lot of attention in recent years, with
experimental cars from Waymo, Uber, Tesla, and others being tested on roads.
Such vehicles have the potential to eliminate human errors (including distracted
driving) that are the cause of more than 90% of all road accidents. The benefits
extend beyond safety, e.g., the adoption of self-driving vehicles on U.S.
roadways is expected to reduce greenhouse emissions by 87–94% per vehicle by
2030. However, well-publicized recent fatalities and accidents involving self-
driving vehicles point to key challenges that remain unaddressed. Recently,
connected autonomous vehicles (CAVs) have emerged, with the potential to improve
self-driving vehicle safety and fuel economy, by communicating with other
vehicles and infrastructure to share information about road hazards,
pedestrians, etc. But CAV safety and sustainable operation assurances remain
elusive, due to their significantly greater complexity compared to the most
advanced vehicles on the roads today. This EAGER proposal will perform critical
early exploratory research to lay the foundations of robust sensing,
communication, localization, security, and control in CAVs, to enable end-to-end
guarantees for real-time safety and sustainable fuel economy. The proposed
research will study the susceptibility of state-of-the-art deep machine learning
algorithms for sensing, scheduling, localization, anomaly detection, and energy-
optimal control to uncertainties from adversarial attacks, sensor faults, timing
aberrations, and other sources. For the first time, the impact of uncertainties
across individual vehicular subsystems will be quantified on the security, fuel
economy, driving performance, and emergent behaviors of the overall CAV system.
This exploratory analysis will allow for the realization of powerful new
countermeasures to improve uncertainty robustness, predictability, and
performance in the “system of deep learning systems” responsible for making
decisions in a CAV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By quantifying and overcoming varied
and dynamic sources of uncertainty in emerging connected and autonomous
vehicles, this project will usher in more robust, safe, and sustainable self-
driving vehicles. This outcome will transform ground transportation and modern
society, laying the groundwork to eliminate thousands of fatalities on U.S.
roads, improving fuel economy, enhancing comfort during transportation, and
saving the U.S. economy billions of dollars annually in lost productivity due to
accidents and traffic congestion. The research thrusts are foundational and can
be applied to a broad range of applications, wherever the emphasis is on
creating uncertainty-resilient multi-agent systems, e.g., swarms of unmanned
aerial or underwater vehicles. All vehicle drive-cycle datasets and algorithms
from the project will be open sourced to further research in the emerging
interdisciplinary area of autonomous vehicle safety and sustainability. Research
efforts will also be tightly integrated with outreach efforts to include women,
underserved, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students in research that has a
highly positive impact on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.