* 2132002
* Assessing the Contribution of Nitrogen from Soil Organic Matter on Plant Growth Response to Elevated Carbon Dioxide
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Donald Zak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 04/30/2025
* USD 888,463.00

Forests have the capacity to mitigate global warming by absorbing carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere and storing it in plant tissues. However, plant uptake of
carbon dioxide is controlled by the availability of other resources, like
nitrogen, an element essential in photosynthesis. Because the supply of nitrogen
is limited in most forests, trees could be prevented from reaching their maximum
carbon uptake potential. This project investigates a new mechanism by which
trees may access additional sources of nitrogen in the soils, and therefore
enable them to absorb more carbon. The mechanism involves relationships among
ectomycorrhizal fungi, tree roots, and forest soils. Understanding how this
mechanism works, where it takes place in the landscape, and which trees benefit
most, enables better predictions of forest carbon storage. This information
allows more accurate quantification of the climate mitigation potential of
forests and will guide better management of these systems. This project trains
several undergraduate and graduate students, thereby contributing to the STEM
workforce. This project also includes collaboration with tribal partners in
Michigan to model landscape forest dynamics under different
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates how trees potentially
access nitrogen that is bound in soil organic matter using ectomycorrhizal
fungi. Further, the project assesses how access to this additional nitrogen
could increase net primary productivity, especially under elevated atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentrations. The assumption that ectomycorrhizal fungi
increase tree productivity has previously been untested under field conditions.
This work directly investigates this mechanism through a field experiment along
a nitrogen gradient. Two hardwood tree species that grow along this gradient-
red maple and red oak- will be studied. The project also uses results from
Bayesian models to improve the accuracy of terrestrial biogeochemical models.
This research discovers: 1) the conditions under which organic nitrogen
contributes to plant nutrition; 2) the magnitude of that contribution to tree
growth; and 3) the effect of organic nitrogen on tree productivity under
elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. This project defines the
conditions under which ectomycorrhizal fungi provide trees with nitrogen bound
in soil organic matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.