* 2132655
* Ultrafine Inorganic Particle Formation in Plasma-Assisted Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yang Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2024
* USD 329,999.00

Particulate matter in the atmosphere leads to reduced air quality, poses health
issues, and complicates climate prediction. On a global scale, fossil fuel
combustion contributes to as much as 85% of the particulate matter in the
atmosphere. Plasma-assisted combustion is a promising technology that may reduce
emissions, improve combustion efficiency, and enhance low-temperature fuel
combustion. However, the formation of particulate matter in plasma-assisted
combustion has not been studied in detail. This research plans to examine
particle formation in common plasma-assisted combustion systems. The properties
of particles will be studied using a suite of novel particle characterization
instruments and modeling methods focusing on particles with sizes ranging from 1
to 100 nm. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
through the development of new knowledge to understand particle formation in
this novel fossil fuel combustion technique. Further benefits to society will be
achieved through student education, training, and public outreach. STEM training
will be enhanced through integration of research findings into course modules,
participation of researchers in K-12 summer science camps, and a partnership
with the Rolla, MO Public Library to disseminate the project findings to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited studies have shown that plasma could
potentially reduce particle formation due to kinetic, thermal, hydrodynamic, or
a combination of these effects, but detailed mechanisms or relative importance
of each effect have not been deconvoluted. These studies left several
fundamental questions unanswered: How do ultrafine particle formation mechanisms
in plasma-assisted combustion differ from conventional combustion? How do we
deconvolute the thermal, kinetic, and hydrodynamic effects of plasma on particle
formation during combustion? How can we accurately model ultrafine particle
formation in plasma-assisted combustion to predict emission characteristics?
This project proposes to answer these questions by deploying a series of
recently developed aerosol instruments and modeling tools to probe particle
dynamics with scales down to 1 nm. This work has the potential to produce a
transformative understanding of particle formation in plasma-assisted
combustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.