* 2132622
* Collaborative Research: Catalyst Structure, Reaction Mechanism, and Roles of Chlorine for Ethylene Epoxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Chris Paolucci, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 257,763.00

Ethylene oxide (EO) is a key intermediate in the production of a wide array of
advanced materials, industrial solutions, and surfactants. Worldwide production
of EO exceeds 27 billion kilograms, and the primary source involves selective
reaction of the raw feedstock, ethylene, with oxygen over silver (Ag) catalysts.
The Ag catalysts are promoted with complex combinations of five or more
elements, each with different roles in catalysis. Chlorine (Cl) is one of the
main promoters used to enhance the selectivity of ethylene conversion to EO.
Although the EO selectivity of current industrial process technology is above
90%, opportunity exists to further increase the selectivity while simultaneously
improving process efficiency and decreasing CO2 emissions. Yet, the interactions
by which Cl increases selectivity are not fully understood, thus limiting
further improvements in selectivity. The project combines advanced experimental,
computational, and machine learning methods to better understand the catalytic
mechanism of EO manufacture and the role played by the Cl promoter. The project
will identify the steady-state active phase, surface structure, and surface
intermediates present on Cl-promoted Ag nanoparticles at pressures and
temperatures relevant for EO catalysis. Deeper understanding of the operation
and design principles for EO catalysts, and increases in EO selectivity, could
lead to transformative advances in the U.S. chemicals industry while
simultaneously decreasing carbon emissions. In addition, the project will
enhance graduate and undergraduate student education at the partner
institutions, through cross-training of students between theory and experimental
research groups, K-12 outreach via mentorship programs, and integration with
educational opportunities that target high school women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project explores the likelihood that surface structures for
active Ag catalysts in many prior studies do not represent catalysts operating
at practical conditions. Consequently, the dominant reaction mechanisms and the
ways in which Cl improves selectivity remain unclear, particularly at
industrially relevant reaction conditions and Cl coverages. The requirement for
Cl as a promoter has long been associated with either induced reactivity of
surface oxygen atoms or the selective titration of oxygen vacancies responsible
for combustion present on oxide surfaces, yet those explanations presume
specific mechanistic pathways that are dependent on catalyst surface structure.
This project will establish the mechanism and reaction pathways for epoxidation
and combustion, and the ways by which those pathways involve specific oxygen
intermediates and oxygen vacancies upon oxygen-induced surface reconstructions.
Additional insight will be obtained regarding how adsorbed Cl atoms affect
surface reconstructions, the distribution and coverages of reactive oxygen
species and vacancies, and the associated changes in reaction barriers, kinetics
and selectivity. The inherent complexity of the catalytic system under reaction
conditions is addressed through a combination of experimental (time-resolved in
situ Raman spectroscopy) and computational methodologies (grand canonical Monte
Carlo and molecular dynamics simulations employing machine learning-based
potentials). More broadly, this project will provide opportunities for creating
and validating methods (both experimental and computational) that address
changes in surface structure during catalysis, a major challenge in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.