* 2132089
* Interactions between Organic Oxidation and Acid-base Chemistry during Particle Formation and Growth
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 853,186.00

This project involves the investigation of the formation and growth of new
particles in the atmosphere. The effort includes the design and participation of
experiments as part of the Cosmics Leaving Outdoor Droplets (CLOUD) consortium
at CERN and participation in complementary experiments at Carnegie Mellon
University (CMU). By improving the understanding of mechanisms for new particle
formation, this project addresses vital national and international interests
associated with climate change and air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort
will study new particle formation involving nitric acid, sulfuric acid, ammonia,
and amines, and particle formation by highly oxygenated organic compounds from
both terpene and aromatic precursors. Experiments seek to answer the following
questions: (1) How do the temperature dependencies of autoxidation as well as
peroxy-radical ‘dimerization’ reactions across different systems (i.e., α
pinene−RO2 + isoprene−RO2 → ROOR+O2) combine to control particle formation and
growth in “pure organic” systems? (2) Do oxidized-organic and acid-base systems
interact synergistically or independently during particle formation and growth,
or can they even ‘spoil’ each other and inhibit nucleation? The two
interconnected projects will focus on the interactions between acids, bases, and
highly oxidized (and polar) organics ranging from particle formation itself to
growth up to 5-10 nm. Key issues are to determine when nitric acid participates
directly in particle formation versus activating growth of formed particles, and
whether the acid-base and organic particle formation pathways proceed
independently in the atmosphere or interact, either synergistically or
antagonistically. Observables including measured formation and growth rates,
gas-phase vapor measurements, and particle composition will combine to tightly
constrain these coupled systems. At CLOUD the CMU team will use an iodide
chemical ionization mass spectrometer to measure the composition of gases and
growing particles, the later by thermal desorption from teflon filters (FIGAERO
CIMS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.