* 2132036
* EFRI DCheM: Distributed Photosynthetic Recovery of Livestock Waste Nutrients for Sustainable Production of Fertilizers
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Brian Pfleger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,220,000.00

Dairy farming in the U.S. is a multi-billion-dollar industry that provides
essential food products. At the same time, the millions of animals that this
industry oversees generate a massive environmental footprint affecting air,
land, and water quality. Specifically, livestock manure is a carbon- and
nutrient-rich (in nitrogen and phosphorus compounds) waste stream that is
routinely used as fertilizer. This practice enables nutrient recycling but also
leads to emissions of potent greenhouse gases such as methane and nitrous oxide,
and to nutrient accumulation in soils due to manure nutrients often being
imbalanced with respect to crop needs. Nutrient accumulation in turn promotes
runoff to surface and groundwaters and leads to eutrophication and algae blooms
that impact property values, recreation, and tourism. Recovering manure
nutrients in a scalable manner remains a grand societal challenge; the main
difficulty is that manure is a vast, diluted, and distributed waste stream. To
give some perspective, there are 1.2 million dairy cows in Wisconsin distributed
across 9,000 dairy farms; a total of 24 million tons of manure are generated in
the state annually and this waste stream contains 32,000 tons of phosphorous.
This project will seek to develop low-cost, modular, and flexible manure
processing technologies to tackle this challenge. These processes will capture
nutrients from manure using photosynthetic microorganisms (cyanobacteria) that
will be engineered using synthetic biology techniques to tailor their
performance for this application. We will combine experiments, computational
models, and machine learning techniques to investigate the potential of using
the cyanobacteria as sustainable biofertilizers that can help reduce the use of
synthetic fertilizers and mitigate nutrient pollution of waterbodies. The
processes that we envision provide a step towards more sustainable farming and
can potentially activate a bioeconomy that helps farmers access new technologies
and revenue sources. This project also provides exciting opportunities to engage
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop
photosynthetic processes for on-farm biofertilizer production from manure using
cyanobacteria (CB). These multi-functional processes aim to: (i) produce a range
of valuable biofertilizers in the form of wet/dry CB biomass and of nutrient-
balanced CB-manure blends, (ii) recover manure nutrients for redistribution, and
(iii) enable sustainable management of water, carbon, and energy in
biofertilizer production. These objectives will be achieved via integration of
modular bag photobioreactors with manure anaerobic digestion units, biogas
purification systems, CB biomass separation units, and power generators. The
enablers of this integration will be engineered CB strains that: (i) maximize
nutrient recovery from manure, (ii) facilitate crop nutrient uptake, (iii)
maximize biogas production from manure, and (iv) facilitate biogas purification.
CB culture, co-digestion, and soil experiments will be guided using machine
learning algorithms; these algorithms will aim to strategically collect data to
create and refine process models. We will use our models to conduct techno-
economic and life-cycle studies and to assess infrastructure-level benefits that
result from the deployment of our processes (e.g., geographical nutrient
balancing). Likewise, the techno-economic modeling work will be used to compare
the economic costs of current nitrogen and phosphorous containment strategies to
the costs associated with potential risks of releasing the engineered CB to the
environment. We have assembled a multi-disciplinary team at UW-Madison with
expertise in systems engineering, synthetic biology, agricultural
sustainability, and soil science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.