* 2132338
* EAGER:SUPER: Optically-enhanced superconductivity in hydrogen-based materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Yao Wang, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,999.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductivity – a state of
matter in which electrons flow without resistance – is a key ingredient for the
development of lossless electrical power transmission, controlled nuclear
fusion, and quantum computing. Normally found only at cryogenic temperatures,
its stabilization at fully ambient temperatures and pressures represents a major
challenge. Recent experiments on hydrogen-rich materials demonstrated room-
temperature superconductivity under extreme pressures, thus inching closer to
this goal. This project aims to gradually lower the pressure requirements in
these materials by modifying their microscopic properties with ultrafast laser
pulses. This research may be conducive to the realization of superconductivity
at fully ambient conditions and, more broadly, to novel ways to control quantum
materials. This tightly integrated experimental and theoretical project involves
undergraduate students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, thus
contributing to training the next generation of experts in quantum information,
photonics, and physical sciences in general.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving and stabilizing superconductivity at
ambient pressure and temperature is a major research focus of modern condensed
matter physics and a fundamental step towards its technological applications.
Over the last century, efforts to optimize transition temperatures above a few
Kelvin were mainly driven by material discovery, either programmatic or
serendipitous. More recently, the use of high pressures, heterostructuring, and
ultrafast optical fields enabled the observation of superconducting states at
ever increasing transition temperatures. However, the goal of reaching stable
superconductivity at ambient temperature and pressure is still elusive and
requires either completely new experimental approaches or the simultaneous
application of multiple tuning knobs. This collaborative experiment-theory
project aims to leverage advanced ultrafast optical techniques to dynamically
stabilize high-temperature superconductivity at low, or even ambient, pressures
in superhydride materials. Following optical excitation, the transient
electronic dynamics are monitored through time-resolved reflectivity
measurements and mapped as a function of temperature and pressure. This research
may potentially be transformative towards the realization of a metastable high-
temperature superconductor at ambient pressure and, more broadly, the control of
emergent electronic phases in compressed quantum materials. The
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research, at the interface between
condensed matter physics, materials science, and photonics, and the tight
integration of experiment and theory provide a stimulating educational
opportunity for undergraduate/graduate students and postdocs who are supported
by this grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.