* 2132141
* EFRI DCheM: Distributed Ribonucleic Acid (RNA) Manufacturing via Continuous Enzymatic Reaction and Separation in Biphasic Liquid Media
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Joel Kaar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,999,998.00

Vaccines based on messenger RNA (mRNA) have played a crucial role in changing
the trajectory of the COVID-19 pandemic and will become increasingly important
in developing new vaccines for future diseases. RNA-based therapies are also
projected to have a major impact in formulating new cancer treatments as well as
regenerative medicines that enable repair and regrowth of damaged tissues.
Despite their proven effectiveness and enormous potential, RNA-based therapies
are notoriously difficult to distribute. Because these therapeutics are
inherently fragile, they require ultracold storage and shipping. This project
will overcome this challenge by developing a novel technology to produce mRNA
on-site and on-demand in any location while protecting the product from
degradation, obviating the need for ultracold storage and transportation.
Furthermore, this technology will lower the cost of production and distribution,
minimize energy consumption, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions by simplifying
the vaccine supply chain. Specifically, the proposed project will develop a
transformative process for distributed ribonucleic acid manufacturing (DReAM)
based on a novel approach to produce and stabilize mRNA in a single processing
step. DReAM exploits reactive membranes that contain a water layer and an oil
layer. The mRNA is enzymatically produced in the water and then extracted into
the oil, where the mRNA is stable and protected from degradation. The DReAM
technology can further serve national interests by enabling on-site production
of other pharmaceutical products in a wide range of settings, supporting space
exploration, national defense, and recovery from natural disasters. This project
will draw graduate and undergraduate students from geographically diverse
locations, with emphasis on institutions serving students underrepresented in
STEM, to grow and diversify the doctoral STEM workforce. Furthermore, the team
will focus on disseminating DReAMâ€™s vision to K-12 students and the public to
generate interest in STEM-related careers. The DReAM team will create a
framework that identifies the expertise and infrastructure needed to maximize
economic growth and employment opportunities. More importantly, success of the
DReAM effort will address the grand challenge that has stymied progress in
delivering advanced healthcare more efficiently and equitably.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our vision is to disrupt the field of RNA manufacturing
and distribution while impacting the national and global need for equitable
distribution and administration of life-saving therapeutics, including critical
mRNA-based vaccines. This EFRI project will develop a transformative process for
distributed ribonucleic acid manufacturing (DReAM) using bicontinuous
interfacially-jammed emulsion gels (bijels), a microstructured membrane
developed by members of the research team, which allow for simultaneous RNA
synthesis and separation. The DReAM process will enable distributed continuous
production of RNA on-demand and shift the current paradigm in the pharmaceutical
industry where centralized batch processes remain the norm. We propose to
leverage the inherent stability of DNA as a genetic template to produce mRNA at
the oil-aqueous interface through the activity of RNA polymerase while feeding
DNA from the aqueous phase. Upon transcription of the DNA, the mRNA will be
selectively sequestered in the oil phase via lipid-mediated interphase transfer.
Partitioning of the mRNA into the organic phase will isolate mRNA from the
reagent stream in situ and stabilize mRNA against deleterious hydrolysis,
obviating the need for cryogenic transportation, which will dramatically
transform the field. The bioequivalence of mRNA produced by DReAM will be
confirmed through in vitro translation and cell-based assays. To realize this
vision, experimental, computational, and modeling approaches will be integrated
to address the effects of crowding of surface-active particles and molecules on
interfacial dynamics, the activity of nanoparticle-immobilized enzymes at the
fluid-fluid interface as affected by the interface microstructure, and the
mechanisms for transport and partitioning of biomacromolecules in chemically
heterogeneous, topologically complex structures. Molecular modeling will be
integrated into all aspects of the project including fundamental
characterization, macroscopic modeling, and control of the DReAM
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.