* 2132904
* ASCENT: Sensor-enabled Wildfire Awareness and Risk Management (WARM) for Electric Power Infrastructure
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Jennifer Blain Christen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

The electric grid is susceptible to increasing wildfire risks, particularly in
forested and rural areas. This is primarily due to a lack of risk awareness in
such remote locations, which makes prevention and response management difficult.
This NSF project addresses this problem by designing and testing a Wildfire
Awareness and Risk Management (WARM) system that will use Internet of Things
(IoT) wireless sensors to monitor the environment around remote electric power
infrastructures and support resilient grid operation during high wildfire risk
periods. The project will bring transformative changes to the way power
utilities, regulatory agencies, and municipal managers react to wildfire threats
by raising their real-time situational awareness and developing methods and
strategies that increase their options for successful prevention and rapid
response. These changes will be achieved by making advances in remote sensing,
wireless communication, power system security analysis, and optimization. The
intellectual merit of this project lies in understanding, anticipating,
measuring, and mitigating wildfire risks associated with the electric grid. The
sensor suites and risk management approaches developed through this project can
have broader impacts in disaster mitigation, environmental monitoring, and
public safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the critical societal impacts of
wildfires and power outages, there are fundamental gaps in sensing and decision-
making methods for wildfire risk management related to the electric grid. We
address this knowledge gap by: (1) proposing a self-sustainable, low-maintenance
sensor suite that will accurately and quickly detect wildfire risks occurring in
its vicinity, and (2) creating data-informed wildfire risk management frameworks
for preemptive and responsive decision-making that are consistent with evolving
regulatory constraints and policy objectives. The result is a comprehensive WARM
system that combines currently available data on power systems and ambient
conditions (such as weather) with data from the sensor suites to provide
fundamental insights and innovative approaches for improved spatio-temporal
management of wildfire risks. The expected benefits of this project include
significant improvements in the operational reliability of the power system
during periods of elevated wildfire risk and more informed decisions about power
shutoffs, leading to fewer, shorter, and more targeted power
outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.