* 2132224
* RII Track-4: NSF: Establish predictive crystal plasticity models with complete deformation twinning mechanisms
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Lei Cao, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 263,915.00

The density of magnesium (Mg) is only about one-fourth that of steels and two-
thirds that of aluminum. Due to the high strength-to-density ratio of Mg,
replacing those conventional structural metals in the automotive and aerospace
industries with Mg alloys not only improves the nation’s energy efficiency, but
also reduces the emission of greenhouse gases. However, Mg and its alloys tend
to break easily upon deformation, which has seriously limited the market
penetration of Mg. Unfortunately, the mechanism of deformation, particularly at
the atomic level, has remained elusive, which has hampered the development of
effective strategies to control the deformation behaviors and properties of Mg
alloys. This project aims to investigate the mechanisms of Mg deformation and
then develop a reliable multiscale model that integrates those mechanisms; this
model can then be used to predict the deformation behaviors of Mg and its
alloys. The proposed research will have a profound societal impact by
accelerating the development of lightweight and ductile Mg alloys to replace
conventional steels and aluminum alloys in the automotive and aerospace
industries. This project will also lead to innovative K-12 education on metals
and deformation behaviors at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR), including lab
tours, science demos, and engineering games for K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deformation of Mg is mostly governed by
dislocation slips and twinning at the atomic scale. However, how twinning
initiates, evolves, and interacts with other twinning modes or dislocations has
so far remained elusive. Thus, the overarching goal of this project is to
develop high-fidelity multiscale deformation models to describe and predict the
deformation behaviors of Mg and its alloys that will guide the development of
more ductile Mg alloys for the automotive and aerospace industries. This demands
a deeper understanding and improved modeling of deformation mechanisms at both
the atomic scale and the mesoscopic scale and, furthermore, achieve a coherent
connection between the two scales via multiscale models. To achieve this goal,
two integrated research objectives will be pursued: 1) establish the atomic-
level nucleation conditions of twinning and dislocation using state-of-the-art,
first-principles calculations and deep neural network-based molecular dynamics
simulations; and 2) implement those atomic-level deformation mechanisms in
continuum-level crystal plasticity modeling to validate against experimental
data. The successful completion of this project will advance the state of
knowledge of deformation twinning in Mg and enable high-fidelity deformation
modeling of Mg, which can accelerate research and development of Mg
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.