* 2132929
* ASCENT: PROWESS: Phase-change Reconfigurable Optical WavEfront Synthesis System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* S.J.Ben Yoo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

On-demand control of light propagation has been a Holy Grail for photonic
engineers. An optical system capable of dynamic control of light propagation can
be reconfigured on-the-fly to fulfill diverse functions such as light focusing,
deflection, and switching, making them useful for applications such as photonic
switching, display, imaging, and optical camouflage. This project aims to
demonstrate such a system, which consists of sub-wavelength structures made of
phase-change materials. The atomic structure and hence optical properties of the
phase-change materials can be dynamically modulated, thereby enabling the system
to be flexibly reconfigured to meet diverse application needs. The system, once
realized, will have far-reaching impacts across many fields of optics and
photonics by enabling new optical computing and imaging systems with major size,
weight, and power advantages over their traditional counterparts. The research
will be tightly integrated with interdisciplinary massive open online course
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a team of researchers with
cross-cutting expertise spanning materials science, photonic devices and
circuits will demonstrate a Phase-change Reconfigurable Optical WavEfront
Synthesis System (PROWESS). PROWESS will realize independent continuous optical
phase tuning and amplitude modulation with wavelength-scale resolution, thereby
enabling complete control of light propagation. PROWESS comprises metasurfaces
or sub-wavelength antenna arrays made of novel phase-change materials, where
their phase transition and hence refractive index are electrically tuned.
Switching of a large metasurface matrix is facilitated by integration with
silicon transistor arrays. PROWESS will be further applied to realize a
reconfigurable optical neural network and an infrared imaging system capable of
collecting of multi-dimensional information such as light wavelength and
polarization. Success of the project will not only directly benefit information
technology and national security, but also strengthen US semiconductor and
photonics manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.