* 2132175
* RII Track-4: NSF: Toward Tracking Organic Carbon Cycling in a Changing Arctic Ocean using Optical Properties and Numerical Modelling
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Atsushi Matsuoka, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 221,015.00

Phytoplankton, which form the base of marine food webs, are responding to the
associated higher light availability and fresher surface water in the Arctic.
Their spring bloom is occurring earlier due to early sea ice melt, and they have
recently tended to show a fall bloom. This suggests that the phytoplankton are
acclimating to a “new Arctic”. The goal of this project is to improve the
understanding of phytoplankton-originating organic carbon cycling through a
collaboration with scientists at the Scripps Institution of Oceanography (SIO)
in San Diego, California. The opportunity to collaborate with two leading
scientists in the field of optical oceanography at SIO will positively impact
and potentially transform the PI’s research career trajectory. These benefits
will also enhance the research capacity of the PI’s home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to 1) investigate
phytoplankton changes in response to environmental variables, 2) track vertical
export of phytoplankton-originating organic carbon, and 3) predict the impact of
phytoplankton changes on zooplankton abundance. The investigator will analyze
several comprehensive datasets acquired on five field campaigns to the Arctic
between 2010 and the fall of 2021. The data include inherent and apparent
optical properties, phytoplankton pigments and community composition, and a full
suite of physical and chemical measurements. Samples obtained from the most
recent campaign will be shipped to SIO for analysis using a customized optical
instrument and technique developed by two leading experts in the field of
Optical Oceanography at SIO. The phytoplankton community composition will be
derived from the measured phytoplankton absorption spectra. The vertical export
of organic carbon will be estimated using an innovative approach based on
profiles of particle backscattering. Together with the data from spring and
summer campaigns in previous years, the fall data will be used to parameterize a
numerical model of the seasonal succession of phytoplankton and zooplankton. The
primary outputs will be publications and presentations for both scientific and
public audiences. Expected outcomes will consist of training in the state-of-
the-art optical measurement and modelling techniques and mentoring of a post-doc
in the integration of the knowledge into a numerical
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.