* 2132048
* Student Participation in the 2nd Annual Global Nanobiotechnology Consortium Conference (GNCC)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Subhra Mohapatra, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This project provides funding to support costs associated with undergraduate and
graduate student registration and/or travel to attend the Global
Nanobiotechnology Consortium Annual Conference (GNCC-2) at the University of
South Florida in Tampa, Florida. There is a crucial need to innovate
nanotechnology-based methods and approaches for the management of the COVID-19
pandemic and future healthcare crises. These efforts will require a global
collaboration and network, and to this end, the Florida Association of
Nanotechnology (FAN) created a Global Nanobiotechnology Consortium in 2021 to
foster and build this collaboration and research endeavors. The conference aims
to address topics in the following areas; nanobiotechnology, nano-diagnostics,
biosensing, nanoimaging, and nanoelectronics and their applications throughout
medicine, pharmacy, and engineering, with a specific emphasis on the current
COVID-19 pandemic. The conference will provide opportunities to network with
researchers from other academic institutions worldwide and the broader
nanotechnology and nanopharma industry while giving students a platform to
present and fine tune professional development skills needed for the next
generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GNCC-2 intends to converge
the thinking of nanobiotechnology global leaders to advance innovative solutions
for worldwide applications, while remaining student centric. Conference
objectives are: 1) promote collaborative and interdisciplinary research and
education initiatives in the field of nanotechnology for the next generation of
scientists; 2) establish multidisciplinary education and research projects,
including novel approaches for translational research; 3) organize presentations
by experts in creating international collaborations, start-ups for nanotech
business, production scale-up; and 4) provide new insights into nanomedicine
applications for nanoscientists, clinicians, and engineers in the areas of drug
delivery, diagnostic testing for the pandemic and related diseases. Notably, the
GNCC-2 will provide a forum for academic and industrial researchers nationwide
and internationally to share their recent discoveries, exchange new ideas, and
develop professional relationships that strengthen the state's nanobiotechnology
research community and U.S. initiative in remaining the leader of the field.
Students will become equipped with the knowledge and skills necessary to
transform their science communication and professional development by fostering
relationships that will aid to STEM education and careers in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.