* 2132524
* Understanding Aromatic Motif Structure and Filtration Relationships of Polyamide Barrier Layers in Reverse Osmosis Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Hsiao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2026
* USD 451,963.00

Reverse osmosis membranes include a thin, nanoporous polymer (polyamide) barrier
layer that is responsible for separating ions from water in desalination
processes. The polyamide barrier layer is typically formed through a chemical
reaction process called interfacial polymerization. The molecular structure of
the polyamide layer depends on the experimental conditions under which the
interfacial polymerization occurs. Understanding how various process conditions
influence the polyamide layer microstructure and, thus, the filtration
performance can lead to the development of better reverse osmosis membrane
materials. For example, more permeable polyamide barrier layers with an optimal
degree of cross-linking and controlled microstructures have the potential to
improve the permeance, maintain high selectivity, and reduce the costs of
freshwater generation. Despite the technical importance of the barrier layer,
the molecular level structure-property-process relationships have yet to fully
emerge. This project integrates experimental and computational methods to
describe how reacting monomers, reaction and processing conditions, and post-
treatments change the structure of the polyamide thin films. The effects of
ultrahigh-pressure operation on the polyamide layer molecular structure will
also be evaluated. The project is expected to lead to the development of new
energy-efficient nanostructured materials for water desalination, which will
reduce the environmental and economic burden of reverse osmosis processes and
mitigate the threat of global water scarcity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
of this research is to investigate fundamental issues, concerning atomic- and
molecular-scale interfacial phenomena and engineering, in interfacially
polymerized aromatic polyamide barrier layers of reverse osmosis membranes.
Three research activities will be completed. Task 1 will investigate aromatic
molecular motif structure and property relationships in polyamide thin films as
functions of different reacting monomers and reaction and processing conditions
in interfacial polymerization. Task 2 will test the hypothesis that certain
solvents can more effectively influence the cross-linked structure of the
polyamide scaffold, i.e., in a different manner between chain ends and backbone,
thus creating a different water-channel distribution. Task 3 will characterize
structural changes in polyamide barrier layers by ultrahigh-pressure reverse
osmosis processes. A suite of experimental and computational approaches will be
combined to reveal new insights into the anisotropic steric interactions between
the functional aromatic rings and the formation of inhomogeneous cross-linked
network structures. State-of-the-art characterization methods will be employed,
including grazing-incident wide-angle and small-angle X-ray scattering and
atomic pair distribution function using synchrotron radiations. The molecular
modeling tasks will apply mesoscopic dissipative particle dynamics, Monte Carlo
with stochastic reaction model, and atomistic molecular dynamic simulations
methods. This project is also expected to reveal new approaches to produce
energy-efficient interfacial polymerization barrier layers through solvent
activation post-treatment and improve the desalination efficiency of ultrahigh-
pressure reverse osmosis processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.