* 2132142
* EFRI DCheM: Digital design of a network of distributed modular and agile manufacturing systems with optimal supply chain for personalized medical treatments
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2025
* Gintaras Reklaitis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,999,703.00

The disruptions in the supply of essential medicines caused by the COVID-19
pandemic have reconfirmed that global pharmaceutical supply chains based on
production in a small number of centralized manufacturing sites, using
traditional large-batch manufacturing methods that produce one-size-fits-all
dosages, are inherently unreliable and inefficient. This project proposes to
address these deficiencies by re-engineering the pharmaceutical manufacturing
ecosystem to bring production of medicines closer to the point of demand—the
patient—employing advanced manufacturing methods including continuous processing
and high levels of automation to assure product quality and to introduce the
capability of producing dosages that are personalized to the characteristics of
the patient. Specifically, we will develop the technology necessary to achieve
these capabilities and demonstrate them using two representative generic drugs,
one for the treatment of cancer and another for treating high blood pressure.
These technologies include high throughput screening to identity efficient flow
chemistry pathways, mathematical model-based design of continuous processes, and
model-based approaches for the control and management of the processes for
making both the active ingredient and the actual dosage. The down-sized scale of
the manufacturing processes will enable distributed dosage production to serve
regional markets and thus substantially shorten the supply chain. Moreover,
using mathematical models built on clinical data combined with relevant patient
characteristics, the specific dosage best suited for an individual patient can
be determined. The sophisticated automation to be developed in this project will
enable production of this dosage in amounts sufficient to meet the needs of that
individual patient, effectively providing pharmacy-on-demand capabilities. This
project will produce an integrated framework for creating a resilient,
distributed pharmaceutical manufacturing ecosystem that will optimally meet
individualized patient needs. The project takes a multi-disciplinary approach
and supports broader participation of underrepresented groups in STEM research.
The broadening participation activities will result in a rich resource for
pharmaceutical process engineering education course materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals will be achieved by executing five
specific aims: (1) development of high-throughput experiments and machine
learning techniques for informing the discovery of new routes for continuous
chemical synthesis and subsequent demonstration of this approach using two
representative drugs, Imatinib and Lisinopril; (2) creation and demonstration of
a general strategy for robust digital design and optimal real-time operation of
modular mini-plants for distributed drug manufacturing; (3) development of a
general, effective strategy for estimation of individualized drug treatment
regimens based on combined first-principles and Bayesian mathematical models
implemented with data collected from the clinical literature; (4) design and
implementation of a mini-plant testbed for process/model validation, which
integrates drug synthesis and personalized formulation capabilities, is equipped
with non-invasive process analytical tools, and features real-time process
management and control systems; and (5) development and demonstration of a
general strategy for the optimal design and operation of pharmaceutical supply
chains, wherein drug products are produced in geographically distributed
networks of mini-plants. Through the research activities encompassed by these
aims, the project will demonstrate the substantial economic and environmental
benefits, significant waste-minimization, better risk management, and higher
agility to adapt to market dynamics and shortages offered by these new
distributed manufacturing and supply chain configurations when compared to the
existing centralized supply chain infrastructure. The research findings also
will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate curricula both in teaching
and as research projects. The test bed and resulting case studies will be used
in outreach activities during visitation days, and through a website, motivating
K-12 students towards STEM careers, with attention to diversity by engaging with
minorities and underrepresented groups. The research will be disseminated
through publications and presentations at conferences and during industrial
visits. Through these avenues, the project will contribute highly qualified
workforce members and to the technology infrastructure needed to remain
competitive in the emerging advanced pharmaceutical manufacturing
domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.