* 2132753
* EAGER: SUPER: Alkane-based molecular synthesis and quantum sensing of light &amp; warm superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Peter Pauzauskie, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors have the potential to
transform our society’s future transportation and electricity distribution
networks based on their unique ability to conduct electricity without loss due
to electrical resistance. Magnetically-levitated trains could transport
passengers and cargo efficiently without friction. Superconducting power
transmission lines could help lower the overall carbon budgets of advanced,
industrialized economies. Normally, materials show superconducting behavior only
at low temperatures, well below the freezing point of water. One grand challenge
in the field of superconductivity is to discover materials that have
superconducting properties at room temperature. In the past decade tremendous
progress has been made in demonstrating that metallic and non-metallic materials
can show superconductivity had high temperatures (~300K) when they are
compressed to pressures on the order of 100,000 atmospheres. With this project,
supported by Division of Materials Research, Professor Peter Pauzauskie and his
research group at the University of Washington will develop new chemical
materials synthesis and processing methods to make high-temperature
superconductors from non-metallic elements (carbon, hydrogen, sulfur) that could
also maintain their superconducting properties at atmospheric pressure.
Materials will be synthesized based on the use of molecular alkane precursors
exposed to large pressures within a diamond anvil cell. Nitrogen impurities
within the diamond anvils will be used to detect the transition to a
superconducting state based on optically detected magnetic resonance. The atomic
microstructure of the materials recovered from high pressure will be
characterized using isotopically sensitive
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
past 10 years tremendous progress has been made in the discovery of materials at
high pressure that exhibit a superconducting phase transition at warm
temperatures based on binary metal-hydride and ternary non-metallic hydrogenated
materials. If the pressure required to observe superconductivity could be
lowered to atmospheric pressure, then these materials would have the potential
to revolutionize the nation’s public transportation networks, the nation’s
electrical energy distribution grid, and also national synchrotron-based
scientific user facilities. Currently there is no fundamental scientific
knowledge to realize materials capable of demonstrating superconductivity at
both 1) room temperature and 2) atmospheric pressure. Recently room-temperature
superconductivity has been reported at high (GPa) pressures for hydrogenated
carbon sulfide (HCS) materials, however the atomistic microstructure of these
materials remains a mystery. This project, supported by the Division of
Materials Research, will test the high-risk, high-reward hypothesis that
saturated molecular alkanes (CnX2n+2, X = H, D) can be used to create low-cost
HCS room temperature superconductors without the need for molecular hydrogen.
The central hypothesis that will be tested experimentally is that molecular
materials can serve as a hydrogen source that will enable the formation of
hydrogen-carbon-sulfur room temperature superconductors at atmospheric pressure
through the atomically precise doping of hydrogen within high-surface-area,
carbonaceous starting materials. This hypothesis will be tested with a unique
experimental design based on 1) atomically precise, molecular alkane-based
delivery of hydrogen, 2) high-pressure, high-temperature materials synthesis, 3)
in situ quantum sensing of superconducting phase transitions based on optically
detected magnetic resonance, and 4) ex situ atom probe tomography for
quantitative microstructural characterization of recovered product
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.