* 2132698
* EAGER: SUPER: Carbon-based Superconductors Stable at Ambient Temperature and Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existence of superconductors -
materials that conduct electricity without resistance - at conditions of the
Earth’s surface would revolutionize diverse technologies ranging from the
electrical grid to computing and communications. New materials displaying
superconductivity at or near room temperature have been discovered but they are
stable only at very high pressures, such as found within the core of the Earth.
The paramount challenge, both fundamentally and for eventual applications, is
stabilizing these and related superconducting materials at ambient pressure.
This project, supported by the Division of Materials Research at NSF, addresses
this challenge through integrated theoretical calculations and experiments to
examine previously unexplored chemical compositions, with a focus on carbon-rich
materials. The guiding hypothesis is that structures in which carbon has the
bonding properties of diamond could lead to room-temperature superconductivity
at ambient pressure. Carbon-rich compounds are systematically explored using
synthesis at high pressures and temperature in combination with both
simultaneous characterization and sophisticated computations to interpret and
guide the experiments. The project involves education and training of
undergraduate students from the diverse population of the University of Illinois
at Chicago (UIC). The success of this research would lead to important advances
in basic science, create potential for major shifts in technology, and train the
next generation of scientists, including groups underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest
for materials that exhibit superconducting critical temperatures near ambient
conditions has been a long-sought goal of condensed matter physics, which among
others, could be key to quantum information technology. Guided by increasingly
accurate predictions of targeted chemical compositions using density functional
theory, high-pressure experiments have demonstrated the existence of
superconductivity at record high temperature in hydrogen-rich materials.
Replacement of hydrogen with carbon in some of these materials is predicted to
give rise to high critical temperature in structures that can be preserved on
decompression, owing to their rigid carbon frameworks, which impart kinetic
stabilization at ambient conditions, much like for diamond. This project,
supported by the Division of Materials Research, will involve an
interdisciplinary team at UIC to carry out an accelerated exploration of carbon-
rich phases, beginning with light alkali metal-containing materials, using in
situ x-ray diffraction with heating and pressurization, measurements of
superconductivity, and tests of kinetic stability at or near ambient pressure.
The experiments are integrated with and informed by DFT and other theoretical
calculations, augmented by machine learning approaches and other large data
techniques. The UIC group incorporates the approaches developed in the project
in university courses. Undergraduates from the diverse student population of
UIC, a minority serving institution, take part in this research and education
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.