* 2132692
* EAGER: SUPER: Experimental characterization of microscopic properties of superconducting polyhydrides; towards a realistic theoretical framework for warm superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Shanti Deemyad, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,992.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Superconductors perfectly transmit
electricity and exclude magnetic fields. The remarkable properties of
superconductors allow lossless energy transmission, design of magnetically
levitating devices, and are key to quantum computation technology.
Superconductor-based technology relies on discovery of superconducting materials
that operate at conditions close to ambient, which remains an unsolved
challenge. Superconductivity at room temperature was recently discovered in
hydrogen-rich materials albeit at extremely high pressures. To find room-
temperature superconductors with lower critical pressure, an accurate
theoretical model with predictive power is required. However, experimentally,
the warm superconducting state is insufficiently characterized at microscopic
level to fully constrain the theoretical models. This project aims to tackle
this issue with the aid of novel spectroscopic tools that overcome inherent
difficulties of characterization of materials at high pressures. By maintaining
a feedback loop between experiment and theory, the project will lead to the
development of a robust framework for understanding warm superconductivity and a
model with predictive power for direct technological applications. The project
will train students in cutting-edge science who are competent in both experiment
and theory, have vision to think out of the box to explore the new frontiers and
lead the next generation of scientific discoveries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Warm superconducting
states in polyhydrides have been discovered under extreme pressures, reached
exclusively in diamond anvil cells. The majority of characterizations of warm
superconducting states, like magnetic susceptibility and electrical resistivity,
are being made with the goal of detecting the onset of the superconductivity.
These measurements are however insufficient to fully constrain the theoretical
models and set limitations on the predictive power of the theories towards
reaching an ambient-conditions superconductor. Two essential parameters for
constraining the theoretical models are the superconducting gap and the
electron-phonon coupling constant near the superconducting transition. Unlike
ambient pressure superconductors, however, the geometry and size of a diamond
anvil cell, limits the types of applicable characterization methods. In this
project, spectroscopic methods including electronic Raman spectroscopy and
ultrafast pump-probe measurements advanced in the PI's laboratory are used with
the goal of systematic characterization of the superconducting states of
polyhydride superconductors and determination of the fundamental parameters.
Parallel theoretical analysis and modeling will allow approaching a realistic
microscopic model for superconductivity of polyhydrides and theory-guided
discovery of ambient-conditions superconducting materials. This project will
advance experimental and theoretical understanding of warm superconductivity and
its application in technology. Students receive training in cutting-edge
experimental and theoretical techniques and participate in a research program
that provides them with a rich experience in scientific method and connection
between theory and observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.