* 2132672
* I-Corps: Developing predictive computational methods for drug development
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Ernest Petersson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
the pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries with a software or service that
generates accurate predictions for experiments across the life sciences. Drug
discovery, biologics design, and other industrial biotechnological efforts often
require billions of dollars and decades of research to see projects to
completion. Although there has been a major focus over the past two decades to
accelerate the drug discovery process using computational tools, the efficacy of
existing technologies has typically been limited to a select few experiments
which have large amounts of curated data. The proposed technology can provide
accurate predictions for experiments across the preclinical discovery space,
addressing several steps outside the purview of other contemporary technologies.
The flexibility of this technology allows for several time and resource
intensive steps to be performed by computer to increase experimental throughput,
while allowing researchers to focus on experiments with a high probability for
success. This opportunity for improved time and resource management may
accelerate the timeline for drugs to enter the clinic and may invigorate
therapeutic efforts towards underserved diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will focus on identifying which experiments within the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology space are underserved by current computational
methods, allowing for these bottlenecks within drug discovery to be addressed.
This technology makes use of a novel approach for generating artificial
intelligence (AI) models employing information from biophysical simulations.
This AI method significantly reduces the amount of data required for generating
accurate predictions and has an increased scope of utility compared with
traditional AI methods. Proof of concept has been demonstrated through several
retrospective studies which demonstrated the technology's ability to provide
accurate predictions toward small molecule-protein interactions, protein-protein
interactions, therapeutic peptide stabilization, and more. Further exploration
of the technology requires insight from potential customers in the
pharmaceutical and biotechnology space to understand the specific experiments
that this technology needs to address to inform future prospective
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.