* 2132820
* FET:Small: An Integrated Unipolar-0.5T0.5R RRAM Crossbar Array for Neuromorphic Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Kaustav Banerjee, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The processing capabilities of the human brain are unparalleled compared to what
is achievable with conventional computing techniques, particularly for
applications targeted toward pattern recognition, and needs dedicated hardware
to be emulated. Neuromorphic (NM) computing hardware, which aims to mimic these
neuro-architectural aspects of the human brain by having the memory- and
processing-centers co-located (compute-in-memory), can deliver processing and
computations on an energy scale that is orders of magnitude more efficient than
the conventional von-Neumann architecture where data are transferred between
separate memory and processing elements. Therefore, NM computing can enable
significant computational advances for a variety of real-world applications. The
compute-in-memory hardware is typically implemented using a crossbar array
layout of resistive random-access memory (RRAM) devices, where each memory
device is connected in series with a control transistor, in what is commonly
referred to as a one-transistor one-resistor (1T1R) cell format. Although this
format ensures the memory devices work reliably and efficiently, it increases
the device count and circuit area. The PI has recently demonstrated a novel
"0.5T0.5R" memory cell architecture where a control device - a transistor - and
a memory element - a RRAM - are integrated into a single hybrid device by
judicious use of two-dimensional (2D) materials with resulting substantial
improvements in the scaling, density, and device/circuit performance. The three-
year project involves the design, fabrication, and characterization of crossbar
arrays of these devices to implement compute-in-memory hardware, thereby
enabling demonstration of large-scale NM computing circuits. The application
space of NM computing is targeted towards both machine learning and pattern
recognition and can be used in a multitude of real-world applications not
limited to self-driving cars and big data, thereby enabling a much broader
scientific impact. Moreover, significant improvements in the energy-efficiency
of NM and in-memory computing paradigms will enable their wide-scale deployment
and enable computing hardware to keep pace with the rapid growth in data
intensive applications in spite of CMOS technology scaling limitations. Thus,
the project is expected to have wide implications for the semiconductor and
electronics industries. Moreover, the PI will use various well established
educational platforms to disseminate the research results and to make them
available to a wide range of users. The overall project also ties research to
education at all levels involving K-12, undergraduates, graduates, and
minorities, partly via participation in programs designed by education
professionals, besides focusing on recruitment and retention of underrepresented
groups in nanoscience and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves the conceptualization, design optimization, and hardware demonstration
of novel and energy-efficient neuromorphic/in-memory computing circuits enabled
by innovative large-scale crossbar array implementation of a novel 0.5T0.5R
memory device. Experimental work is being carried out with close modeling and
simulation support to optimize the device and array design. More specifically,
development of compact models with the aid of numerical and ab-initio
simulations to help in device optimization and developing neural learning
algorithms, to be subsequently implemented in the crossbar array, is being
carried out in tandem. The interdisciplinary nature of the research project,
spanning fundamental 2D materials science, device design, and nano-fabrication
techniques, as well as theoretical simulations and system architecture design,
ensures that the proposed research ideas are feasible and tailored to deliver
optimal neural learning and inference objectives. Significant improvements over
recently demonstrated NM computing devices are proposed, employing large-area 2D
materials synthesis techniques and configuring the hybrid device to provide
further scalability and ease of energy-efficiently addressing array elements.
Finally, hardware neural tasks pertaining to real-world applications of pattern
recognition, cybersecurity, and implementing physically unclonable functions are
being demonstrated. The successful completion of this project is intended to
advance the development of a revolutionary new class of NM computing systems
that efficiently emulate biological information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.