* 2132412
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Neurological Role of Cartographic Visual Contrast in Geospatial Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Pongpichaya Limpisathian, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 10/31/2023
* USD 29,500.00

The use of maps is commonplace in many aspects of daily life given the
widespread use of mobile devices for navigation and increased availability of
geospatial data on web platforms. It is important to understand how to design
maps that communicate information effectively and have high usability. This
project studies how map design affects the ability to understand the spaces and
places represented in maps via fMRI brain scanning – a method used to see
responses in our brains while looking at maps. This project uses brain scanning
to better observe and study how the design of maps affects the spatial decision-
making process in our minds. Ultimately, the insight from this research has the
potential to change how maps are designed and tailored for different
applications. This project will contribute to training of graduate students in
geospatial design and cognitive science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Map makers and
researchers argue that cartographic visual contrast, the measure of how objects
on a map stand out, is important for ensuring that maps are easily read and
understood. However, there is no consensus on how to designing maps with good
contrast. This matter is complicated by different interpretations of visual
contrast in map design. This research uses neuroscientific understandings to
reframe visual contrast theories by conducting a traditional map design
interaction study coupled with an fMRI brain scanning experiment. Participants’
brain activities are observed while they complete map interaction tasks under
different visual contrast conditions. Data are analyzed to identify the areas of
the brain relevant for different map interaction tasks. The analysis searches
for any potential mediating effects resulting from different map visual contrast
conditions. The result of this research helps to modernize and anchor an
important map design concept within current design science literature. This also
research expands what we know about parts of the brain that are important for
map interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.