* 2132696
* EAGER:SUPER: In-situ Synthesis of a New Functional Material: Superconducting Polyacetylene
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Michael Sponsler, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Imagine a world with infinitely
rechargeable batteries that are very light, store electrical energy without
losses, power lines that lose no power, and portable medical imaging scanners —
these are a few of the transformative applications that could be realized by the
development of room-temperature (RT), ambient pressure superconductors
(materials that transport electricity without resistance). Theory predicts that
linear molecular conductors, like polyacetylene (PA), whose chains of carbon
atoms are connected by alternating double and single bonds, might be one such
superconducting material. In the laboratory, PA is anything but linear when
synthesized, becoming highly disordered (like a spaghetti) and prone to reacting
with itself or neighboring molecules. Just as a winding road slows traffic, what
starts as a straight PA chain can twist to produce bent and twisted geometries
that significantly affect its conductivity — this factor alone is a major
experimental bottleneck in achieving RT superconductivity in this and other
potential organic conducting polymers. With this project, supported by Division
of Materials Research, Professor Michael Sponsler and his research group at
Syracuse University will focus on preparing a completely new form of PA with
separated and highly ordered single chains isolated in long, straight tunnels.
To achieve a linear geometry capable of exhibiting potential RT
superconductivity, the PA chains will be synthesized within the tunnels of
honeycomb-like urea crystals, then studied to confirm their geometries and
electrical behavior. If successful, the project will produce structurally
ordered PA for the first time, result in a novel organic material that will have
a significant impact on the theory and application of conducting polymers, and
reveal the RT, ambient pressure superconductivity state, a long-standing elusive
goal. Moreover, integrating a large arsenal of experimental efforts to
characterize these chains and their behavior will serve to educate new chemists
from undergraduate to post-doctoral levels, including women and underrepresented
minorities in these interdisciplinary research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyacetylene (PA), the simplest conjugated
polymer, is thought of as a long, straight-chain semiconductor exhibiting bond-
length alternation (BLA). Based on foundational calculations predicting that PA
chains cannot have BLA because the vibrational zero-point energy is above the
Peierls barrier, the premise of the proposed study is that an individual,
isolated chain of PA in its fully extended all-trans conformation will have a
half-filled band electronic structure and thus will be a one-dimensional (1D)
metallic polymer without doping. Further, the vibrational frequency of the
carbon-carbon (C-C) bond alternation mode (1455 1/cm) associated with the 1D
conductivity is ~7 times higher than thermal energy at room temperature (RT),
precluding thermal excitation as a mechanism of electron scattering. Since there
is no mechanism for resistance to the electron motion, high-temperature
superconductivity in PA is a real possibility. This project, supported by the
Division of Materials Research, will test the hypothesis that individual PA
chains of sufficient length and isolation will show superconductivity by (1)
synthesizing ordered, fully extended PA chains by encasing the polymer chains
into structures with nanometer-sized diameters – the parallel tunnels of a urea
inclusion crystal; and (2) characterizing the structural and electronic
properties of the long chains produced to demonstrate that they show no BLA and
have no measurable electrical resistance to DC currents, showing that PA acts as
an RT, ambient pressure superconductor. The PA/urea inclusion crystals will be
made from urea and a photoreactive precursor molecule,
(E,E,E)-1,6-diiodohexatriene (DIHT), through a new light-induced process called
elimination-condensation inclusion polymerization. This unique approach employs
photochemical bond scission of terminal carbon-iodine (C-I) bonds from a DIHT
molecule with the formation of new C-C bonds and elimination of iodine from the
tunnels of the urea host crystal. The photochemical process continues until all
iodine has left the crystal and high molecular weight and fully-conjugated PA
chains are made within the crystalline urea tunnels. The photochemical
conversion of included DIHT to PA will be monitored by mass-loss measurements to
track the stoichiometric amounts of iodine lost from the initial crystal and by
Raman spectroscopy that monitors the growth and disappearance of features
observed in the initial stages of the process. The resulting PA/urea crystals
will be studied by high-resolution X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy,
inelastic neutron scattering spectroscopy, and conductivity measurements, both
in bulk crystal measurements and by the use of conductive atomic force
microscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.