* 2132105
* Novel Mechanical Functionality in Nano-Architectured Ferroelectrics via Rational Design of Free Energy Landscapes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Joseph Ngai, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 597,856.00

Ferroelectrics are important materials used for sensing and telecommunication.
Mechanical motion can be induced in ferroelectrics by applying electric fields,
which manipulate the orientation of nanoscale clusters of electric dipoles,
known as domains. Advances in the growth of thin films now allow artificial
ferroelectric materials to be created by combining layers that differ in
chemical composition or domains into a single structure, one atomic layer at a
time. In comparison to traditional ferroelectric materials, artificial systems
offer new ways to manipulate domains and thereby mechanical behavior. This award
aims to understand how “smart” mechanical behaviors, such as the ability to
induce mechanical motion with light or the ability to tune mechanical resonance
with light or stress, can be engineered in artificial ferroelectrics. This
research will integrate advanced computational techniques with the fabrication
and characterization of microscale mechanical devices based on artificial
ferroelectrics. The project will also provide opportunities to educate and train
graduate and undergraduate students in the cross-disciplinary areas of materials
science, physics, device engineering, and data science. Outreach and
dissemination efforts will include educational modules for local middle and high
school students, as well as displays for Dallas and Fort Worth area science
museums. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectrics are key materials in
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Recent advances in thin-film epitaxy have
enabled artificial ferroelectric systems to be created by combining
compositionally diverse layers into monolithic heterostructures. In contrast to
systems of homogeneous composition, artificial systems offer unprecedented
pathways to tune the free energy landscape, and thereby mechanical response.
This proposal aims to elucidate how free energy landscapes, and thereby
mechanical functionality, can be rationally engineered in artificial
ferroelectric heterostructures. Of particular interest are materials poised near
instabilities in the free energy landscape that may lead to dramatic mechanical
response to perturbations. Such materials could also exhibit smart functional
characteristics, including light-induced mechanical actuation and mechanical
resonance that can be tuned on-demand. The approach involves phase-field
modelling of ferroelectric heterostructures comprised of perovskite ABO3 (A =
Sr, Ba; B = Ti, Zr) layers of varying composition. Machine learning on a
database generated by high-throughput phase-field simulations will identify and
correlate key material characteristics (or “fingerprints”) of heterostructures
to mechanical response. Heterostructures will be experimentally realized through
epitaxial growth on silicon using oxide molecular beam epitaxy. Microbeam
resonators and cantilevers will be created from these heterostructures, and
electromechanical behavior will be probed under perturbation of mechanical
stress and optical excitation to form a close-loop
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.