* 2132727
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Characterizing a Novel Turbulence-generating System to Facilitate Exploration of Insect Orientation Behavior Under Real-world Conditions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

This project, a collaboration between a biologist and an engineer, will develop
and test an innovative device to control and reproduce airflows in a wind tunnel
to mimic those found in environments inhabited by flying insects. Odors or other
similar signals are transported on air currents and form trails that many
animals use to locate critical resources such as food, mates, and shelter.
Current understanding of the behavior of flying insects in response to these
cues has been garnered from studies in laboratory wind tunnels with steady,
smooth flows. However, the wind conditions that occur in natural habitats are
not uniform but instead are highly variable and turbulent. As such,
understanding the strategies employed by flying insects as they orient and
locate sources of airborne cues is incomplete. This project addresses this gap
by characterizing turbulent flows in the field, refining the design of a novel
airflow control device and testing it with insects navigating turbulent flows
within a wind tunnel. Design and construction details of the airflow control
device will be made available to the scientific community to facilitate new
research aimed at elucidating the orientation tactics of other flying animals.
New insights from studies using this technology may lead to improved control of
important disease vectors (mosquitoes) and agricultural pests (moths), as well
the performance of other flying animals. The proposed research project will
provide interdisciplinary training for students and generate relevant curricular
materials that highlight the interdisciplinary nature of the work for students
in grades 6-12. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For many animals, passive scalars such as
odors, carbon dioxide, humidity, and heat are critical signals distributed in
the environment according to turbulent dynamics of the fluid into which they are
emitted. Currently, there is a significant deficiency in knowledge regarding the
behavioral mechanisms utilized by flying insects in locating sources of such
cues. This gap exists because virtually all previous studies have been conducted
over relatively small distances in laminar-flow wind tunnel experiments where
turbulence is minimized with attendant effects on scalar distribution. To bridge
this gap, it will be necessary to develop an experimental set-up that enables
the creation and control of turbulent wind conditions in the laboratory. The
collaborative project will develop an innovative active grid system for the
controlled and reproducible generation of turbulence tailored to conditions
encountered in natural and built environments inhabited by two different
exemplar insects (moths and mosquitoes). In order to accomplish this goal,
turbulent conditions that occur in the field when insects are responding to
relevant scalar cues will be characterized. Through the measurement of
temperature and other passive scalars such as odors and carbon dioxide, the
scope of turbulent plume structures generated by the active grid in a wind
tunnel will be evaluated and tuned to the range determined from field
measurements. The project will support two graduate students and one
undergraduate researcher each year, who will be exposed to an inter-disciplinary
research environment within the two collaborating laboratories. In addition,
curriculum-appropriate materials about insect flight and behavior will be
developed for grade 6-12 students and disseminated
virtually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.