* 2132348
* I-Corps: Solid-State Polymer Batteries Enabled by Conformal Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Jae-Won Choi, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of all-solid-state batteries, where a solid polymer electrolyte
(SPE) and electrical components are 3D-printed. The proposed technology is
designed to eliminate the fire and explosion hazards associated with current
liquid electrolyte lithium (Li)-ion batteries. In addition, the use of 3D
printing may free product designers to move away from current solid geometrical
shapes, e.g., cylinders, discs, and flat plates, to practical, three-
dimensional, flexible shapes that are favored by consumer demand. This
flexibility means a high degree of design freedom. The proposed technology may
enable the use of 3D printable battery manufacturing technology to make high-
performance flexible structures with improved dimensional accuracy and safety,
enabled by the unique material capabilities of ionic polymers and multi-material
conformal 3D printing. Dimensional accuracy and safety may also allow product
designers to develop compact products with integrated batteries that lower
developmental costs with fewer design constraints. Currently, solid-state
batteries require expensive custom molds that increase unit production costs.
The proposed technology may lower costs by 3D printing the battery components
enabling the fine-tuning of material properties while adding design flexibility
to specific custom battery applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a 3D printing technology for solid
polymer electrolytes on a freeform surface using ionic compounds and polymers.
Current battery technologies calls for the use of volatile organic liquid
electrolytes that present a problem due to the low flashpoints of the solvents.
This safety issue may be overcome using solid polymer printing with properties
that are flame retardant, lightweight, and exhibit high ionic conductivity.
Preliminary research has shown that the mechanical properties may be tuned to
meet precise customer specifications where base formulations consist of a
photocrosslinkable monomer, lithium salt, and plasticizer. In addition, previous
research has shown that conformal 3D printing, 3D printing on a freeform
surface, may enable a 3D structure to be built on virtually any surface. The
combination of conformal 3D printing and solid polymer electrolytes offers a
unique opportunity for developing a 3D customizable battery of practically any
three dimensional shape. Future research will focus on increasing ionic
conductivity (with higher surface areas) as well as proving that conformal
printing may be used to print batteries on existing product
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.