* 2132007
* EFRI DCheM: Re-Engineering the Nitrogen Cycle: Distributed Electrochemical Nitrogen Refineries for Ammonia Synthesis and Water Purification
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* William Tarpeh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

Nitrogen pollution is a Grand Challenge identified by the National Academies.
Fertilizer production has outpaced removal of nitrogen from wastewater, leading
to continuous losses that threaten aquatic ecosystems and human health. This
project aims to meet this challenge by recycling waterborne nitrogen pollutants
into high-purity ammonia. The PIs’ approach is unique in its ability to reduce
nitrogen emissions and their negative cascade effects; reduce the energy and
costs of conventional fertilizer production and wastewater treatment; and
address legacy pollution that can persist for decades in coastal ecosystems like
the Gulf of Mexico. The overall goal of this EFRI Distributed Chemical
Manufacturing research project is to understand, design, and control
multifunctional electrochemical processes that enable on-site fertilizer
manufacturing and water purification with minimal environmental impacts. The
project combines fundamental breakthroughs in novel materials and processes to
convert wastewater pollutants into products. The project includes integration of
the fundamental discoveries with cost optimization and performance in various
wastewaters, as well as prioritizing adoption locations and value propositions
for recovery facilities. Because re-engineering the nitrogen cycle is a
demanding challenge, it requires the best approaches from the entire U.S. talent
pool. Thus, the project team plans to broaden participation by hosting an annual
workshop and demonstration day at a Stanford pilot-scale water treatment plant
and invite underrepresented K-12 students; local community members;
undergraduate researchers; and the project’s industrial advisory board
representing fertilizer production, agriculture, and water treatment. The team
will also develop workshops for incoming underrepresented undergraduate
students, hands-on lab activities in classes, nitrogen-focused modules with K-12
students, and mentored research experiences for high school and undergraduate
EFRI Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current engineering efforts to rebalance the
nitrogen cycle have largely concentrated on the improvement of the Haber-Bosch
process to produce ammonia or expansion of nitrogen removal from wastewater.
This project puts forward a transformative vision: recycling reactive nitrogen
(e.g., ammonia, nitrate) in distributed nitrogen refineries that convert
fugitive emissions in waste waters into high-purity ammonia. The overall goal of
the research is to understand, design, and control multifunctional
electrochemical unit processes that enable distributed ammonia manufacturing and
water purification with minimal environmental impacts. The project will utilize
electrodialysis and nitrate reduction as a platform to benchmark and
characterize ammonia-selective catalysts, as well as a treatment process
applicable to two ubiquitous wastewaters: municipal wastewater and fertilizer
runoff. The project’s objectives are to: (1) understand and control
electrocatalytic microenvironments via selective electrochemical reactive
separations; (2) establish quantitative material and process innovation targets
for energy-efficient, cost-effective, and adaptive processes; and (3) leverage
economic and environmental assessments to prioritize local contexts and products
for wastewater-derived ammonia manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.