* 2132718
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Photonic Crystal Fabrication for Mesoscale Fuel-to-Electricity Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Veronika Stelmakh, MESODYNE INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2024
* USD 945,253.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to commercialize a novel technology that
enables compact, efficient, silent, reliable, and fuel-flexible power
generation. Existing power solutions can lack endurance, reliability, and
portability and often generate harmful emissions; or they are prohibitively
expensive or incompatible with existing fuels and distribution infrastructure.
The power generation platform developed in this project has the potential to be
a key enabling technology for the future rapid growth of commercial drone
applications, which currently are often limited by the performance of lithium
ion batteries. Drones are expected to make an impact across numerous industries
including transport and delivery, power and utilities, telecommunications, and
remote sensing. Additionally, this power generation technology can benefit
industrial internet of things applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop a novel
power source that is easily portable and is compatible with existing fuel
infrastructure. This project develops a system that converts most fuels to
electricity via light; combustion heats a nanophotonic material to incandescence
and the resulting light drives photovoltaic cells. The nanophotonic material is
engineered to be spectrally matched to the photovoltaic cells, enabling
efficient conversion. This technology can increase the endurance of drones or
other systems up to ten times over batteries alone. This work is focused on cost
reduction through new material development. The specific research objectives are
to demonstrate a low-cost and scalable process for the nanophotonic material and
photovoltaic cell while maintaining high performance, and then integrate and
pilot the low cost system. Successful completion of these objectives will enable
this technology to translate to drone applications with a compelling need for
long-lasting portable power.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.