* 2132738
* Workshop on “Life Cycle of the Elements: rocks, soils, organisms, environment”
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 11/30/2022
* USD 9,071.00

This online workshop will gather experts in diverse areas of biology and
environmental sciences to discuss the “life cycle of elements” moving through
the environment and into organisms. Topics to be considered during the workshop
span the fields of soil sciences, environmental sciences and mining; plant
sciences, plant engineering and agriculture; and fundamental processes of
micronutrient uptake, transport, and function in living tissues and cells. The
workshop consists of four sessions: (1) Geological/geochemical impacts on
environment; (2) Soil-microbe-plant interfaces; (3) Use of elements by cells
(fundamental mechanisms; uptake, transport, storage, function); and (4) Impact
of environment on living organisms. A major product of this workshop will be a
peer-reviewed, published report defining forefront research questions
surrounding how chemical elements move through ecosystems, from interfaces
between soils and living cells, to how elements are taken up, transported, used,
and stored by living tissues and cells. Defining these questions will clarify
which areas would most benefit from cutting-edge x-ray techniques and
complementary imaging tools. The workshop will engage students and postdoctoral
researchers through poster contributions and an “idea slam,” where speakers have
one slide and 1-2 minutes to describe an important research question that they
cannot address today. This workshop is a follow on to the CHESS X-LEAP
initiative workshop in June 2020. X-LEAP stands for X-ray imaging for Life
sciences, Earth sciences, Agriculture, and Plant
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Elemental distributions in the environment and in
living organisms are fundamentally intertwined. The subsurface composition of
the earth, through both natural geology and human impact, strongly influences
the elemental content in the surrounding waterways, soils, plants, and animals.
The workshop will define leading-edge questions related to elemental processes,
especially metals, at the complex interfaces between soils, microbiomes, and
plants, including elemental cycling in the environment and fundamental
mechanisms of elemental uptake, transport, storage, and function in living
tissues and cells. Understanding quantitative elemental distributions at
different length scales in these complex, chemically heterogeneous systems,
including living tissues, is essential to understanding the fundamental
processes underpinning elemental transport on environmental scales (mm to m)
down to cellular and even subcellular levels (&lt;1 µm). Frequently it is
critical to determine not only the elemental distribution but also the chemical
state (i.e. metal oxidation states and/or bonding environment), ideally with
minimal sample preparation or even in vivo, at relevant time scales for
dynamically changing systems. The workshop will also seek to clarify the
experimental capabilities needed to advance understanding of the questions it
defines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.