* 2132419
* I-Corps: Recycling system for converting cellulosic and polyester components of textile waste into recycled thread
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Olivia Robinson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the development of a
textile recycling system that sorts and recycles discarded textile waste into
new, reusable thread. More than 93 million tons of textile waste are generated
annually, but &lt;1% of this waste is recycled for new textile production. This
waste occurs due to the recycling industry’s inability to inexpensively sort
textile waste for efficient recycling, resulting in textile recycling being
prohibitively expensive. The proposed system automates the sorting of textile
waste by material, before entering a chemical treatment that converts cellulosic
and polyester components of the waste into 100% recycled thread. The proposed
technology may allow for over 93% of all global textile waste to be recycled
into thread that would be 50% cheaper than virgin cotton. The recycled thread
may then be sold to existing textile manufacturers for weaving, embroidery, etc.
In addition, the proposed process may facilitate access to local, low-cost raw
materials for textile production, enabling the possibility of localized textile
production in designated, economically disadvantaged zones. The proposed
recycling technology may have a significant impact in reducing the textile
industry’s environmental footprint, by reducing textile landfill waste as well
as the use of water, land, and pesticides that are used to make
textiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an integrated recycling system that uses robotics and artificial intelligence
(AI) to automatically sort textile waste and a chemical recycling process to
convert sorted textile waste into new, reusable thread. The input to the
proposed recycling system is bulk, post-consumer textiles sourced from existing
textile collection companies. The proposed recycling system sorts the textile
waste by material and color using near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy and image
processing, leveraging AI to improve the accuracy of sorting. The textile then
goes through a chemical pretreatment that chemically separates the polyester and
cellulose fibers (cellulose being the main component of cotton and other plant-
based textiles). This pretreatment process is tuned according to the material
and color percentages, which is designed to achieve the highest material yield
from the chemical process. The final step involves regenerating the new recycled
thread that may be sold to existing textile manufacturers while providing a
sustainable solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.