* 2132838
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-Chromatographic Method for the Purification of Viral Vectors
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Kelli Luginbuhl, Isolere Bio, Inc
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2024
* USD 902,504.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the creation of a scalable platform
technology to deliver new therapies and vaccines through manufacturing viral
vectors. This sector has been hampered by inefficient manufacturing methods
designed for small molecules 10,000 times less complex than the current effort.
The technology developed herein will provide a durable competitive advantage by
offering “plug and play,” broad compatibility, and improved productivity for
virus manufacturing compared to existing industry solutions. The technology will
improve yields, shorten manufacturing lead times, and accelerate time-to-market
for potentially life-saving therapies and vaccines. This research project seeks
to validate scalability and establish a production method to deliver quality
reagents to developers of adenoviral vectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to advance a scalable
downstream purification process for gene therapy vectors. Viral vectors have
remarkable utility as therapeutics and vaccines, but their impact has been
plagued by downstream purification inefficiencies that lead to single digit
yields. The technology developed in this project will address this bottleneck
using a polypeptide-based reagent that combines affinity-capture with phase
separation and filtration equipment. The technology aims to improve capacity,
step yield, final vector purity, and productivity. To validate the lead
adenovirus reagent, a tangential flow filtration process will be optimized using
harvests with a wide range of starting impurities and across various adenovirus
serotypes to ensure a broadly compatible product. The reagent’s ability to
stabilize adenovirus will be further explored toward an efficient and scalable
filtration process. Finally, a method for reagent manufacturing will be
developed to ensure consistent and low-cost supply. Completion of these
objectives will yield a mature downstream process for one-step adenovirus
purification, a manufacturing method that ensures sufficient quantity of quality
reagents to support adenovirus clinical development, and rapidly deployable
adenovirus vaccine manufacturing to meet future needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.