* 2132339
* SBIR Phase II:  Minimally invasive device for restoration of ventricular diastolic recoil without blood contact
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Christina Bolch, CORINNOVA INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2023
* USD 994,019.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to provide a device-based therapeutic option
to heart failure (HF) patients with diastolic dysfunction (insufficient heart
relaxation/filling), as current treatments are largely ineffective.
Approximately half of people with HF have diastolic dysfunction, equating to an
estimated 4 million patients in the US. There are currently no therapies that
treat the underlying causes of this disease. Thus, a vast unmet need exists for
a solution that can relieve symptoms while correcting and reversing the aberrant
heart mechanics that contribute to disease progression. The proposed approach
improves native heart function, leading to true recovery from the disease. This
technology will provide effective treatment to millions of Americans, improving
quality of life, patient outcomes, and saving many lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project
advances a device for cardiac care. Specifically, this project will: (1)
demonstrate and evaluate device efficacy in increasing heart relaxation in an
animal model of chronic diastolic heart disease; (2) determine materials
specifications and device design; (3) conduct benchtop fatigue testing and
evaluation, including the development of a custom life test apparatus; (4)
prepare for design transfer to an appropriate medical device manufacturer; and
(5) conduct a pilot GLP safety study in an animal
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.