* 2132769
* SBIR Phase II:  Domestically produced, novel carbon-based active anode materials for rechargeable lithium ion batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Marvin Schofield, CONOVATE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is both to provide novel, domestically produced raw
materials to the US battery supply chain and to generate affordable, safer,
fast-charging, long-lasting lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) for electronics. With
these raw materials, the US can manufacture lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) using
its own resources; US battery manufacturers need no longer depend on foreign
suppliers. The manufacturing process will employ readily available US
manufacturing capabilities to generate domestically produced, value-added
materials and thus strengthen the high-tech US economy that critically needs new
materials for more effective energy storage. Further, the proposed materials
will improve battery performance and safety, such as in wireless, battery-
powered medical devices (e.g., implants and sensors) that use phone apps to
monitor people's health and welfare. These apps need improved LIBs made from
novel, lighter, and safer anode materials that can charge faster and store more
energy than current versions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
proposes to introduce a value-added active anode material with high-quality
performance to the battery supply chain. The anode material aims to reduce the
quantity of expensive—but critical—cathode materials (Ni, Co, and others)
required for successful battery designs. Funding will enable upgraded production
methods to produce anode material at scale, thus demonstrating how to produce a
lithiated version of the anode material which will increase its desirability for
battery manufacturers. The main R&amp;D activities will improve both key
desirable performance value propositions through engineering optimization
approaches to synthesis and scaleup, and improve upon the currently low initial
coulombic efficiency for the first charging cycle through introducing pre-
lithiation and full-lithiation methodologies. Research outcomes include: (1) a
value-added active anode material—with higher capacity than graphite mid
potential between lithium titanate and graphite, low irreversible lithium
capacity loss, and potentially increased lithium availability—to reduce the size
and cost of the overall battery system per kWh, (2) a third-party demonstration
of minimum viable product 200mAh batteries with superior performance, and (3) a
roadmap for battery manufacturers to effectively incorporate additive amounts of
the novel, lithiated material (even to completely replacing graphite) in
existing battery designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.