* 2132641
* ANT LIA: Do Molecular Data Support High Endemism and Divergent Evolution of Antarctic Marine Nematodes and their Host-associated Microbiomes?
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2026
* Holly Bik, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 06/30/2026
* USD 609,982.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The long isolation and unique biodiversity of
the Southern Ocean represents an important case study region for understanding
the evolution and ecology of populations. This study uses modern -omics
approaches to evaluate the biodiversity, evolution, and ecology of Antarctic
marine nematodes and their host-associated microbiomes from a variety of
habitats collected at different depths. The results are producing an important
baseline dataset of Antarctic meiofaunal diversity. All genomic resources
generated in this project will be publicly accessible as open-source datasets
with the potential for long-term scientific reuse. This project supports diverse
researchers from underrepresented backgrounds and produces a suite of Antarctic-
focused digital public outreach products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Nematode worms are abundant and ubiquitous in marine
sediment habitats worldwide, performing key functions such as nutrient cycling
and sediment stability. However, study of this phylum suffers from a perpetual
and severe taxonomic deficit, with less than 5,000 formally described marine
species. Fauna from the Southern Ocean are especially poorly studied due to
limited sampling and the general inaccessibility of the Antarctic benthos. This
study is providing the first large-scale molecular-based investigation from
marine nematodes in the Eastern Antarctic continental shelf, providing an
important comparative dataset for the existing body of historical
(morphological) taxonomic studies. This project uses a combination of classical
taxonomy (microscopy) and modern -omics tools to achieve three overarching aims:
1) determine if molecular data supports high biodiversity and endemism of
benthic meiofauna in Antarctic benthic ecosystems; 2) determine the proportion
of marine nematode species that have a deep-sea versus shallow-water
evolutionary origin on the Antarctic shelf, and assess patterns of cryptic
speciation in the Southern Ocean; and 3) determine the most important drivers of
the host-associated microbiome in Antarctic marine nematodes. This project is
designed to rapidly advance knowledge of the evolutionary origins of Antarctic
meiofauna, provide insight on population-level patterns within key indicator
genera, and elucidate the potential ecological and environmental factors which
may influence microbiome patterns. Broader Impacts activities include an
intensive cruise- and land-based outreach program focusing on social media
engagement and digital outreach products, raising awareness of Antarctic marine
ecosystems and understudied microbial-animal relationships. The diverse research
team includes female scientists, first-generation college students, and Latinx
trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.