* 2132006
* Field-Controlled Ion-Locked Polymorphic Electronics for Hardware Security
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ke Xu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 645,237.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware counterfeiting and
intellectual property piracy cost the U.S. more than $200 billion annually. A
promising hardware solution is “polymorphic electronics,” in which the same
circuit can be reprogramed to achieve a different functionality, thereby
obscuring their original function. While conventional approaches are being
explored, they use transistors with fixed polarity, which require many
additional transistors to alter circuit functionality. Alternative approaches
where the polarity is not fixed require power to be continuously supplied. Here,
a transistor is proposed whose polarity is set during operation, and for which a
continuous voltage supply is not required to maintain the state; these
attributes will reduce both power and size requirements. The polarity of the
device is set by ions in a custom synthesized ion-conductor that are locked into
place at the surface of the device. Demonstrating such a configurable transistor
represents a large step towards realizing polymorphic electronics to address
hardware security. In addition to addressing a critical security need, another
broader impact of this work is training a postdoc, graduate student and
undergraduate students on a project that requires knowledge of nanoelectronics,
materials science and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hardware security breaks are often executed in the form of
malicious circuity, known as a Hardware Trojan (HT), which is a modification or
insertion made by an untrusted third party. One promising hardware solution is
so-called “polymorphic electronics,” which allows changing the functionality of
the same circuit/cell during operation. While conventional CMOS approaches are
being explored, they require a large number of Si transistors because the
polarity is fixed; non-Si approaches are emerging, but they require voltage to
be continuously supplied, and the triggers involved to convert the circuit from
one function to another are often impractical. Here, a Field-controlled
Polarity-reconfigurable Field-Effect Transistor (FPFET) is proposed in which the
polarity is set by field effect using a polarity gate voltage (VPG).
Specifically, the polarity of transistors is set and locked during operation and
therefore does not require VPG to be continuously supplied. The intellectual
merit lies in demonstrating device-level polarity locking (i.e., n- and p-FET),
programming NAND and NOR gates on-demand by field-effect, and demonstrating the
operation of those gates in the absence of a continuous VPG. The broader impacts
include advancing polymorphic electronics to address hardware security, and
student training at the intersection of several disciplines: device physics,
materials science and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.