* 2132178
* EFRI E3P: Nonthermal Plasma-Assisted Hydrogenolysis of Waste Plastics to Value-added Chemicals and Fuels
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Tianbo Liu, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,664,023.00

Difficult to recycle plastic waste accumulates in landfills and the environment
since few commercially viable recycling technologies exist, which severely
deteriorates terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. This project will examine a
method called nonthermal plasma-assisted hydrogenolysis as a potential approach
for recycling mixtures of plastic waste materials. Nonthermal plasma-assisted
hydrogenolysis provides a low-energy pathway for depolymerizing mixed plastics
(i.e., polymers) and generating value-added small molecules, such as monomers,
C2-C3 olefins, and liquid paraffins, which serve as chemical feedstocks and
transportation fuels. Nonthermal plasma will provide two key functions: (i)
channeling electric energy to activate polymer bond-breaking processes and (ii)
serving as an electrolyte for electrochemical conversion of polymer fragments to
desired small molecules. This project integrates the expertise of investigators
from The University of Akron and Lawrence Berkley National Laboratory with the
objective of (i) developing a transformational concept in electrocatalysis,
using plasma of hydrogen/hydrocarbon from polymers as gaseous electrolyte and
(ii) coupling this novel concept with conventional catalysis to achieve fast and
selective conversion of polymer wastes to desired chemicals. Successful
demonstration of the nonthermal plasma-assisted hydrogenolysis concept will
establish the knowledge base required to advance the scientific frontiers in
electrocatalysis with gaseous electrolyte and plasma reaction engineering. The
proposed technology could be further applied to upcycle consumer products and
organic agricultural wastes generated by intensive animal farming. The
nonthermal plasma-assisted hydrogenolysis of plastic wastes has a potentially
transformative role in closing the loop of the plastics carbon cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to investigate a non-
thermal plasma-assisted catalysis approach for the selective conversion of mixed
plastics (i.e., polymers) to monomers and small molecules. Nonthermal plasma
discharge, i.e., electrically ionized gaseous species produced by dielectric
barrier discharge, initiates the breaking of C-H and C-C polymer bonds which
produces polymer fragments as well as their radicals and ionic species in the
gas phase. The inorganic contaminants in the plastic waste, which cannot be
vaporized, precipitate in the form of solid particles. Then, polymer fragments
adsorb on the catalyst surface for the selective conversion to desirable small
molecules at ambient temperature and pressure. Ionic species could serve as
electrolytes to enable the conversion of adsorbed species on the electrocatalyst
surface, a process that controls the rate and selectivity of the reactions.
Ambient temperature electrocatalysis provides several attractive features: (i)
decreasing the need for thermal energy, (ii) minimizing the side reactions (in
particular, the formation of tar), and (iii) enhancing the selectivity toward
desired products. The mechanistic understanding of nonthermal plasma-assisted
catalytic hydrogenolysis of polymer wastes will be achieved through
comprehensive kinetic studies, operando infrared spectroscopic studies of
reactive adsorbed intermediates, in situ X-ray absorption studies of the
structure of the catalyst and adsorbed polymer fragments, catalyst
characterization, rational design of catalysts, and testing of a pilot-scale
reactor. The results of this study will advance nonthermal plasma-assisted
hydrogenolysis as a method for polymer waste recycling and yield a mechanistic
understanding of gas-phase plasma electrocatalysis. Moreover, the transformative
concept of gas-phase electrocatalysis with plasma as an electrolyte offers a new
paradigm in electrochemistry for further basic research and practical
applications. Ultimately, this project will (i) identify active, selective, and
durable catalysts suitable for nonthermal plasma-assisted catalytic conversion
of plastic wastes and (ii) provide the technical basis for the design and
operation of nonthermal plasma gas-solid catalytic
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.