* 2132156
* EFRI E3P: High-throughput synthetic biology approaches for mixed plastic degradation and reutilization
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* AIFEN ZHOU, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2025
* USD 2,220,000.00

The abundance of microorganisms found in nature, including both bacteria and
fungi, is extremely diverse. Many of these microorganisms can degrade a variety
of polymeric materials such as biomass and plastic waste. However, the few known
microorganisms that can degrade plastics do so slowly. More efficient plastic-
degrading microorganisms could be leveraged as industrial biotechnology to
recycle waste plastic materials and create value-added products. In particular,
the ability to biochemically recycle high-volume, difficult-to-recycle plastics
like polystyrene and polyethylene would be an important step toward overcoming a
mounting global environmental and health concern. The project team has recently
isolated several promising bacterial and fungal strains that appear to degrade
polystyrene and polyethylene. The multidisciplinary team will work together to
decipher how these microorganisms degrade plastic waste and use this information
to engineer bacterial cells to improve degradation efficiency. They will also
utilize a mixture of different bacteria and fungi as a consortium to improve the
plastic degradation efficiency, mimicking how microbes work together in nature
to decompose complex materials. Finally, the plastic degradation products will
be converted into high-value chemicals using novel engineered microorganisms.
The proposed work will directly accelerate the research and development of
microbe-driven plastic degradation and re-utilization and will address a
critical national need for green technology through microbial bioproduction and
biomanufacturing. The project will contribute to the training of next-generation
researchers through exposure to multidisciplinary science and engineering at the
high school and undergraduate levels. The team will also create online learning
modules, presentations, and social network materials that will build
partnerships between academia and the public to communicate and enhance the
scientific awareness about the future of plastic waste and the potential for
bioremediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project vision is to degrade mixed
waste plastic and upcycle the degradation products into high-value chemical
precursors using bacterial/fungal consortia and engineered bacterial consortia.
The first aim is to identify the key plastic-degrading enzymes from individual
microorganisms isolated from the enriched polyethylene- and polystyrene-
degrading environmental bacterial/fungal consortia. The second aim is to create
tailored synthetic fungal-bacterial consortia that can bio-augment mixed
polyethylene/polystyrene degradation. The third aim is to develop engineered
strains that produce a useful chemical precursor, 3-hydroxypropionic acid, and
use these to create a synthetic consortium of plastic-degrading engineered
microbes. Innovative high-throughput microfluidic technologies will be used to
accelerate the discovery and testing processes. The project will yield new
insights into the biochemistry of plastic degradation and conversion of plastic
degradation products to high-value products, as well as significantly accelerate
the development of next-generation bioremediation and green bioproduction
technologies. In addition, the synthetic biology strategy, stable microbial
consortia construction strategy, and high-throughput microfluidic platforms are
expected to have broad appeal in the fields of synthetic biology,
biomanufacturing, and biotechnology. The anticipated outcomes, focused here on
polystyrene and polyethylene mixtures, are expected to pave the way for
biochemical degradation and re-utilization of other complex plastic mixtures
encountered in the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.