* 2132247
* A U-statistic approach to population genetics
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2021,12/31/2023
* David Gerard, American University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 12/31/2023
* USD 188,694.00

Polyploids, organisms with more than two complete sets of chromosomes, are
ubiquitous in the plant kingdom, predominant in agriculture, and important
drivers of evolution. Many plant species exhibit ancestral polyploidy, and so
understanding the evolutionary behavior of polyploids today gives researchers a
greater understanding of the mechanisms of evolution in general. However,
polyploids manifest greater complexities that make modeling their genomes much
more difficult. This project will address these added statistical and
computational complexities by developing novel methods for the population
genetics of polyploid genomes. These methods will allow researchers to better
determine the structural relationships within and between polyploid populations,
which could better reveal aspects of the underlying evolutionary processes
within these species. All methods will be implemented in open-source software,
which will make these approaches accessible to applied researchers. This project
will provide advanced training in Statistics and Computational Biology to
undergraduate and graduate researchers in preparation for the next steps in
their careers. This project will also result in publicly available educational
materials for advanced statistical&lt;br/&gt;computation using the R statistical
language, making such topics more accessible to the greater academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project reformulates key tasks from
population genetics in terms of U-statistic minimization, a statistical
technique for estimation and testing. This approach will lend itself to greater
generality and complexity, such as for polyploid populations. These methods will
also account for deviations from classical Mendelian segregation caused, for
example, by double reduction, the co-migration of sister chromatids into the
same gamete during meiosis, a common event in some types of polyploids. The
first aim is to develop novel testing strategies for equilibrium in polyploid
and mixed-ploidy populations. The second aim is to develop new approaches to
estimate population structure while accounting for common issues that result
from polyploid data. The third aim is to explore other possible applications of
the U-statistic approach, such as for inbreeding estimation or linkage
disequilibrium estimation. This project emphasizes developing usable software
for the research community, and extreme reproducibility in all results. This
project will deliver usable R packages for each innovation, which will be
accessible to the greater biological community. Student researchers will be
trained in the fundamentals of software development using R, and so will be an
integral&lt;br/&gt;part in building the R packages of this project. The results
of the project can be found at https://github.com/dcgerard/NSF-U-
Statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.