* 2132144
* RII Track-4: NSF: Elucidating heterogeneous single chain conformation and dynamics in thin films through optical imaging
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Zhe Qiang, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 01/31/2024
* USD 196,435.00

Polymer thin films are indispensable in a wide range of nanotechnologies. For
some applications, their thickness needs to be less than the size of a polymer
molecule. However, films with such thickness can have substantially different
material properties relative to their bulk analogs. Understanding the
fundamental structure-property relationship of polymer thin films is crucial for
enabling their rational design. In this project, the PI and a female graduate
student from the University of Southern Mississippi will work with experts at
Rice University. The team will directly elucidate how nanoscale confinement
alters polymer chain microstructures, mobility, and system heterogeneity through
advanced optical imaging methods. This project will strengthen single-molecule
imaging capabilities in the PI’s group and develop new collaborations between
institutions. These resources will be leveraged to improve the research
infrastructures in Mississippi, as well as to develop new course and workshop
materials for educating future STEM researchers and enhancing community
outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this RII Track-4
fellowship project is to obtain a complete, molecular-level understanding about
thin film confinement effects on polymer chain dynamics and conformations
through real-space, real-time imaging. Specifically, single-particle tracking
(SPT) and single-molecule Förster resonance energy transfer (sm-FRET) methods
will be employed for characterizing polymer mobility and their end-to-end
distances as functions of film thickness and matrix molecular weight. Both
imaging techniques are uniquely suited for simultaneously examining hundreds of
individual molecules. The combined use of SPT and sm-FRET in this project will
elucidate heterogenous chain behaviors of polymer thin films, which are
particularly important for informing their efficient system design. Furthermore,
this fellowship program will establish a platform to advance optical imaging
capabilities in the PI’s home institution and the state of
Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.