* 2132223
* RII Track-4:NSF: Exploring the Potential of ANNIE Physics Phase and Beyond
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jingbo Wang, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 169,803.00

The Accelerator Neutrino Neutron Interaction Experiment (ANNIE) is a 26-ton
gadolinium-doped water Cherenkov detector at the Fermilab Booster Neutrino Beam,
small by particle physics standards but with big ambitions. The goal is to
develop a next-generation neutrino detector using advanced photosensors and new
experimental techniques while making important measurements to understand
neutrino-nucleus interactions. The ANNIE result will have a direct impact on the
reduction of the systematic uncertainties and the improvement of the signal-
background discrimination in future large neutrino detectors, which is essential
for long-baseline oscillation physics, proton decay searches, and supernova
detection. The proposed research will develop new analysis algorithms to improve
the neutrino detection capability in ANNIE and perform fundamental simulations
and tests to explore the physics potential beyond the current phase. The
fellowship will advance the collaboration between South Dakota School of Mines
and Technology (SD Mines) and Fermilab. It will also provide comprehensive
training for the PI and a graduate student to enhance the group's research
capability in developing next-generation neutrino detectors. The results of the
research will significantly advance knowledge and understanding of new
technologies for neutrino detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ANNIE will perform
several fundamental tests of new technologies to be used in neutrino detectors,
such as a novel kind of photodetectors called Large-Area Picosecond
PhotoDetector (LAPPD) and Water-based Liquid Scintillator (WbLS) that is a
newly-developed detection medium. The technology behind the ANNIE detector will
have a high impact on the development of future large water Cherenkov detectors
as well as on detection techniques for neutrino physics. This fellowship
supports the PI and a graduate student to visit Fermilab for six months to work
closely with their ANNIE collaborators onsite at Fermilab. The proposed research
aims at (1) developing analysis algorithms to push the ANNIE detector to its
full potential demonstrating its promise for future experiments, (2) testing a
new neutrino detection medium WbLS by deploying a target vessel into the
existing water tank, and (3) performing simulations to investigate the
feasibility of measuring the number of final state neutrons from neutrino-argon
interaction using the ANNIE infrastructure. The proposed research will deliver
an optimized fast-timing-based reconstruction package to facilitate the physics
analysis and explore the ANNIE's potential beyond the current phase. The WbLS
deployment and the feasibility study of liquid argon target deployment connect
ANNIE to future larger-scale neutrino experiments with broader impacts on the
field. This research fellowship would provide the PI with expertise on new
neutrino detection technologies and enable the PI to sustain his career in
experimental neutrino physics in the long term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.