* 2132229
* Center for Advanced Radio Sciences and Engineering
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Francisco Cordova, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Cooperative Agreement
* Alison Peck
* 12/31/2026
* USD 6,836,665.00

The Center for Advanced Radio Sciences and Engineering established in this award
will enable the development of integrated tools to resolve spectrum sharing and
coexistence issues, and improve performance on radio science observations
through an innovation and collaboration ecosystem designed to elevate the
science and engineering capacity at University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez
(UPRM), Arecibo Observatory (AO), and Puerto Rico in general. The center will
explore new concepts in radio astronomy, atmospheric sciences, spectrum
monitoring and radio frequency interference mitigation, with a focus on
scientific observations. The Center will improve the research competitiveness of
the Puerto Rico engineering and academic communities, training a new generation
of students via hands-on experience with leading-edge research infrastructure
and internships. The creation of this center will foster new collaborations
between AO, the National Radio Astronomy Observatory (NRAO), industry, and the
Puerto Rico academic community, which will both enrich radio sciences and
engineering and position Puerto Rico students and scientists to participate
strongly in future radio sciences projects. This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Astronomical Sciences, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UPRM formed a collaboration with industry and with AO via
its managing organization, the University of Central Florida (UCF), to create
the Center for Advanced Radio Sciences and Engineering. This Center provides
support to maintain and grow the local scientific and engineering capacity. The
Center will enable the development of integrated tools to resolve spectrum
sharing and coexistence issues, and improve performance on radio science
observations. The Center’s specific goals include the development of enabling
technologies in radio frequencies, microwave, and millimeter-wave antennas and
systems, electronics and embedded systems, and digital signal processing
algorithms, together with crosscutting applied sciences research activities in
atmospheric sciences and radio astronomy. Tools envisioned for development
consist of spectrum monitoring and radio frequency interference (RFI) mitigation
systems; interference robust scientific receivers; small size, low weight, low
power and low-cost scientific receivers and monitoring systems; and adaptable
transmitters with reduced out-of-band emissions. The Center includes industry
partnerships to develop RFI mitigation solutions. A primary focus is to create
new partnerships between academia and industry for the development of the
diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce required to plan, design,
prototype, construct, commission and operate the next generation of radio
astronomy instruments. Center activities will enhance engineering, radio
astronomy, atmospheric science and high-throughput computing research
infrastructure at UPRM and at Puerto Rico institutions more broadly, including
new faculty lines, support for postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, and
cross-institutional research support. Education, Outreach, Workforce, and
Diversity, Equity and Inclusion activities will be developed in partnership with
the UPRM Centro Universitario para el Acceso, and the NRAO Radio Astronomy Data
Imaging and Analysis Lab Project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.