* 2132013
* RII Track-4:NSF: Relational Algebra on Heterogeneous Extreme-scale Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Sidharth kumar, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 264,755.00

Relational algebra (RA) forms a basis of primitive operations such as join,
projection, aggregation, and selection that transform one or more input
relations (i.e., database tables) into an output relation. It can be used to
implement algorithms in graph analytics, deductive databases, program analysis,
satisfiability, constraint solving, and machine learning. High-performance RA
has the potential to extract vast untapped parallelism from critical
applications. Despite this great expressive power, investigation of RA within
the HPC community has been limited and significant advances are needed to scale
RA on next-generation HPC systems. This work will advance the state of art by
developing novel algorithms for massively parallel relational algebra on
exascale HPC systems such as the Aurora supercomputer at Argonne National
Laboratory (ANL). In the context of heterogeneous systems (i.e., those using
multiple distinct compute paradigms in concert, like Aurora), this work will
address key scaling concerns including workload decomposition, load balancing,
communication, and I/O. This work will establish foundations for long-term
collaboration with ANL towards the development of foundational theory, practical
implementations, and rigorous evaluations of parallel RA. The project will
support a graduate student from an underrepresented minority and lay groundwork
for a high-impact dissertation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to increasing inter-
network data-movement costs and power constraints, exascale systems are
increasingly shifting toward heterogeneous computing environments, with CPUs
being coupled with coprocessors such as GPUs. Aurora Supercomputer at Argonne
national lab is an example of a leadership-class heterogeneous system; every
Aurora node is equipped with multiple GPU co-processors. This work will lead to
the development of parallel algorithms for RA, in the context of Aurora
specifically and heterogeneous systems more broadly, over three key phases: (1)
development of core RA algorithms for multi-GPU nodes; (2) extending these
algorithms to supercomputers with many nodes, like Aurora; (3) extending the
whole compute process to include scalable parallel IO. First, phase (1) will
require investigating three technical approaches for the RA itself, extending
them to multi-GPU nodes: (i) radix-hash, (ii) sort-merge, and (iii) nested-loop.
Second, in phase (2) the work will investigate inter-node balancing of RA
primitives and techniques to minimize data movement across multi-node systems.
Finally, in phase (3) a customized parallel IO system and storage model will be
developed that will take into account the deepening memory hierarchy available
on modern supercomputers. These innovations across three phases will be
evaluated using the ALCF supercomputer Aurora, using three application domains:
graph mining, static program analysis, and deductive databases for scientific
simulations. With exascale insight, this research is poised to create a new
generation of applications based on relational
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.