* 2132846
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Robot-Assisted Feeding: Towards Efficient, Safe, and Personalized Caregiving Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2025
* USD 483,392.00

The goal of this project is to develop caregiving robots that can provide long-
term assistance with activities of daily living (ADLs) to people with mobility
limitations. Despite great strides taken towards sustainable solutions in
controlled environments, robots are far from ready for adoption in real home
environments as long-term caregiving solutions. Key factors could be the over-
reliance on full autonomy in tasks that require dynamic physical and social
interactions in unstructured environments as well as the lack of personalized
assistance. Based on the central tenet that robots need to optimize both
physical and social interactions to provide efficient, safe, and personalized
assistance for ADLs, this work will focus on developing robot-assisted feeding
as a long-term caregiving solution for a person with upper-extremity disability
in an unstructured, real-home environment. Successful feeding consists of bite
acquisition (i.e., picking up a food item) and bite transfer (i.e., moving it
into the mouth). This project develops methods to integrate these activities
towards the development of an intelligent and personalized robot-assisted
feeding system. The models leverage multimodal feedback to develop human-in-the-
loop control policies that adapt to a range of human and environmental factors.
Realizing that full autonomy can be challenging in unstructured and dynamic
environments, the methods will leverage expert human feedback while minimizing
the cognitive load and interweave them intelligently with autonomy to arrive at
a long-term caregiving solution. This work will have a direct impact on the
lives, health, and comfort of millions of people in the world who live with
motor impairments. Developing policies that consider the human in the loop at
every step and learn from their feedback through multiple modalities will have
an impact on many other human-robot interaction domains including but not
limited to assistive teleoperation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the state of the art of robotics from both a technical and algorithmic
perspective. First, novel bite acquisition algorithms will be developed that are
capable of picking up deformable objects in unstructured settings. Second, bite-
transfer algorithms will be developed that learn from physical feedback provided
on the robot or on the utensil when transferring food inside of a person's
mouth. Finally, the research team will develop active and adaptive algorithms
that tap into other sources of data, such as comparisons or language
instructions, to intelligently improve the acquisition and transfer algorithms
and personalize the feeding experience. This work leverages the idea of learning
from multimodal human feedback---specifically by embracing physical interactions
rather than trying to avoid them---to better manipulate and transfer food. The
assistive acquisition and transfer algorithms will be extensively evaluated
through human subject studies. The algorithms will be implemented on multiple
high-degree-of-freedom robotic platforms across labs. Planned user studies and
low-level implementations will advance the state of robotics outside of
assistive feeding, particularly towards other ADLs or Instrumental ADLs (IADLs)
in home settings, such as meal-preparation, cooking, and
housework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.