* 2132323
* Collaborative Research: High-frequency, High-power Amplifier Based on Distributed Coupling of GaN HEMTs Through a SiC Substrate-integrated Waveguide
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* James Hwang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 333,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical&lt;br/&gt;High-frequency, high-power sources are
critical to exploiting the electromagnetic spectrum. The project may enable the
next generation of millimeter-wave electronics with unprecedented bandwidth and
power, while minimizing their size, weight, power consumption, cost, and failure
rate. The methodologies developed to design, integrate, and fabricate high-power
sources above 110 GHz, and to characterize these devices in terms of
electromagnetic coupling, millimeter-wave performance, and thermal metrology can
be used in the future to further improve the bandwidth and power of
monolithically integrated power amplifiers to cover not only the entire
millimeter-wave frequency range, but also terahertz frequencies that are not
widely exploited. The substrate-integrated waveguide (SIW) platform may enable
other electronic components such as high-quality filters and antennas to be
monolithically integrated on a single chip, which has been difficult with
conventional integrated circuits. The project directly impacts Future of Work by
facilitating ubiquitous wireless communications, smart man-machine interfaces,
and Internet of Things (IoT). It is estimated that wireless communications
currently cover approximately 60% of the Earth surface, making Internet
accessible to only about half of the world's population. 6G wireless
communications enabled by millimeter-wave sources that are small, light,
powerful, low cost, and reliable can extend the coverage to 100% of the Earth
surface, making Internet accessible to
everyone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Based on an ultra-low-loss
SiC SIW, a novel traveling-wave amplifier (TWA) is used to combine high-
electron-mobility transistors (HEMTs) in a distributed manner for overcoming the
power combining and impedance matching challenges of conventional monolithic
millimeter-wave integrated circuits. Distributed and synchronous coupling
between a quasi-transverse-electromagnetic wave on a grounded coplanar waveguide
and a transverse-electric wave on an SIW is new, as is monolithic integration of
SIW with transistors. This approach takes advantage of high-quality GaN grown
epitaxially on SiC to achieve high-frequency, high-power performance through
monolithic integration. This monolithic integration allows unprecedented
precision and field strength in a distributed geometry, which is impossible to
realize with conventional split-block machined parts or hybrid integration on a
printed circuit board. This provides a path to high-frequency circuits with
power and efficiency performance that is not otherwise attainable. As a proof-
of-concept test vehicle, TWAs capable of 1-W output power at the D band (110-170
GHz) are designed, fabricated, and characterized. If successful, similar
approaches can be used to generate higher powers at higher frequencies, or be
implemented in other semiconductor technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.