* 2132647
* EAGER: SUPER: Electrochemical Protonation to Achieve Superconducting Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Ju Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Superconductors are used for electricity
transmission, quantum computing, and for making strong magnets essential for
medical imaging, nuclear fusion, and particle accelerators. Currently they are
cryogenically cooled, or need to be put under tremendous pressure, which drive
up the operating cost. Discovering room-temperature normal-pressure
superconductors is a grand challenge in science, and would enable new energy
technologies, sensors, and information technologies. In this project, the team
aims to develop new electrochemical control of superconductors that would allow
a new design degree of freedom. This approach is potentially transformative as
electrochemical confinement/retention will be much easier to industrialize than
pressure confinement/retention, and also can be easily miniaturized to micron-
diameter lines, with highly insulating and stable solid electrolytes that enable
the dynamic tuning of dopant chemical potentials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;We will establish
processing-structure-properties relationships for quantum phases of cuprates and
iridates. The proposed electrochemical control of protonation and oxygen
deficiency will allow us to reach otherwise unachievable, high-temperature and
ambient-pressure superconducting phases. In addition, the proposed autonomous
oxide synthesis is capable of simultaneously making and interrogating a wide
range of oxide chemistries in a high-throughput manner. A terahertz probe method
will be used for rapid mapping and screening of temperature-dependent transport
properties. The team will use the experimentally acquired data to learn a
predictive mapping between the input control variables (precursor chemistry,
flash heating-time profiles, and dynamical electrochemical hydrogen doping or
oxygen deficiency) and superconductivity, with real-time design and process
control. This project will also establish high-throughput exploration for
autonomous design and manufacturing, and also stimulate broad interests and
educate a broad range of audiences at the intersection of materials design,
computation, quantum phase physics, and high-throughput experimental
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.