* 2132623
* Ferroelectricity Emerging from Antisite Defects in Complex Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Caroline Ross, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 11/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Description: Ferroelectric materials can store electric charge, and
have applications in energy storage, memory devices, and actuators. This project
develops a new class of ferroelectric materials that also have magnetic
properties. This combination of properties makes them particularly useful for
low power memory and computing devices. It has been a challenge to find
materials that possess both magnetic and ferroelectric properties at room
temperature, but recent work shows a path to this goal by manipulating the
composition of a class of oxides that contain iron and a rare earth metal. The
change in composition produces a particular type of defect which is the source
of the ferroelectricity. This research project investigates ferroelectricity in
material compositions that are predicted to show the strongest effects. Broader
impacts include student training, activities to promote diversity, public
outreach via events and online classes, and technology transfer to industrial
groups. Public outreach is offered at The Nano-Observatory, an annual event
where attendees visit a nanofabrication and characterization lab at MIT for
demonstrations of nanotechnology, and through free online classes that
contribute to a micro-minor certification. Outreach to underserved minorities is
carried out through a program that brings undergraduates from minority
populations to MIT, and through a departmental Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Collaborative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Ferroelectrics are
useful and interesting materials, with applications in energy storage, memory
and actuators. Furthermore, when combined with ferro- or antiferromagnetic
order, the materials are multiferroic and exhibit additional functionality such
as voltage-induced changes in magnetization or magnetic field-induced changes in
polarization. This research project explores the hypothesis that
ferroelectricity can be induced in perovskites with generic formula ABO_3 as a
result of antisite defects, i.e. the presence of one cation on a site that
should contain a different cation. Recent work has shown that antisite defects
in yttrium orthoferrite YFeO_3 with Y:Fe &gt; 1 lead to a robust room-
temperature ferroelectricity, even though the bulk stoichiometric material is
non-ferroelectric, and density functional theory predicts that this mechanism
would be even stronger in orthoferrites with smaller rare earth cations such as
Lu. This research investigates antisite-defect-mediated ferroelectricity in thin
films of rare earth-rich orthoferrites LuFeO_3 and YbFeO_3, and measures the
effect of magnetic field on their ferroelectric response. Broader impacts
include student training, activities to promote diversity, public outreach via
events and online classes, and technology transfer to industrial groups. Public
outreach is offered at The Nano-Observatory, an annual event where attendees
visit a nanofabrication and characterization lab at MIT for demonstrations of
nanotechnology, and through free online classes that contribute to a micro-minor
certification. Outreach to underserved minorities is carried out through a
program that brings undergraduates from minority populations to MIT, and through
a departmental Diversity, Equity and Inclusion
Collaborative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.