* 2132744
* EAGER-Harnessing natural killer cell-derived extracellular vesicles as anti-viral nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Eun Ji Chung, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 144,647.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural killer cell-derived
extracellular vesicles (NKE) are natural nanoparticles that are inherently
biocompatible, stable in vivo, and contain anti-viral components. As such,
investigating the materials properties of NKE will be critical to informing the
design of synthetic, biomimetic nanoparticles that can be scaled-up for anti-
viral application including COVID-19. To meet these needs, the overall goal of
this EAGER award by the Biomaterials Program is to study the nanomaterial
properties, membrane composition, and cargo of NKE. Using this new knowledge,
the PI and her lab will test how these material properties affect membrane
fusion, as well as cell internalization and anti-viral function against SARS-
CoV-2 infection. Since NK cell activity has been found to differ among various
patient populations, the PI will also elucidate how the materials properties of
extracellular vesicles vary with biological factors, and can be used to obtain
new knowledge that is critical for compatibility, stability, and overall
performance of drug delivery systems. These research efforts will be integrated
with education and outreach initiatives for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students and for the public. The activities at the college and graduate levels
are centered on recruitment, mentorship, and training women, URM, and LGBTQ
students through in-depth research experiences, while K-12 activities are based
on classroom lectures and hands-on demos. In addition, the PI will interact with
the public through an established collaboration with the California Science
Center and a social media platform for K-12 students. The goal is to inspire,
engage, and prepare the next generation of scientists and engineers from diverse
backgrounds to develop innovative solutions that can benefit global public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL ABSTRACT:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural
killer (NK) cells are the first line of defense against viral infections and
helps eliminate unhealthy host cells. Although NK cells have been proposed as a
cell-based therapy against diseases caused by viral infections such as COVID-19,
cell therapy has challenges including limited cell survival in vivo, short
shelf-life, and high cost. Instead, the cytotoxic, extracellular vesicles (EVs)
that endow natural killing properties to NK cells have the potential to be
scaled-up as long-term, off-the-shelf drug delivery carriers and can be used to
inform the design of stable, biomimetic drug delivery carriers for anti-viral
application. To that end, the PI and her lab will first 1) characterize the
material properties, as well as lipid, protein, and RNA membrane and cargo
composition of NK EVs (NKE) originating from several human sources. Then, the PI
and her lab will 2) evaluate NKE cell internalization and anti-viral activity in
cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 and assess how differences in NKE composition and
materials properties influences their function. Success of the research plan is
anticipated to advance fundamental knowledge of NKE, and elucidate their
material properties as it relates to anti-viral function. Thus, the results from
the research proposal may be significant during the current pandemic (e.g.
COVID-19) in evaluating NKE as a novel source of anti-viral therapy, but will
have potential benefits for immunotherapy in other viral infections. The
research plan is integrated with the education and outreach plan which includes:
1) recruitment, training, and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students
from diverse backgrounds including women, URM, and LGBTQ groups through in-depth
research experiences, 2) classroom lecture and hands-on activities regarding
bio-nanomaterials including nanoparticle carriers in recent COVID-19 vaccines
(32nd Street School, Los Angeles Unified School District), and 3) NanoDays, an
annual program that will include bio-nanotechnology demos at the California
Science Center, and NanoPeek, our social media platform that showcases bio-
nanotechnology content. Together, these initiatives aim to excite, engage, and
disseminate knowledge to a diverse audience ranging from K-12 to the public
regarding bionanomaterials in medicine and its potential to solve global public
health issues such as pandemics. The effectiveness of the programs will be
evaluated for each activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.