* 2132025
* EFRI E3P: Program plastic lifecycle by rationally design enzyme-containing plastics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Corinne Scown, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project targets embedding active enzymes during plastic manufacturing, and
programming on-demand plastic degradation or modification during product
fabrication, storage, and use. The project's hypotheses are that (1) molecular
control of biocatalysis within polymeric matrices can afford on-demand
modification or programmable plastic degradation during manufacture, use, and
disposal, and (2) with recent advances in synthetic biology and nanomaterial
engineering, it is feasible to develop economically viable enzyme-embedded
plastics to achieve valorization or degradation of end-of-life plastic waste.
The interdisciplinary project team seeks to develop compostable single-use
plastic based on polymers with chemically labile backbones and valorization of
polyolefins by C-H bond oxidation. The team intends to (1) develop approaches to
manufacturing these materials at large scale using melt extrusion, (2) test
properties of prototypes, and (3) evaluate the environmental impact of the
prototypes with local ecology centers. By engineering compostable plastics that
are stable under conditions relevant to storage and use but degrade in a matter
of days under composting conditions, this project seeks to provide basic
knowledge of important relevance to the compostable single-use plastics
industry. The intended outcome of the research would reduce the volume of
single-use plastic packaging sent to landfills and reduce mechanical separation
costs at organics processing and composting facilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is to (1) develop molecular
understanding in biocatalysis of enzymes nanoscopically dispersed in semi-
crystalline polyesters with focus on enzyme stability, catalytic mechanism, and
kinetics to realize programmable degradation, (2) develop molecular
understanding in biocatalysis in oxidase-containing polyolefins and design
catalytic cascades to chemically modify sidechains of polyolefins for
valorization and accelerated degradation, and (3) fabricate minimum viable
prototypes, optimize the system for relevant commercial performance as single-
use plastics, validate the material properties and performance using ASTM
testing methodology, and perform technoeconomic analysis and evaluate prototype
life cycle. It is anticipated that the work will provide significant insights in
the emerging fields of solid-state enzymology and enzyme-containing functional
materials. The project team also plans a three-tiered approach aimed at
improving undergraduate education in the area of polymer science, developing a
polymer degradation kit for students and public demonstrations, and creating
course modules to specifically highlight polymer recycling, upgrading, and
enzymatic degradation. This award is co-funded by the directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences, specifically the Polymers Program in the
Division of Materials Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.