* 2132561
* SBIR Phase II:  A portable rapid cycling compression device to prevent blood clots
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2023
* John Welsh, OSCIFLEX LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Edward Chinchoy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,727.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to reduce the incidence of blood clots in
individuals outside a clinical care setting. Venous blood clots are a common
event in individuals who recently been discharged from a hospital or clinical
care setting, with an estimated 500,000 cases annually in the US alone. Venous
clots cause leg pain and swelling, loss of mobility, re-hospitalization, and
even death in some cases. This project develops a novel device, specifically for
use at home, to increase venous blood flow in low mobility users to prevent
blood clot formation. This project improves patient outcomes and reduces the
estimated $10 B in associated costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project leverages molecular studies that
identified a key genetic pathway that regulates blood clot formation in veins.
This protective pathway is activated by specific patterns of venous blood flow
stimulated by typical activity and mobility. However, in individuals with low
mobility this pathway can be lost resulting in an increased risk for venous
blood clot formation. Because stimulation of this pathway offers powerful
protection against clot formation, this project proposes a novel device
specifically designed to recreate the patterns of venous flow that activate the
protective genetic pathway. This pattern may be successfully created in immobile
individuals with external compressions applied to the user’s calf. This project
will focus on optimizing the device size and weight while maximizing patient
comfort and ease of use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.