* 2132421
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineering broad-spectrum disease resistance in soybean without fitness cost
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Peter Alexander, UPSTREAM BIOTECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 994,582.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is the development of a novel genetic trait that allows plants to
rapidly respond to attacking pathogens. Despite modern agricultural practices
and chemistry improvements, almost 40% of all crop production is lost due to
pests and pathogens each year; within the U.S. over 25% of soybean production is
lost this way. These losses are even more severe in regions where pesticide
application is prohibitively expensive for farmers. This project develops a new
technology for use in soybean and other oilseed crops to protect against plant
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a broad-spectrum
pathogen resistance trait. While the first generation of transgenic trait
technologies conferring herbicide tolerance and insecticidal traits have been
readily established for oilseed production across North and South America,
further development has faltered due to the complexity of these plant traits.
Unfortunately, the proteins that provide the best tolerance to adverse
environmental conditions also result in toxic side-effects when produced in
healthy plants; consequently, the utility of developing these proteins is
limited. Current methods for regulating expression of resistance proteins
introduced into plants through genetic engineering are insufficient to regulate
toxic proteins/compounds that may have side-effects in other environmental
conditions. The proposed project will demonstrate an expression system that
responds to signals, common to both bacterial and fungal pathogens, in the early
and late stages of the plant immune response to release the production of anti-
microbial proteins only in when needed, effectively eliminating the off-target
side-effects. The project objectives are to 1) perform field and greenhouse
trial of soybean with this technology to ascertain extent of pathogen resistance
and yield effects in infected and healthy conditions; 2) optimize the technology
for tissue specific (i.e., roots vs. leaves) use in soybean; 3) conduct
greenhouse experiments to determine response to pathogen detection in canola,
cotton, and potato as candidates for future field trials and
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.