* 2132602
* Summit for Examining the Potential for Crosscutting Concepts to Support Three-Dimensional Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Sarah Fick, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 11,612.00

This project will convene a group of scholars in K-12 science education for a
workshop that will lay fundamental conceptual groundwork for research on how
crosscutting concepts (CCCs) can inform science teaching and learning. CCCs,
along with disciplinary core ideas and scientific practices, reflect a new
vision of science proficiency expressed in recent national and state science
education frameworks and standards. This vision integrates the "knowing" and
"doing" of authentic science and promotes knowledge and skills necessary for
participating productively in society as a citizen. The primary aims of the
summit are to (1) develop preliminary theoretical models for learning that can
underpin research programs on CCCs, (2) map the terrain of existing research on
CCCs, and (3) identify central issues that can guide research about the roles of
CCCs in science teaching and learning. These aims will help the field move
beyond challenges that it currently faces, such as ambiguous terminology, a lack
of clear theoretical consensus, and a lack of empirical grounding. This project
is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
summit will enable scholars who are experienced with studying CCCs to discuss
the diverse perspectives that exist about the nature and purpose of CCCs, as
well as their potential to inform science teaching and learning. Summit
participants will include researchers, curriculum developers, school
practitioners, and other stakeholders, so as to include diverse perspectives on
conceptual and empirical research, classroom implementation, and teacher
professional learning. Summit activities will focus on the authoring of position
papers that will be presented, peer-critiqued, and refined over the course of
the 3-day event. The agenda will address specific topics such as how CCCs can
support the integration of science disciplines (including engineering),
assessing student proficiency with CCCs, and viewing the CCCs across grade
bands. Insights will be published in a proceedings that will articulate key
issues and challenges; which will be made freely available to the science
education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.