* 2132098
* Effects of Quantum Confinement in Photosensors from Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Edward Van Keuren, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 349,838.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Ultra-thin materials that are just one-
atom-thick and the new physics arising from their drastically reduced dimensions
are fueling intense research activity worldwide, with tremendous opportunities
for discoveries in fundamental science and for potential practical applications,
especially in electronics and photonics. The restriction of the charge carriers
(electrons and “holes”, or missing electrons) to two dimensions, an example of
so-called “quantum confinement”, deeply affects the properties of two-
dimensional materials and their interaction with light. This project involves
the study of how the properties of these types of materials can be further
modified by additional structure in the layers, for example, by making thin
“nanoribbons” or by placing the layers on top of nanoscale holes that will
locally affect the charge carriers. The results of this work will help us
understand their properties better, as well as potentially lead to improvements
in devices such as phototransistors and other types of optical detectors. The
project is a collaboration with a group at the Army Research Lab, and so will
also provide an excellent opportunity for students to become involved with
cutting-edge research that will support the national defense as well as the
optoelectronics industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum confinement deeply affects the properties of two-
dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and their interaction with
light, yielding a plethora of optical excitations with binding energies larger
than a few tenths of an electron volt. This project will push studies of these
materials towards even stronger quantum confinement by patterning them into
nanoribbons, creating heterostructures of TMD nanoribbons stacked with other TMD
layers, and patterning the substrates to suspend these materials on nanoscale
holes. Nanostructuring 2D materials into nanoribbons will introduce new van Hove
singularities at the onset of one-dimensional subbands, possibly yielding
stronger light-matter interaction and higher responsivity compared to 2D
channels with the same active area. Stacking a layer of a different
semiconducting TMD on the TMD nanoribbons is expected to result in fast charge
transfer and photogating after light absorption, as well as the formation of
interlayer excitons having longer lifetimes than the intralayer excitons. We
will study the effect of the longer lifetimes combined with the spatial
confinement of the nanoribbons on the exciton condensation. Lastly, this project
will study the effect of quantum confinement due to nanopatterning of the
substrate. Exciton liquid condensation has been observed in TMD suspended on
holes with size of a few microns. This project will study the effect of reducing
the hole size to dimensions that are a few tens or hundreds of the exciton size,
thereby studying the effect of spatial confinement in exciton
droplets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statement of merit
review:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.