* 2132649
* CBMS Conference: Ramanujan's Partition Congruences, Mock Theta Functions, and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Timothy Huber, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

This award provides funding for the research conference "Ramanujan's ranks, mock
theta functions, and beyond" organized as part of the Conference Board of the
Mathematical Sciences (CBMS) series. The event will take place at University of
Texas Rio Grande Valley during May 16-20, 2022. The main goal of this event is
to provide an introduction to various topics in mathematical number theory to a
broader audience. The conference revolves around ten lectures to be given by
Professor Frank Garvan of the University of Florida Gainesville. The discoveries
of the mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan have found applications in disciplines
from supercomputing to chemistry, and to physics and the study of black holes.
Recent work has been motivated by data obtained from the innovative use of both
mathematical theory and the use of computer algebra systems. In accordance with
the goals of the NSF-CBMS program, the main purpose of this conference is to
stimulate further research by bringing together leading mathematicians and
junior researchers interested in q-series, modular forms, and partitions. We
expect that many of the scientists attending this CBMS conference to come from
all over the Gulf Coast States and Mexico. Such a conference will have
immeasurable impact on the new doctoral program in mathematics that is planned
at the University of Texas Rio Grande Valley. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Garvan will lecture on the topics of Ramanujan’s partition congruences and mock
theta functions. The viewpoint of these lectures and topics goes back to the
work of the physicist Freeman Dyson. In 1944 Dyson asked for deeper
combinatorial reasons for Ramanujan's famous partition congruences. Dyson's
question was completed by Garvan in 1987. In his article, A Walk through
Ramanujan’s Garden, Dyson foresaw that "Garvan's beautiful discovery is not an
end but a beginning." Dyson proffered the challenge to build a grand synthesis
of partition congruences and mock theta functions to develop the group theoretic
structure of mock theta functions. This synthesis would be analogous to Hecke's
development of modular forms from Jacobi's theory of theta functions and would
lead to applications in physics. Professor Garvan will lecture on how modern
mathematics has taken up both of Dyson's challenges. This will involve
combinatorial techniques and function theoretic methods including the classical
theory of basic hypergeometric functions as well the modern theory of weak
harmonic Maass forms and p-adic modular forms. Further information about the
conference will be available at the website:
https://www.cbmsweb.org&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.