* 2132200
* EFRI DCheM: Chemicals from Renewables Through Green Electrochemistry (ChaRGE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Sarah Ryan, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Alias Smith
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,032,000.00

This project aims to develop a new approach to distributed chemical
manufacturing that combines sustainability, performance, and chemical
flexibility. It capitalizes on electrochemistry, a technology that uses electric
fields to enhance chemical transformations and open new reaction pathways. The
investigators in this project will streamline fermentation and electrochemistry
in modular reactor systems to produce high-value chemicals from regional carbon
(biomass) and wind/solar energy sources. To this end, they will develop
fundamental insights into the electrochemical transformation of intermediates
obtained from fermentation, design new catalysts for organic electro-reductions
and -oxidations, engineer reactor systems for flexible operation, and synthesize
novel high-value monomers. In addition, the copolymerization and chemistry of
the obtained monomers will be explored with the intent to access Nylons with
performance advantages. Constant feedback among electrochemical experiments,
theory, reactor design, polymer engineering, and operations research will yield
distributed manufacturing systems where energy management, plant scale and plant
location are optimized for maximum expected operating profit under uncertainty
in feedstock availability and quality, and in renewable energy supply. The
overarching goal of this project is to decarbonize the U.S. chemical industry,
evolve the power and chemical industries, advance the American leadership in
chemical manufacturing, improve rural economies, and provide unique outreach and
training opportunities for building a biomanufacturing workforce. The project is
particularly relevant to develop a locally-rooted STEM workforce in the Midwest,
with enhanced participation of underrepresented students in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the scientific and
technological barriers to the implementation of organic electrosynthesis for the
distributed manufacturing of chemicals. The team will design catalysts and
reaction pathways for the diversification of biologically-produced cis,cis-
muconic acid (MA), a diacid that has recently been elevated to the status of
platform chemical due to its unparalleled promise for strategically advancing
the bioeconomy. The project will focus on three transformations of industrial
importance for which the project will provide environmental and economic
benefits: (i) cathodic hydrogenations using water as hydrogen source, (ii)
cathodic carbon-carbon coupling using green electrons and, (iii) anodic
epoxidations using chloride ions as a mediator. Using green electrons from
wind/solar energy and compounds already present in the fermentation broth will
create new opportunities for sustainable manufacturing, process intensification,
and the cost-effective production of monomers from waste biomass. In addition to
adipic acid, a commodity monomer used in the manufacture of Nylon 6,6, the
proposed research will provide novel diacids with functionalities that are not
readily accessible from petroleum. The outcomes of the project are
transformative at multiple levels as (i) it will elucidate the role of the
substrateâ€™s molecular structure, ions in solution, pH, the nature and the
structure of the electrocatalyst, and the electric field on the conversion of
bioproducts; (ii) it will also highlight how species abundant in biomass, namely
water and chloride ions, can be efficiently used as a source of hydrogen and as
a mediator, respectively, to perform industrially-relevant hydrogenation and
epoxidation reactions under ambient conditions; (iii) it will reveal the
benefits of electrocatalysis to access new monomers and performance-advantaged
bioplastics; and (iv) it will reveal strategies to mitigate the intermittent
nature of renewable energy for chemical manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.