* 2132666
* EAGER: SUPER: Non-Hexagonal 2D Boride and Borocarbide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Kirill Kovnir, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 10/31/2023
* USD 295,357.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project, supported by
Division of Materials Research, Profs. Kirill Kovnir, Kai Ming Ho, and Vladimir
Antropov and their research groups at Iowa State University will be focused on
the discovery of novel high-temperature superconductors which will greatly
benefit society. High-temperature superconductors which are stable at ambient
pressure have the potential to revolutionize modern technology in many energy-
related fields: generation, transmittance, transformation, and transportation.
Such superconducting materials are currently unavailable. Extensive previous
studies on conventional superconductors pointed to promise of the systems based
on light elements, such as hydrogen, carbon, and boron. In the current project,
computational and experimental efforts are joined to find novel superconductors
among layered borides and borocarbides of two or more transition metals. These
particular target systems are severely understudied, and hold promise for tuning
of the materials properties by means of metal or boron/carbon substitutions. The
proposed research integrates computational and experimental studies to provide
diverse training for graduate student researchers. The fundamental issues
considered in the project are applicable to emergent energy technology. The
acquired knowledge and established methodology may be applicable for functional
materials development in other areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project, supported by the Division of
Materials Research, is focused on the discovery of high-temperature
superconductors in non-hexagonal borides and borocarbides of two or more
transition metals. A combination of different transition metals allowed for
realization of layers based on 5- and 7-membered B rings providing a lever to
tune electron-phonon interactions in the boron network. The search for new
superconductors starts with the wide computational screening of ternary and
multinary metal borides and borocarbides containing at least two different
transition metals with non-hexagonal B or B-C layers. A combination of Adaptive
Genetic Algorithm and fast advanced machine learning algorithms is used to
screen a large number of boride and borocarbides. The promising candidates are
evaluated by higher-level theory and the properties relevant for the electron-
phonon superconductivity (density of states, phonon frequencies, electron-phonon
coupling) are estimated using DFT. Using the DFT result, selected candidates are
experimentally synthesized and characterized. The experimental feedback is
provided both to structural optimization and superconductivity groups to further
estimate potential ways of optimizing electron-phonon interaction by aliovalent
substitutions, in both, transition metal sublattice (to tune electronic
properties), and boron sublattice (boron/carbon substitutions to tune phonon
interactions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.