* 2132238
* RII Track-4: Leveraging fermented foods to understand microbial interactions under changing environments and broaden scientific training opportunities
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Andrea Jani, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 237,651.00

Microbes such as bacteria and fungi are crucial to both human and environmental
health. Fermented foods exemplify the importance of microbial communities
because microbes drive the fermentation that results in the flavors, textures,
extended shelf-life and even some health benefits of these foods. Many of these
foods have multi-faceted significance, including nutritional and cultural
importance as well as roles in food security due to extended shelf life. Working
with locally important fermented foods, such as taro (poi), this project will
determine how the success and abundance of microbial species is determined not
only by the abiotic environment (e.g., temperature, moisture, acidity,
nutrients) but also by biotic interactions (e.g., helpful or harmful influences
of other organisms). This project will increase research capacity, advance
scientific knowledge with basic and applied importance, and initiate a research
program that will provide culturally relevant scientific training opportunities.
The fellowship will take place at the University of California, in the
laboratory of a world leader in fermented food microbiology. Through this
fellowship and collaboration, the PI and student will develop expertise in
cutting edge molecular methods to identify the traits that determine bacterial
fitness. Integration of these tools with the PI’s complementary expertise in
microbial community ecology will substantially increase the PI’s research
capacity and the reach of her research program while strengthening the
microbiome science program at the University of Hawai‘i.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to determine the fitness consequences of
microbial interactions under changing environmental conditions. The project will
specifically focus on microbial interactions during ecological succession in
locally important fermented foods, but the scope of the research question is
broadly important across basic and applied microbial ecology. The project will
employ recently developed high throughput molecular methods to identify genes or
putative traits needed for bacterial survival. These mechanistic methods will be
integrated with a community ecological framework to understand the fitness
consequences of microbial interactions (i.e., how microbes affect each other’s
fitness), what molecular mechanisms underly those effects, and how the
interactions change due to shifting environmental conditions. The research will
advance scientific understanding of why certain microbial species are successful
or abundant in a given environment. The new knowledge generated can benefit
society by informing future efforts to predict the beneficial value of microbial
communities and eventually engineer microbial communities for desired functions.
This project will develop a basic research model focused on local, culturally
important fermented foods, which have historically been understudied. By
creating culturally relevant research training opportunities, this project will
foster broader participation in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.