* 2132519
* NRI: Hierarchical Representation Learning for Robot Assistants
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Shuran Song, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,511,435.00

More than eighteen million people in North America have a physical disability
due to limited mobility, restricting their independence, lifestyle, and ability
to perform daily activities. One in five older adults struggle with mobility,
millions of people with limited mobility are veterans, and a significant number
of people have limited mobility because of diseases and accidents. Due to recent
advances in artificial intelligence, robots hold great promise to provide timely
assistance to people with disabilities, and drive improvements to their quality
of life, independence, and productivity. This project introduces an automated
robot assistant that is able to recognize a person’s goal, and provide them the
right object at the right time, thereby helping people perform complex
activities, such as cooking, object repair, and housekeeping. From both sight
and dialogue, the research products will be able to anticipate what objects a
person will need in the near future, and deliver it at exactly the right moment.
Furthermore, the project will generate new educational opportunities at the
intersection of robotics, computer vision and natural language processing
through a series of systematically designed curriculum and annual capstone
projects for assistive robotics. Due to the tight integration of multiple
disciplines and the large practical impact, these educational programs will
serve as an excellent platform for training the next generation of roboticists
and increasing the diversity in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project introduces a novel hierarchical representation learning framework for
assistive robots, which serves as a common interface to drive integration
between robotics, computer vision, and natural language understanding. The
project includes three thrusts. First, the team will develop hierarchical task
representations. Second, human intention prediction and verification will
developed. The final thrust will address intention-aware planning. Unlike
established state representations in robotics, the new representation leverages
non-Euclidean geometry, such as hyperbolic manifolds. Since hyperbolic space is
a continuous analog of a tree, it provides new opportunities for learning task
hierarchies from large-scale unlabeled instructional videos. This task
representation is able to anticipate the activities of people, steer dialogue to
reduce uncertainty, and provide dense rewards for long-horizon planning. This
representation is learned from large-scale unlabeled instructional videos,
making this approach flexible and adaptable to the many real-world applications
of just-in-time object delivery for people with limited
mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.