* 2132183
* EFRI E3P: GOALI: Waste Management and Circularity of Crosslinked Polyurethane Foams
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Matthew Green, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,101,370.00

The global market for polyurethanes (PUs), which are primarily available as
covalently crosslinked microcellular foams (PUFs), will exceed $50B in 2021 and
represents over 10% (&gt;65 billion pounds) of total global plastic consumption.
A multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional team (that includes ASU, Virginia
Tech, Adidas AG, NREL, and ORNL) will address fundamental science and
engineering challenges for PUs and PUFs circular sustainability. The team will
collectively tackle the following objectives: (1) elucidation of fundamental
design principles for engineering catalytic chemical processes in porous
polymeric solids such as PUFs, (2) quantitative assessment of sustainability
adoption and valorization with concomitant plastic “renewal-of-life” (ROL)
predictive tools, and (3) engagement of underrepresented groups in engineering
with mechanisms for community partnership that nurture eco- conscious global
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A systems-level approach will address
depolymerization and valorization while providing engineering tools and metrics
for advancing a national circular plastics economy for the elimination of end-
of-life PUs and PUFs. Accelerated ideation of solutions and scenarios will be
grounded in material flow analysis (MFA), life cycle assessment (LCA),
sustainable enterprise models, economic models, social value assessment, and
back-casting within the Planetary Boundaries framework. The team hypothesizes
that depolymerization in a porous polymeric solid waste stream will be less
energy intensive, offering faster kinetics and providing a purifiable waste
stream that returns PUs/PUFs to the marketplace. This potential circular
transformation requires fundamental understanding of chemical processes in
microcellular (porous) solids, leading to the programmable engineering of
microcellular structures and metamaterials for enhanced depolymerization
kinetics and optimization of mechanical performance. In- situ monitoring will
standardize processes from varied PU compositional waste, leading to refined
product with platforms for precision foam manufacturing. PUFs offer highly
visible societal impact, ranging from foamed mattresses and energy-saving
insulation to textiles, footwear, automobile seating, adhesives and coatings,
and life-saving biomedical products. Broadening participation activities will
include partnership with local waste management systems, and community
engagement with local high schools and community colleges with an emphasis on
inclusion of indigenous and Hispanic communities. Adidas AG as a project partner
will enable a “network-of-networks” approach that will leverage ASU's
Sustainability Consortium. Mechanisms will be put in place to nucleate
entrepreneurship, co-advise graduate students, provide student mentorship with
consortium partners and student internships with industry, and engagement with
ASU Biodesign Europe and partner institutions to nurture sustainability
principles with global and cultural awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.