* 2132369
* I-Corps:  Biomimetic Engineered Space Technology Platform
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Eda Yildirim-Ayan, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
cost reduction and time-saving for researchers in academia and industry in
designing studies to be conducted in an extraterrestrial gravity environment
(e.g., low-Earth orbit, Martian gravity, or lunar gravity). Currently,
pharmaceutical companies and researchers in academia (biology, chemistry,
bioengineering fields) need a platform for producing reliable and replicable
data in simulated extraterrestrial gravity before sending the experiments to the
International Space Station (ISS). While the experimental set-up size limitation
at ISS requires diligent optimization of independent variables in experiments,
the high flight cost to the ISS and one-time opportunity in running experiments
there necessitates absolute success in experimental execution with already
tested experimental parameters. This technology provides time and cost effective
solutions to overcome the shortcomings of experimental preparations prior to
launching to the ISS. This core technology also has potential applications for
improving outcomes for elderly populations and patients with prolonged
immobility. The creation of knowledge in this area can benefit drug development
and rehabilitation efforts aimed at revitalizing deteriorating tissues caused by
prolonged immobilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project simulates
extraterrestrial gravity to study the gravity-sensitive mechanisms of organic
and inorganic materials, cells, tissues, and organs in a three-dimensional
dynamic environment. The key technical innovations underpinning the platform
involve being able to mimic a varying gravitational environment on Earth and
monitor the gravitational forces in situ. It necessary, the technology will also
be able to modulate conditions while providing realistic culturing and
processing environments for cells, proteins, and materials. The platform uses an
innovative technique to reach a pre-defined gravitational state in 60-90 seconds
by independently rotating two computer-controlled axes. The data acquisition
chip placed in the device collects and plots the gravity data for a user to
track/observe the gravitational force. Another technical innovation of this
I-Corps project is that various mechanical strains can be applied to the sample
of interest in a temperature, light, and humidity-controlled environment to
study the samples in realistic conditions under a pre-defined, simulated
gravitational state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.