* 2132729
* I-Corps: Software Platform for the Assessment and Measurement of Port Disruptions
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2021
* Gabriel Weaver, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project may enable
stakeholders to model the functional and economic impact of cross-
organizational, inter-infrastructure disruptions to intermodal supply chain
movements. The project directly addresses the need for more resilient supply
chains. Just-in-time supply chains designed for efficiency can result in high-
impact disruptions and motivate the need for stakeholders to understand economic
losses on disruptions via secondary, operational effects on intermodal
transportation networks. Planning tools for resilient supply chain movements
should employ holistic threat models that enable stakeholders to consider
tradeoffs between infrastructure complexity and operational efficiencies. The
algorithms and envisioned software platform will help stakeholders to apply
emerging threats to their infrastructure, quantify potential impacts, and
strategically invest for increased community
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project integrates discrete-event
simulation and network flow optimization to compute optimal, cost-minimizing
vehicle and commodity flows through shipping ports. The simulation also reroutes
goods based on non-linear costs and economic impacts. This optimization
algorithm enhances the capabilities to capture capacity constraints and to model
delays resulting from disrupted commodity movements. Routing vehicles and
commodities is a non-deterministic polynomial-time hardness problem. Existing
approaches use time-expanded networks to model commodity movements, but they
result in scalability issues for large practical instances. The proposed
optimizer adopts a dynamic approach to model discrete times and introduces delay
nodes and arcs to accommodate container movements. The proposed optimizer also
constrains per-unit-time flow rates of commodities (e.g. road capacity, crane
rate) in a continuous-time framework, thus significantly enhancing scalability.
The tool both estimates costs due to disruptions and finds least cost ways to
effectively recover from or mitigate their impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.