* 2132455
* RAPID: Discovering Global Diversity in Pelagic Symbioses (Vessels of Opportunity)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Michael Dawson, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 05/31/2024
* USD 155,447.00

Close relationships between different species, i.e., symbioses, are widespread
and important biological interactions. Symbioses are integral to many wonders of
the natural world, such as coral reefs and old growth forests, and are among the
most important relationships for maintaining planetary and human health alike,
including the pollination of flowering plants by insects, and the gut microbiome
of large animals. However, our understanding of symbioses in the seas — which
cover 70% of the planet’s surface and constitute &gt;99% of its habitable volume
— is scant. The goal of this project is to conduct a rapid and time-sensitive
global survey of the diversity of symbionts associated with jellyfishes and
other animals that specialize in making a living in the open waters of the
coastal seas and oceans. This research will offer insights into adaptations to
life in the world’s largest habitat by some of the most widespread and
ecologically important predators on the planet. These symbioses likely also play
other important roles, directly influencing the global carbon pump, and
indirectly affecting coastal human activities as diverse as fisheries, power
generation, and tourism. This project includes a diverse team and provides
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and early career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic analyses have revealed that marine
metazoan species diversity is much greater than historical estimates and marine
microbial diversity is immense. This project explores the idea that we are now
poised to discover diverse marine metazoan-microbial pelagic symbioses. A rapid
global survey of gelatinous zooplankton—a key convergent functional phenotype
that has evolved independently in multiple phyla—is designed to estimate the
prevalence of symbioses, the diversity of symbionts, and whether associations
are constrained or flexible geographically, i.e., among populations within
species, and taxonomically (at the levels of species and higher taxa). This
project will [1] build on and extend collections for the Aquatic Symbioses
Genomics (ASG) program, [2] collect replicated samples of diverse taxa,
preserved for multiple traditional and ‘omics analyses, in a standardized manner
and including reference environmental samples and [3] barcode the hosts and
primary symbionts (e.g., zooxanthellae) and meta-barcode the microbiome of a
representative cross-section of specimens. By discovering and documenting marine
pelagic symbioses, the project also sets the scene for comparisons with benthic
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.