* 2132724
* RI: Small: SM-An Active Approach for Data Engineering to Improve Vision-Language Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2026
* Chitta Baral, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2026
* USD 175,256.00

Intelligent systems that can robustly process vision and language data are
necessary to enable integrated AI applications (such as automated driving,
robotic home assistant, etc.) and improve quality of life. However, such systems
typically operate in open and highly uncertain environments for which physical
and geometric understanding, semantic robustness, and conducting hypothetical
reasoning become essential. This project will result in a publicly available
software suite that can assist with training and validating robust Vision and
Language (V&amp;L) systems. In particular, the resulting semantic
transformations will be packaged as an API service that companies and
universities could quickly utilize. The resulting benchmark challenges will be
made publicly available for further V&amp;L research. Finally, the proposed
study will stimulate educational activities at ASU in training graduate and
undergraduate students in AI/ML/CV/NLP with a "post-dataset era'" vision. The
project will also train 2 Ph.D. students and several master-with-thesis
students, develop a new seminar course, recruit underrepresented minority
participants at all levels, and reach K-12 students with modules that explain
the challenges in developing robust intelligent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust intelligent systems such as home assistant
robots fundamentally depend on highly correlated vision and language systems and
fine-grained data alignment. Even though the existing approaches demonstrate
success on carefully collected benchmarks, it is not sufficient to establish
robustness, reliability, and out-of-distribution generalization for them to be
deployed in real-world applications. The project will conduct a systematic study
on intelligent and active data engineering to boost their performance and
robustness. By investigating a novel and active perspective towards vision and
language data engineering, the project will address the following three
fundamental research tasks: 1) development of data generators to hallucinate
training data from existing ones with low-level vision; 2) with hypothetical
actions, and 3) design of training paradigms incorporating the new data
generated with the goal of increasing the ultimate systems' generalization
capability and robustness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.