* 2132003
* RII Track-4: Research and Development of Ring-Contact Germanium Detectors
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,05/31/2023
* Wenzhao Wei, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 05/31/2023
* USD 182,745.00

If neutrinos are proven to be their own anti-particles, it can offer an
explanation of the prevalence of matter over anti-matter in the universe. The
only experimentally feasible way to answer this question is to look for
neutrinoless double-beta (0νββ) decay, a proposed form of nuclear decay. Large
Ge crystals have a higher volume-to-surface ratio which is advantageous for the
collection of signals and rejection of backgrounds in a search for 0νββ decay.
GERDA and MAJORANA DEMONSTRATOR have proved that a Ge-based ton-scale experiment
can be built with sufficient low-background that will achieve a sensitivity
capable of the potential discovery of 0νββ decay. This RII Track-4 proposal will
develop large-size Ge ring-contact (GeRC) detectors to further reduce
backgrounds, complexity, and cost. The proposed research will advance Ge
detector technology for cosmology, astronomy, homeland security, and industrial
applications. Results from this project will be published in scholarly journals
and disseminated through collaboration with industry. Research activities are
closely integrated with education and outreach efforts: both graduate and
undergraduate students will work on the project, thus gaining cutting-edge
skills and expertise in Ge crystal purification and detector development. The
main focus of undergraduate education and outreach activities is to encourage
women to pursue STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sensitivity goal for the
Large Enriched Ge Experiment for Neutrinoless double beta (0νββ) Decay
(LEGEND-1000) requires a background level of ≤1×10^(-5) events/keV/kg/year.
LEGEND-1000 prefers large-size detectors (&gt;3 kg per detector), which will
further reduce backgrounds, complexity, and cost. This RII Track-4 proposal will
explore large-size detectors through research and development (R&amp;D) on GeRC
detectors using high-purity Ge crystals grown by the University of South Dakota
(USD). With the collaboration of Professor Rusty Harris (Host) of Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU) and Professor John Wilkerson (collaborator) of University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC), the PI will fabricate GeRC detectors at
TAMU and test them at UNC. Currently, LEGEND-200 has successfully tested
inverted coaxial point-contact (ICPC) Ge detectors that have a typical mass of
~2 kg. To further increase the mass per detector, a new detector concept based
on GeRC detectors is promising, as it can potentially be used to make a Ge
detector as large as ~6 kg. Although they have been modeled, a GeRC detector has
yet to be fabricated and tested for its energy resolution and pulse shape
properties. The degradation of energy resolution seen with Ge detectors that is
due to incomplete charge collection in large-size Ge crystals will also be an
obstacle for LEGEND-1000. This project will help to resolve three key
challenges: fabrication of a GeRC detector with a mass of ~2 – 3 kg, measurement
of the energy resolution and pulse shape discrimination in a large-size GeRC
detector, and analysis of the quality of USD-grown
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.