* 2132018
* RII Track-4: Superparamagnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles as Recoverable Microwave Susceptors for Pre-hydrolysis of Waste Activated Sludge prior to Anaerobic Digestion
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Onur Apul, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 130,664.00

Municipal sewage treatment plants generate 6.5 million metric tons of excess
sludge every year in the United States. Transportation and disposal of this
excess sludge comprise half of the total wastewater treatment cost, exceeding $2
billion per year with a steady 1% annual increase. A common practice to
stabilize waste sludge is anaerobic digestion (AD) prior to disposal. This
technology can be described as the microbial transformation of sludge into
biogas in the absence of free oxygen. The biogas produced from AD is a valuable
green fuel, and it has comparable calorific value to natural gas. Furthermore,
the digested sludge becomes easier to transport and dispose of after AD. Despite
these environmental and economic advantages, AD has long reaction times, and low
process yields. Even under 20-30 days of retention, sludge decomposition is
incomplete, leaving 35-45% of the sludge undigested. This project utilizes
extremely reactive, recoverable magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (or
superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles) to improve the efficiency of sludge
digestion and improve the economic and environmental benefits of the process.
This RII Track-4:NSF project aims to minimize the costs and environmental
impacts associated with excess sewage sludge management. This fellowship will
take place at Yale University within the Department of Chemical and
Environmental Engineering and involves support for a graduate
trainee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles
(SPIONs) are ground-breaking nanomaterials with remarkable application potential
in a multitude of industries. SPIONs can respond to magnetic domains rapidly and
efficiently without significant remanence. In addition, they can heat rapidly
under microwave (MW) irradiation. Their properties make them promising
candidates for sludge pretreatment applications. First, they have the potential
to bind to components of sludge floc assemblies and deliver immediate and
intense MW heating strategically to cells or extracellular polymers. MW
irradiation creates an oscillating electromagnetic field that causes SPIONs to
have both their electrical dipole moments and their magnetic moments rotate,
creating internal vibrations that dissipate energy in the form of heat locally.
Second, due to their size (typically &lt;50 nm) SPIONs have spin electrons
packed within a minuscule physical domain that can respond to the magnetic field
without remanence magnetism (i.e., showing properties of both paramagnetic and
ferromagnetic materials). Therefore, SPIONs do not have the burden of magnetic
hysteresis, which empowers their effective and rapid recovery from slurries even
in complicated reactor installations. The key merit of this proposed study is
that SPION properties can be strategically tuned for superior dielectric heating
and magnetic reactivity while maintaining material integrity to accomplish
repeated use for MW pretreatment. Through this RII Track-4:NSF fellowship, the
PI aims to develop a practical technology that will tailor and employ SPIONS as
dielectric and recoverable susceptors for MW-induced pre-hydrolysis of
wastewater sludges. First, the PI and a graduate trainee will learn protocols
for advanced SPION synthesis. Next, the team will focus on at least three SPIONs
that show promise in terms of paramagnetic abilities, MW heating, and material
integrity for repeated use. Finally, the process for wastewater treatment will
be optimized, and experiments to identify hydrolysis pathways such as the role
of temperature, water chemistry, slurry viscosity and formation of hydroxyl
radicals and other basic controls will be conducted to ensure data quality. This
fellowship will take place at Yale University within the Department of Chemical
and Environmental Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.