* 2132626
* I-Corps: Electrochemical Oxidation Water Treatment Process for Harmful Algal Blooms
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Stefan Grimberg, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is mitigate the
effects of harmful algae blooms (HABs), which are a threat to human and wildlife
health and result in significant financial loss in areas such as recreational
and commercial fishing operations. Increasing global temperatures and continued
use of nutrient-rich fertilizers are likely to exacerbate HAB concerns in the
future. The approach developed here to address these toxic blooms may reduce the
likelihood of health-related problems associated with HABs by rapidly
eliminating surface blooms via an electrochemical oxidation technology.
Environmental consulting and remediation companies represent the likely first
customers for the technology while municipalities and lake associations are
important stakeholders. Through this project, potential customers, partners, and
stakeholders will be engaged to understand how HABs are currently managed, how
environmental remediation companies engage their customers, and how the supply
chain for environmental remediation equipment is
structured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a harmful algae
bloom (HAB) mitigation technology for treating transient HABs. The temporal
occurrence of HABs causes extra challenges for HAB mitigation as traditional
efforts involve the use of hydrogen peroxide, aeration for biostimulation, or
algae harvesting processes, all of which require the use of pesticide permits
which are site and time specific. The developed technology is based on
electrochemical oxidation (EO) techniques that rapidly remove algae and cyano
toxins without the addition of chemicals. Thus, no pesticide permits are
required, allowing for rapid deployment of the technology to mitigate a HAB
before it causes beach closures. The process consists of a power supply, a
generator, and a set of electrodes with specialized electrode coatings. The
unique electrode composition results in a significant energy savings compared to
traditional EO processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.