* 2132197
* I-Corps:  Sub-orbital Ballooning System (SBS) for Earth and Space Observations, Meteorological Applications, and Scientific Studies
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Ibrahim Tansel, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sub-orbital ballooning system for Earth and space observations,
meteorological applications, and scientific studies. Currently, the only way to
access this region is via rocketry, which does not allow more than a few minutes
of access. The proposed technology may remove the hurdles in accessing the
mesospheric sub-orbital region for a prolonged duration and allow balloon-based
payload launch support at a cost less than 50% of the current sub-orbital launch
costs. In addition, the proposed technology may intensify the exploitation of
mesosphere for scientific research, exploration, and security purposes. It is
estimated that the proposed system may save &gt;$1M/sq.km/y in capital expenses
and &gt;$2M/sq.km/y in operational expenses for telecommunication service
providers, making them lower-cost with wide coverage for next generation
networks (5G/6G). In addition, the proposed technology may fulfill the remote
sensing and technology demonstration needs of the private sector and military
needs for communication and persistent surveillance, as well as the needs of
federal agencies, academia, and the scientific community in better understanding
the mesosphere and its effects on the Earth, which otherwise is not feasible
using existing technologies of rocketry or high-altitude ballooning. A goal for
the technology is to enable low-cost space exploration that will open doors to
many who have no access to space today due to technological limitations and cost
constraints, accelerating space exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a sub-orbital ballooning system for Earth
and space observations, meteorological applications, and scientific studies. The
technology leverages advancement in ballooning technology by incorporating
previous research on size control by energy and mass transfer to reach higher
altitudes throughout the mesosphere and up to the edge of space (von Kármán
line). The artificial intelligence (AI) powered system is designed to sense the
environment, understand the ballooning transport needs, and fulfil energy
demands facilitating the inflation or deflation of the balloon envelop. This
capability enables the raising or lowering of the balloon’s altitude without
bursting the balloon. The proposed technology performs precise altitude control
that enables access to the sub-orbital region for prolonged durations. The
proposed technology was designed to address the technology gap and market needs
followed by proof-of-concept demonstrations on scaled
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.