* 2132296
* AGS-PRF: Evaluating the Changing Role of Monoterpenes in Regulating Atmospheric Reactive Nitrogen Budgets
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Christopher Kenseth, Kenseth, Christopher M
* Fellowship Award
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 190,000.00

This Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (PRF) proposal focuses on developing a
better process-level understanding of the chemistry of organic nitrates in the
atmosphere. This project includes laboratory, field, and modeling work that will
provide fundamental experimental and observational constraints on the
photolytic, oxidative, and heterogeneous degradation pathways of organic
nitrates. This research is expected to greatly improve model parameterizations
of the fate of organic nitrates in the atmosphere, important for resolving the
atmospheric nitrogen budget. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will: (1)
synthesize a series of authentic monoterpene-derived organic nitrates (RONO2),
(2) systematically evaluate the kinetics, products, and mechanisms of their
photolysis, oxidation, and hydrolysis in targeted laboratory experiments using
advanced mass spectrometric techniques, (3) incorporate experimental findings
into a state-of-the-science global chemical transport model (GEOS-Chem), and (4)
use the experiments and updated model framework to interpret measurements of
monoterpenes, O3, NOx, and speciated RONO2 that will be collected as part of the
NSF GreaterNY Oxidant, Trace Gas, Halogen, and Aerosol Airborne Mission
(GOTHAAM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work with the Stony Brook University
Alan Alda Center for Communicating Science to provide information to the public
on better understanding issues associated with air quality and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.