* 2132586
* EAGER:SUPER: Collaborative Research: Ab Initio Engineering of Doped-Covalent-Bond Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Elena Roxana Margine, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2023
* USD 226,947.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports a joint
computational and theoretical effort to guide the search for practical
superconducting materials. Superconductors carry electrical current without any
resistance when cooled down below a certain material-dependent critical
temperature. This remarkable property has already found numerous applications,
from maglev trains to the Large Hadron Collider, but present-day superconductors
are difficult to manufacture or require ultra-low temperatures to function. New
superconducting materials that can be mass-produced and operate at easily
maintained temperatures have the potential to revolutionize energy,
transportation, communication, and other emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Design of new superconductors is notoriously
difficult, because their properties are sensitive to the chemical composition
and crystal structure. In this project, the team will focus on exploring
promising combinations of light abundant elements including boron, carbon, and
various metals. The PIs will employ advanced modeling methods and computational
tools developed in their groups to identify and analyze suitable candidate
materials. The search for stable compounds will be performed with a combination
of an evolutionary algorithm and machine-learning interatomic potentials. Viable
compounds will be examined with a computational method based on Wannier
functions, a state-of-the-art approach for predicting superconducting
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will contribute to the development of
the next generation of scientists by organizing outreach activities for
elementary-school students and involving students from underrepresented groups
into STEM research. All new computational features added to the team's open-
source packages will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports research aiming to
identify quasi-two-dimensional doped-covalent-bond light-weight materials with
potential for high-temperature conventional superconductivity at ambient
pressure. With the long-term goal of screening a large compositional space
centered on second-row elements forming covalent frameworks and light metals
improving the compounds' stability, the team will first perform a systematic ab-
initio exploration of the Li-M-B-C compositions. For predicting synthesizable
materials, the team will use the previously developed Module for Ab-Initio
Structure Evolution (MAISE) platform to accelerate the identification of stable
compounds with a combination of evolutionary structure optimization and machine-
learning interatomic potentials. For modeling superconducting properties, the
team will rely on the Electron-Phonon Wannier (EPW) code based on Wannier
functions, which enables resolving superconducting anisotropy within the
Eliashberg theory. An integral part of the research is the development of
physics-based rules for the rational design of superconductors, which will be
achieved by finding descriptors correlating easy-to-calculate structural,
electronic, and vibrational properties with superconducting
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will offer an opportunity for
undergraduate and graduate students to acquire knowledge in advanced electronic-
structure methods, computational materials science, and high-performance
computing. The PIs will continue to organize workshops and webinars to teach the
underlying theory and optimal usage of EPW and MAISE to the broader materials-
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.