* 2132773
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Robotic Disassembly of High-Precision Electronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Beiwen Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project addresses the increasing quantity
of discarded high-precision electronics such as cell phones, tablets, and
laptops. Current recycling methods rely on shredding after battery removal, due
to high labor costs for disassembly. As a result, many valuable components are
buried in landfills and not recycled. Disassembly, the first step of recycling,
is more complex than assembly since there is much more variability in product
type and, as a result, remanufacturing is usually not profitable. This award
supports research to provide the fundamental understanding needed for the
development of a novel robotic system that can effectively perform high-
precision disassembly operations and make them practically and economically
viable. The work has potential to mitigate labor shortages in recycling
industry, reduce electronics waste, and revolutionize the remanufacturing of
high-precision electronics. The research involves several disciplines including
3D sensing, deep learning, and robotics. The multidisciplinary research will be
integrated into a series of educational and outreach activities which will
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in research and positively
impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike the robotic assembly
lines that assemble products, programming robots for repetitive operations is
not a feasible solution for disassembly due to the widely varying types of
discarded high-precision electronics. Therefore, disassembly of high-precision
electronics is significantly more complex than assembly and requires high
robotic adaptability, dexterity and accuracy. The research aims to enable a
novel robotic system that can accurately see, interpret, and disassemble high-
precision electronics through integrated and convergent research on 3D sensing,
deep learning, robotic hand design, and high-precision manipulation. In
particular, the research team will (1) perform accurate 3D sensing for complex
surfaces exhibiting wide ranges of optical properties and reflectivity
variations; (2) design and optimize the design of deep learning architectures
for 3D point cloud interpretation; and (3) design a novel lightweight cable-
driven robotic hand and develop a high-precision manipulation algorithm enabling
efficient learning from experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.