* 2132281
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Enabling Data-Driven Security and Safety Analyses for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Adwait Nadkarni, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2024
* USD 799,839.00

Smart home products have become extremely popular with consumers due to the
convenience offered through home automation. In bridging the cyber-physical gap,
however, home automation brings a widening of the cyber attack surface of the
home. Research towards analyzing and preventing security and safety failures in
a smart home faces a fundamental obstacle in practice: the poor characterization
of home automation usage. That is, without the knowledge of how users automate
their homes, it is difficult to address several critical challenges in designing
and analyzing security systems, potentially rendering solutions ineffective in
actual deployments. This project aims to bridge this gap, and provide
researchers, end-users, and system designers with the means to collect,
generate, and analyze realistic examples of home automation usage. This approach
builds upon a unique characteristic of emerging smart home platforms: the
presence of "user-driven" automation in the form of trigger-action programs that
users configure via platform-provided user interfaces. In particular, this
project devises methods to capture and model such user-driven home automation to
generate statistically significant and useful usage scenarios. The techniques
that will be developed during the course of this project will allow researchers
and practitioners to analyze various security, safety and privacy properties of
the cyber-physical systems that comprise modern smart homes, ultimately leading
to deployments of smart home Internet of Things (IoT) devices that are more
secure. The project will also produce and disseminate educational materials on
best practices for developing secure software with an emphasis on IoT devices,
suitable for integration into existing computer literacy courses at all levels
of education. In addition, the project will focus on recruiting and retaining
computer science students from traditionally underrepresented
categories.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on three specific
goals. First, it will develop novel data collection strategies that allow end-
users to easily specify routines in a flexible manner, as well as techniques
based on Natural language Processing (NLP) for automatically processing and
transforming the data into a format suitable for modeling. Second, it will
introduce approaches for transforming routines into realistic home automation
event sequences, understanding their latent properties and modeling them using
well-understood language modeling techniques. Third, it will contextualize the
smart home usage models to make predictions that cater to security analyses
specifically and develop tools that allow for the inspection of a smart homeâ€™s
state alongside the execution of predicted event sequences on real products. The
techniques and models developed during the course of this project will be
validated with industry partners and are expected to become instrumental for
developers and researchers to understand security and privacy properties of
smart homes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.