* 2132994
* NRI/Collaborative Research: Robust Design and Reliable Autonomy for Transforming Modular Hybrid Rigid-Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Isuru Godage, DePaul University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2023
* USD 281,645.00

Soft robots are a promising technology for exploration tasks and have shown
great potential for unlocking the secrets of biological creatures and creating
adaptable, versatile, and human-friendly robots. On the other hand, rigid robots
offer many advantages in terms of precision and ease of control. The novel
hybrid robot design considered in this project will combine these two
technologies to provide the advantages of both. This grant supports research to
produce new knowledge related to modular design and reliable human-robot
collaboration using this hybrid design paradigm. The new modular robots will be
able to adapt to new environments, move across varied terrains, and operate in a
wide variety of environmental conditions. This project will result in improved
robotic capability for exploration of difficult terrains such as those found
during search and rescue, inspection, surveillance, and reconnaissance. The new
robot capabilities will also benefit future extra-terrestrial missions. The
project includes summer research opportunities for undergraduate students and
educational outreach activities to K-12 students to support soft robotics
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this grant will
significantly advance the state-of-the-art in the theory and practice of soft
robots by creating novel and hybrid (incorporating both stiff and soft elements)
physical hardware designs to offset limitations of each individual technology.
The research tasks are aimed at advancing the seamless integration and operation
of non-collocated human-robot teams and are aligned in two thrusts. The first
thrust considers modular design for extreme environments using low-degree-of
freedom modules connected by reversible, completely sealed permanent magnet
connectors. Modules communicate with each other via wireless protocols to enable
distributed control algorithms. Dynamic modeling and simulation are used to
discover a hybrid locomotion strategy based on a learning central pattern
generator. The project also creates motion planning algorithms for bioinspired,
topologically reconfigurable soft robots. The second thrust focuses on reliable
non-collocated human robot collaboration, including high-level teleoperation,
topological transformation strategies to mitigate module failures, automatic
gait re-selection based on fault diagnosis techniques, and a consensus decision-
making system to enable functional modules to disable nonfunctional
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.