* 2132220
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Understanding Human Hair With Type 4 Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Aliah Darke, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2025
* USD 127,538.00

Understanding the mechanics of human hair has wide applications in visual media
and is critical to faithfully depicting virtual humans, because after the face,
hair is the next characteristic that we look to when establishing a person's
identity. However, almost all existing research has focused on the depiction of
straight or curly hair, which spans Types 1 to 3 in the Walker hair typing
system, whereas Type 4 hair, also known as afro-textured or kinky hair, has
received almost no attention. This knowledge gap is unfortunate, because the
naturally occurring hair type of millions of people in the United States, and a
billion people worldwide, is Type 4; consequently, representing and simulating
virtual Type 4 hair in digital media is difficult, because existing algorithms
were not designed with its specific computational challenges in mind. More
broadly, a comprehensive understanding of human hair is not possible without a
complete investigation of Type 4. This project will address these deficiencies
by developing new mechanical models and efficient computational methods for Type
4 hair.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental mechanical behavior of a solid is
determined by its strain energy, and energies are usually custom-tailored to the
behavior of specific real-world solids. Leveraging the team's complementary
expertise and prior experience designing robust new energies for volumetric
solids, a new, anisotropic, elasto-plastic energy for Type 4 hair will be
defined, and the resulting model will be validated against real-world
measurements as well as extensive large-scale simulation data. Moreover, a
detailed understanding of Type 4 hair will point the way toward representations
that span all hair types; to bridge these types, this research will develop
general eigenanalysis methods for strain energies that span the strand (1D),
shell (2D), and volumetric (3D) regimes. Project outcomes will include efficient
methods that are capable of generating realistic motion for human hair, in all
of its diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.