* 2132195
* RII Track-4: The Integration of Plasmonic Nanoantenna and Super-hydrophobic Surface for Ultrasensitive Fluorescence CRISPR Biosensing
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Shengjie Zhai, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 180,493.00

Early diagnosis provides significant and unprecedented benefits since patients
diagnosed at an early stage of diseases often have a good chance for cure and
functional outcomes. In addition, rapid testing is crucial to combat the
pandemic as exemplified by the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic. This project aims to
design a direct Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats
(CRISPR) based point of care diagnostic system without pre-amplification of
viral genomes. It will allow ultralow and ultrasensitive detection of many
diseases (e.g., cardiovascular diseases, cancer, and infectious diseases) at an
early stage when the concentration of viral genomes in body fluids (i.e., urine,
blood, saliva) is still very low and not sufficient to be detected by existing
technologies. This NSF EPSCoR RII Track-4 fellowship provides the opportunity to
collaborate with a renowned expert in point-of-care diagnostics for infectious
diseases in the Department of Biomedical Engineering at the University of
Connecticut to achieve this goal. The successful completion of this project will
lead to noninvasive, inexpensive, mass-producible systems for early detection,
treatment outcome evaluation of diseases, greatly improving patient morbidity
and reducing healthcare cost, particularly important to Nevada, which
consistently ranks near the bottom in terms of higher rates of the 12 leading
causes of death.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to (1)
integrate nanoantenna with super-hydrophobic surfaces for enhancing the
CRISPR/Cas12a detection sensitivity without pre-amplification; (2) integrate the
designed enhanced CRISPR/Cas12a fluorescence detection module with microfluidics
for viral detection in the blood sample. Although CRISPR based point of care
diagnostic system has emerged as a popular technology and a powerful tool for
rapid screening due to its simplicity and flexibility, it still has many
limitations such as low stability in complex biological samples. One promising
solution is to explore the nanoantenna technique to trigger the enhanced
Localized surface plasmon. However, the nanoantenna technique is still far from
being routinely implemented in biomedical fields due to a major obstacle not
from plasmonics but from the mass transport: Most nanoantennas typically rely on
diffusion to capture target molecules, which makes the detection time
impractically long. This project integrates the nanoantenna with the
superhydrophobic surface to address this diffusion limit. Droplets over super-
hydrophobic surfaces maintain quasi spheres during evaporation and do not wet
the surface. Therefore, the droplet evaporation replaces the diffusion and
concentrates molecules onto the sensitive regions of the nanoantenna, becoming
the dominant mechanism of mass transfer. The droplet evaporation time is not
only much shorter than the diffusion time but also can be actively controlled,
which is an additional benefit. The combination of plasmonics and super-
hydrophobic surfaces offers a unique solution to the aforementioned key
challenge and holds the promising for ultralow and ultrasensitive biosensing
platforms enabled by CRISPR. The training and research experience provided by
this RII Track-4 fellowship will allow the PI to successfully transition from
the background of material science and engineering to a biomedical
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.