* 2132240
* Serving Two Masters; The Role of Trade-Offs in the Evolution of Bacteriophage/Metal Resistance in Escherichia Coli
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Joseph Graves, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 651,022.00

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a major public health challenge that portends
danger in healthcare delivery, as scientific reviews on antibiotic resistance
predicted a likelihood of 10 million mortalities per year by 2050. Post-
antibiotic era, which was brought about by the spread of resistance to
traditional antibiotics, has prompted the quest for new antimicrobial
substances. Interest in metallic antimicrobial materials such as Ag, Cu, Zn, and
excess Fe (II, III) are growing due to their potential to control pathogenic and
multi-drug resistant bacteria. However, we do not know if utilizing these
materials can lead to genetic adaptations that produce even more dangerous
bacterial strains. Early studies that proposed ionic and nanoparticle metals as
new antimicrobials were deficient because they did not consider the evolutionary
dynamics of populations exposed to toxic materials. Another alternative to
traditional antibiotics are bacteriophages, which are viruses that infect and
kill bacteria. Bacteriophage therapy recently gained more attention because of
the emergence of multi-drug resistant bacteria. Our preliminary findings suggest
that experimental evolution of E. coli in Fe (III) yielded variants which were
better fitted in antibiotics. If trade-offs exist in pattern of resistance, we
expected our Fe (III) + T7 phage variant to trade T7 phage resistance for
susceptibility to antibiotics. The goals of the present proposed study are to
unravel the evolutionary dynamics of potential trade-offs between Fe (III) and
phage resistance in E. coli. This project will contribute to ongoing recruitment
and retention of underrepresented undergraduate and graduate minority students
in STEM, including bioinformatics, genomics, microbiology, evolutionary biology
and engineering. Opportunities will include technical training, professional
development activities, presentations at national conferences, and educating and
recruiting their peers. Also, community science outreach activities are planned,
including participation in the North Carolina Science Olympiad at a local K-12
school as well as recruitment of a high school student to perform research on
this project as part of their senior science project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
mechanism of trade-offs in antibacterial resistance evolution under multi-
selective pressures, including bacteriophages, antibiotics and heavy metals is
incompletely understood. Therefore, the long-term goal of this project is to
evaluate bacterial evolution under multi-selective pressures, specifically heavy
metal (iron) and bacteriophage. The central hypothesis is that evolution of
resistance to iron will consequently confer susceptibility to bacteriophage
infection and evolution of bacteriophage resistance will confer susceptibility
to iron and a combination of iron and bacteriophage resistance will affect
susceptibility of evolutionary resistance to either. This trade-off mechanism is
well known in evolutionary studies as a fitness epistasis or genetic background
effect and is implicated in driving evolution of extensively drug resistant
microbes. Understanding how bacteria evolve resistance to biocides is an
important aspect of the sustainability of any control measure. For example, if
the bacteria develop completely independent responses to iron and bacteriophage
then this has profound implications for how any biocide should be deployed. If
there are trade-offs associated with multi-selective pressures then the
sustainability of each resistant strain may be enhanced by the use of
combination approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.