* 2132217
* RII Track-4: NSF: Does warming-driven root damage lead to drought stress in declining yellow-cedar trees?
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Benjamin Gaglioti, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 112,967.00

Yellow-cedar (Callitropsis nootkatensis) is now experiencing widespread dieback
in the temperate rainforests of northwestern North America. Significant evidence
supports the idea that a loss of insulating snow cover caused by global warming
exposes yellow-cedar (YC) roots to frost damage, which eventually leads to tree
death. The purpose of this project is to better understand how climate change is
affecting yellow-cedar (YC), an iconic tree species in widespread decline. To
date, over 3,000 km2 of YC forests have experienced significant dieback, which
has had far-reaching economic, ecological, and cultural effects in Southeast
Alaska and British Columbia. Yellow-cedar is now considered a “poster child” of
the global trend of declining forest health in response to anthropogenic
warming, and successful YC conservation efforts will hinge on identifying all
the links between climate change and tree death. Drought stress in the aftermath
of frost damage to YC roots during periods of anomalous, late-winter weather is
an untested yet potentially critical link in the dieback process. Through a
collaboration between the University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) and the
University of Arizona, this project will test whether declining YC trees exhibit
symptoms of drought stress by applying newly developed methods to analyze cedar
wood anatomy. In addition to peer-reviewed publications and conference
presentations led by an early-career researcher, this project will involve a
week-long workshop with K-12 students and forest managers in the Alaska Native
community of Kake. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
test an important corollary of the “frost-damaged root” hypothesis; namely, that
YC root injury results in drought stress and eventual tree mortality. To avoid
cavitation, drought-stressed conifer trees lay down thinner-diameter and
thicker-walled tracheid cells within their annual rings, and these anatomical
changes can be documented using new methods in quantitative wood anatomy (QWA).
This project will use these methods to test the prediction that tracheid cells
in the outer rings of declining and dead YC trees have significantly lower lumen
areas and thicker walls relative to the same annual rings grown in nearby
healthy YC trees. To accomplish this, the investigator from UAF will work with a
collaborator at the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research at the University of
Arizona to apply QWA methods on long dead, actively declining, and currently
healthy YC trees collected from Southeast Alaska. These results will provide new
insight about climate change and forest dieback and will allow stakeholders to
predict the impacts of frost damage and drought more accurately on this
important tree species. In addition, this project will expand research
infrastructure at UAF by acquiring new analytical methods that will benefit an
array of environmental research in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.