* 2132182
* RII Track-4:NSF:Multimodal imaging of large-scale neural networks for optimized neurostimulation
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Han Yuan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 01/31/2024
* USD 276,998.00

Mental illnesses, including depression and anxiety, are chronic, disabling, and
devastating conditions. However, many people are not receiving the care they
need to fully recover from their illnesses because of a shortage of health
services and a lack of state-of-the-art treatment options. Studies have
documented that up to two-thirds of patients who seek standard pharmacological
and/or psychological interventions to emotional disorders will not respond.
Noninvasive neurostimulation methods, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation
(TMS), are emerging techniques to treat patients who have failed multiple
attempts of standard interventions. However, issues of variable response effects
and inter-subject variability have arisen in numerous investigations of treating
depression and other mental illnesses, which have prevented the broad
application of noninvasive neurostimulation for clinical use. This EPSCoR
Research Fellows RII Track-4:NSF fellowship will enable the PI from the
University of Oklahoma, to partner with psychiatrists and scientists at the
Medical University of South Carolina to develop a novel neurostimulation
technology that is integrated with neuroimaging in a closed-loop design. This
research and the associated partnerships will pave the way for developing
individualized treatment with much improved outcomes in people with mental
illness. This success can be further generalized to the neurostimulation
treatment of other disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Noninvasive neurostimulation
is an emerging technology that is rapidly booming in the recent decade for
treating many neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders. However, the
responses to a standard protocol varied greatly among individuals. Addressing
the issue of heterogeneous responses will be an important step forward to
exploit the full potential of neurostimulation as the treatment option. The key
innovation of the project is to leverage the large-scale neural networks as
biomarkers, using the algorithms previously established by the PI, to
individually optimize the therapeutic outcomes of neurostimulations. A high-
density, whole-head montage of multimodal electroencephalogram (EEG) and
functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS) will be used in the project for
recording in the human participants. The computational analysis of the
multimodal imaging data will primarily focus on identifying the functional
connectivity of neural networks as biomarkers in response to neurostimulation
treatment. Addressing these research questions will be important steps towards
the next-generation neurostimulation methods via a biomarker-based, closed-loop
approach to optimize individual treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.