* 2132659
* Catalyst-ionomer interactions in electrochemical systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Svitlana Pylypenko, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 353,495.00

Electrochemical energy conversion systems including polymer electrolyte membrane
(PEM) fuel cells and water electrolyzers are central to reducing global fossil
fuel dependence through widespread implementation of renewable hydrogen. Great
improvements have been made in reducing the amount of expensive noble metals
needed for high-performance. Nevertheless, significant opportunity exists for
further improving fuel cell/electrolyzer performance through optimization of the
interface between the catalyst and the ion-conducting medium known as the
ionomer. The study utilizes state-of-the-art instrumentation, combined with a
suite of electrochemical characterization methods, to gain unprecedented insight
regarding the interfacial interactions between the catalyst layers and the
ionomer. The resulting fundamental insights regarding catalyst-ionomer
interactions across a range of catalytic systems – under conditions emulating
device operation – will translate directly to improved designs of durable, low-
cost PEM fuel cells and other water electrolyzer systems. The study involves a
set of interconnected research and educational goals, both aimed at expanding
knowledge of electrochemical devices, ensuring a highly trained future
workforce, and highlighting the importance of renewable energy to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop fundamental understanding
of catalyst-ionomer interfaces and interactions, determine the effects of
catalyst and support chemistry and morphology on these interfaces and
interactions, and track evolution of interfacial structure and composition under
sustained electrochemical reaction. The project will also establish best
practices and protocols for PEM catalyst layer surface studies that can be
applied to other systems. A variety of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
experiments under in situ conditions, in conjunction with complementary
characterization, will investigate the evolution of both catalyst-ionomer
interactions and interfaces during exposure to relevant conditions for three
material sets of increasing complexity: 1) ionomer thin films, 2) catalyst-
ionomer composites, and 3) integrated electrodes. The resulting insights will
guide future work in designing novel catalyst systems and electrodes with
optimized surfaces and interfaces as well as improved performance and
durability. Knowledge obtained from this project will be disseminated to a wide
audience through publications, participation in workshops and conferences, and
close interactions with scientists from academia, national labs, and industry.
The investigator will contribute to the education of STEM teachers through the
AVS Science Educators workshop (SEW) and through the Summer Workshop on Energy
Education for Teachers (SWEET) program at the investigator’s institution. The
project also focuses on increasing participation from underrepresented minority
groups and training future leaders capable of transforming scientific
understanding related to clean-energy and climate impact via renewable
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.