* 2132167
* RII Track-4:NSF:Measurement of charge exchange X-ray spectra using the NIST EBIT and TES microcalorimeter array
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Fabian Kislat, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 159,156.00

A key goal of modern astronomy is to understand how the Universe works and how
it evolved, eventually making life on Earth possible. Observations of X-rays
emitted by stars at various stages of their life, and from the remnants of their
violent deaths in supernova explosions, are a powerful tool to study the
physical processes at work. The interpretation, however, of these observations
relies heavily on our knowledge of the atomic physics at play. Given the
expected capabilities of future observatories, the current lack of experimental
data will become a limiting factor. The goal of this fellowship project is to
gather experimental data about interactions of neon ions with hydrogen and
helium gas commonly found in relevant astrophysical environments. These data
will both improve our understanding of basic atomic physics of highly charged
ions and our ability to make use of the data collected by future large space
observatories. The fellowship program will also train the PI and a graduate
student from the University of New Hampshire (UNH) in techniques relevant to
scientific areas of national importance such as quantum sensing, quantum
computing, and low-temperature physics. This will enable them to pass this
knowledge on and to train graduate and undergraduate students at UNH in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Charge exchange, a process in which a highly
charged ion captures an electron from a neutral atom, plays a significant role
in many astrophysical plasmas. It is a recombination process that results in
emission line intensities that differ from collisional excitation, and can serve
as an important diagnostic of the ionization balance and composition of a
plasma. Correct interpretation of astrophysical data requires detailed and
accurate knowledge of charge exchange cross sections, and typically relies on
theoretical modeling of synthetic spectra. During two fellowship visits to the
National Institute for Standards and Technology’s (NIST) Boulder Laboratories,
the PI and a graduate student will carry out a sequence of measurements to test
models of energy-level resolved charge exchange cross sections of highly ionized
neon Ne(8,9,10)+ with neutral gasses. These benchmarks will improve the fidelity
of models and our ability to interpret astrophysical X-ray data. The measurement
campaign will utilize X-ray transition edge sensor microcalorimeters for high-
resolution spectroscopy and a miniature Electron Beam Ion Trap to create and
trap the ions. The fellowship project is intended to be the starting point of a
broader collaboration between the PI and groups at NIST. It will expand beyond
the PI’s current work in high-energy astrophysics enable him to participate in
future measurement campaigns with highly charged ions and in the analysis of
data relevant to astrophysics. Expertise gained during this fellowship will also
enable the PI to carry out other X-ray measurements using equipment already
available at the University of New Hampshire (UNH), and to train students at UNH
in techniques relevant to scientific areas of national importance such as
quantum sensing, quantum computing, and low-temperature
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.