* 2132528
* Collaborative Research: A Unified Theory of Crack Nucleation and Growth for Materials Subjected to Repetitive Surface Acoustic Waves and Dynamic Impacts
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Oscar Lopez-Pamies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 353,840.00

Surface acoustic waves (SAWs) are prevalent in many naturally occurring
destructive phenomena, such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Further, SAWs have long
been speculated to contribute to surface damage produced by cavitation on ship
propellers, high-speed impact on wind turbine blades, and fragmentation of rocks
by jetting streams. In emerging medical applications, such as Nano-Pulse
Lithotripsy, SAWs have also been postulated to play a vital role in ensuring the
success of noninvasive disintegration of kidney stones in patients. Despite
this, the fundamental mechanisms by which SAWs trigger fracture on the surface
of materials remain largely unknown. This is not an isolated phenomenon as the
nucleation and propagation of cracks regardless of the loading type has been a
vexing problem for decades. In this context, this award supports fundamental
research to explain how the repeated application of SAWs and other dynamic
loadings can give rise to the nucleation of cracks on the surface of brittle
materials and affect their subsequent growth. Insights from this project will
significantly benefit scientists and engineers seeking to understand and predict
a fundamental phenomenon that has remained elusive: the onset of damage in
brittle materials in response to mechanical loads at large. The proposed
research is interdisciplinary, bringing together engineers and computational
scientists to fully explore this class of problems. Importantly, it also
includes outreach activities designed to encourage under-represented minority
students in STEM fields at the high school and undergraduate levels to pursue
research in mechanics of materials. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite recent
theoretical progress in the field of fracture, the current scientific
understanding of crack nucleation and its transition to growth in solids remains
incomplete and under-explored. This research is focused on the experimental,
theoretical, and computational study of crack nucleation and growth in brittle
materials in response to repeated, dynamic loadings under a wide range of
conditions. Two prototypical systems will be studied: materials that are
submerged and subjected to multiple shock loadings that also cause SAWs, and dry
materials that are subjected to repeated impact loads. New experiments will be
conducted on both glass and Begostone, an engineered material whose elasticity,
strength, and toughness properties can be conveniently varied over a substantial
range. The experiments will be carried out in conjunction with simulations based
on a new continuum theory that will incorporate inertial effects and low-cycle
fatigue into a unified model of crack nucleation and growth. The results of
these studies will shed light on the fundamental yet long-unresolved question of
how low cycle fatigue and inertial loads can degrade the strength and toughness
of material systems and ultimately result in their fracture and failure in
response to arbitrary mechanical loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.