* 2132161
* RII Track-4:NSF: Investigating Functional Neuronal Connections between Sensory and Motor Cortex using 3D Mesoscopic Optical Imaging Technique and Three-photon Microscopy
* O/D,OIA
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2024
* Qinggong Tang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,323.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how the brain works will
improve the ability to treat a variety of mental and neurological diseases. This
project will provide a fellowship to an Assistant Professor and training for a
graduate student at the University of Oklahoma and will use a novel and cost-
efficient mesoscopic imaging technique for functional brain imaging in living
mice. Additionally, the project will take advantage of the cutting-edge
microscopy at Cornell University to validate this imaging technique and further
investigate the brain circuit. The researcher along with one Ph.D. student will
spend a 6-months visit to the host lab at Cornell University to initiate
research collaborations. The validated mesoscopic imaging platform has potential
to provide a significant improvement over the current imaging system and will
become a powerful tool for neuroscientists to investigate the neural activities
in the mouse cortex in vivo. Furthermore, this validated imaging platform can be
broadly used to study numerous neurological disorders, such as Alzheimer’s
disease, and aid in devising better diagnostic and treatment strategies. Through
this fellowship, the researcher will learn and master these cutting-edge
microscopy techniques and bring this knowledge back to the University of
Oklahoma to benefit &gt;50 researchers—thus enhancing the research capability in
Oklahoma. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The neural
circuits in the mammalian cortex play important roles in higher brain function.
Due to the limited thickness of the mouse cortex (organized in 6 horizontal
layers in ~1 mm depth) and the distance between different cortical areas (~
several millimeters), most of the currently employed methods for brain
functional imaging are unable to adequately study the layer-specific
interactions within the cortex. This is due to at least one of the following
major limitations: limited field of view, shallow penetration depth, limited
spatial and/or temporal resolution. To investigate the three-dimensional (3D)
layer-specific interaction in the mouse cortex and between different cortical
areas in vivo, the researcher developed a novel mesoscopic imaging technique
that can achieve a resolution of ~30-100 µm with millimeters imaging depth. On
the other hand, recent advances in three-photon microscopy have made it possible
to image through the mouse cortex for both structural and functional imaging.
The research objective of this proposal is to: 1) validate this novel mesoscopic
3D imaging method using the state-of-art three-photon microscopy at Cornell
University; and 2) investigate the functional consequences of the layer-specific
projections in whisker sensorimotor circuit. In addition to validating the
mesoscopic imaging system, the study has potential to help uncover the layer-
specific neural functional connections between the somatosensory cortex and
primary motor cortex by combining both the advanced imaging methods and
optogenetic control strategy. These novel imaging platforms will enable
neuroscientists to investigate the 3D neural connections across different
cortical regions of live animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.