* 2132733
* I-Corps: Developing Protein-based, Edible Coatings for Perishable Produce to Reduce Food Waste
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Muhammad Rahman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a sustainable coating technology to reduce global food waste and
economic losses. Among all foods, fruits and vegetables are the highest
categories of losses, with up to 50-60% of produce discarded in landfills. The
proposed innovation will provide a desirable and healthy protein-fortified
coating for food preservation and upcycle inexpensive food waste materials
currently disposed of as landfills. The coating is washable, edible, and glossy
- providing an all-encompassing yet desirable food preservation solution that
benefits consumers, sellers, and farmers alike. It extends the post-harvest life
of perishable products by reducing maturation, senescence, dehydration, and
microbial growth rates. The proposed coating technology will be targeted towards
the growing food coating market and will offer significant potential to combat
the challenge of food preservation and waste management effectively and
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an eco-friendly and biodegradable protein-based nanocomposite
coating that can be applied to the surface of perishable fruits and vegetables
of any shape via dip and spray coatings. Agro-derived proteins such as soy and
corn will be modified by sequential chemical interactions using an optimized,
bio-based plasticizer, crosslinker, and nanomaterials to fabricate the coating.
In the preliminary work, cellulose nanocrystal-reinforced, egg-protein composite
coating has significantly extended the shelf life and cosmetic appearance of
various fruits, including banana, avocado, strawberry, and papaya. The coating
has shown excellent antimicrobial properties and overcomes the significant
challenge of simultaneously achieving the lowest oxygen and moisture barrier
properties for a natural food coating. This combination of properties will
extend the post-harvest life by reducing maturation, senescence, dehydration,
and microbial growth rate. Future efforts include further optimizing materials,
chemical modifications, scaling mechanisms from a technical perspective, and
assessing business feasibility for potential
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.