* 2132033
* EFRI E3P: Hydrogenolysis for upcycling of polyesters and mixed plastics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* J.William Medlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,032,000.00

Using plastics has tremendous benefits for humanity; however, the lifetime of
plastic products is long, creating an enormous accumulation of plastic wastes.
Upcycling of plastics involves transforming plastic waste into new materials
with high economic and environmental value. One of the major challenges for
plastics upcycling efforts is the complexity of the feed stream. The various
polymers in plastic wastes have diverse molecular structures, and plastic wastes
typically contain significant levels of additive and contaminants. Methods that
allow processing of mixed plastic wastes can reduce costs associated with
sorting, but these methods will require robust process technology capable of
handling highly heterogeneous waste streams. Development of such processes
requires new experimental and computational tools to understand how the various
components of plastic wastes interact with the catalysts that are used to drive
such processes. This project combines a variety of closely coupled, experimental
and computational modeling tools and approaches to probe interfaces between
plastics and catalysts in complex environments. The investigators will also
address how key plastic additives and contaminants complicate the interfacial
chemistry, using technoeconomic analysis to identify the most important
opportunities for reducing upcycling cost and environmental impact. The project
will lead to cross-disciplinary training of a diverse group of students in
plastic waste conversion technology. Faculty and students on the project will
engage in multiple forms of outreach, including both in-person workshops aimed
at K-12 school children and development of electronic resources aimed at life-
long learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
develop technologies that allow simultaneous or sequential processing of mixed
plastic wastes to desirable monomers. Achieving this goal will require
understanding how polymer deconstruction is influenced by different polymer,
monomer, catalyst, and gas phases, as well as by the presence of plastics
additives and contaminants. The proposed work will identify ways to manipulate
the interactions between the various components and phases to achieve efficient
deconstruction of single plastics components and binary mixtures of condensation
polymers and polyolefins. Catalytic hydrogenolysis will be employed as a robust
technique for deconstruction of diverse plastics, using both simultaneous (one-
pot) and sequential depolymerization of plastic mixtures. Methods for
controlling the reaction environment will be investigated by an
interdisciplinary team of researchers with expertise in natural polymers
deconstruction, chemical catalysis, advanced in situ characterization, materials
synthesis and surface modification, and computation. The transformative aspect
of the research lies in the focus on multiphase reaction engineering, with an
explicit focus on both reaction kinetics and mass transfer limitations in
catalytic plastics deconstruction. Experimentally validated models will be used
in conjunction with techno-economic analysis to design processes that convert
mixtures of waste plastics to valuable monomers through appropriate synthesis of
optimal catalysts, temperature programs, and reactor designs. The methods for
studying polymer-catalyst interfaces can be applied beyond the hydrogenolysis
and will be useful in addressing fundamental science problems related to the
interaction of macromolecules with catalytic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.