* 2132235
* RII Track-4: NSF: Novel target-enriched genomic approaches to assess the diversity of Gorgonian Octocorals on Indo-Pacific Mesophotic Coral Reefs
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Sonia Rowley, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 215,035.00

This RII Track-4 Research Fellowship will investigate the diversity of gorgonian
octocorals from shallow to mesophotic depths of the Indo-Pacific. The coral
reefs of the Indo-Pacific are centres of marine biodiversity, yet the natural
resilience and biodiversity of these ecosystems are under great threat. Research
at deeper depths (mesophotic coral ecosystems - MCEs; 30 to &gt;150 m) reveal an
unknown reservoir of biodiversity and natural resilience in the face of steep
environmental gradients. Gorgonian octocorals typically dominate these dynamic
environments yet are notoriously difficult to identify in the field and from
morphological traits alone. Furthermore, molecular phylogenies have been largely
unresolved, until the recent pioneering research of the project host at the
National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), using target-capture genomics. This
research will apply these novel genomic approaches to the PI’s rare and highly
unique gorgonian collection from the mesophotic and shallow reefs of the Indo-
Pacific that she has assembled over several years. Applying these novel genomic
approaches to the PI’s collections will move beyond current analytical
limitations and add transformative data and phylogenetic accuracy to the
Cnidarian tree of life. This fellowship will assist the PI in building capacity
at the University of Hawai‘i at Mānoa by passing on these critical and
innovative skills, particularly to underrepresented minority students who are
native to the locations of the samples themselves, and are passionate to
conserve marine biodiversity of national and international concern.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gorgonian octocorals are an ecologically important, highly
diverse yet poorly resolved group, where traditional markers have lacked
phylogenetic resolution at the species and higher taxonomic level. Delimiting
species and species boundaries across steep environmental clines are critically
important in biodiversity assessments for conservation management particularly
as the value of mesophotic ecosystems is increasingly recognised. Thus, we test
the hypotheses that 1) the gorgonian fauna is distinct and more diverse at
mesophotic depths, and 2) that morphotypes within the ubiquitous genus Annella
Gray, 1858, are delimited by depth. This will be achieved using the target-
capture genomic approach developed by the host, which simultaneously estimates
the phylogenetic relationships between taxa over shallow and deep time,
population structure within a species, and the delimitation of species
boundaries. Using these methods will facilitate the development of a multi-trait
(phenotypic and genomic) framework that will 1) assess the phylogenetic and
phylogeographic relationships within and between gorgonian taxa from shallow to
mesophotic depths, and 2) present an exemplar case study of population structure
and species delimitation in the widely distributed genus, Annella Gray, 1858.
This work will develop a multi-trait (morphologic and genomic) framework to
advance our understanding of a critically important coral group from some of the
world’s most biodiverse yet critically endangered hotspots. This research will
provide the opportunity for the PI and a female graduate assistant from a
Pacific coastal nation, to learn these highly effective genomic techniques that
are specific to corals, and disseminate the results formally (e.g., peer-review
publication, MCE Gordon Research Conference) and informally (e.g., social media
platforms).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.