* 2132116
* RII Track-4:NSF: Understanding the role of surface interactions in co-assembly of spherical and rod-shaped colloids
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Bhuvnesh Bharti, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 162,551.00

In nature, the brilliant colors of butterfly wings, peacock feathers, and beetle
carapaces originate from the interference of light waves with the structural
order in the material forming the wings/feathers. In contrast to dyes and
pigments, structural colors do not absorb light but instead reflect it from a
microscopically structured surface. The wavelengths of reflected light depending
on the orientation of the object and the viewing angle, causing the shimmery,
color-shifting effect of iridescence. This structural color can be also produced
by assembling spherical particles (200-500 nm) into close-packed crystals on
surfaces. The local ordering of the particles within a colloidal crystal is
governed by the interaction between particles, and their particle packing
efficiency. While most of the currently available experimental studies aim at
maximizing the size of colloidal crystals, there is a significant knowledge gap
in understanding the factors governing local order and its impact on structural
color. This lack of understanding exists due to a complex interplay between the
experimental parameters used in the assembly process and the corresponding
structure obtained. Understanding the relationship between the crystal order of
colloidal particles and the experimental processing parameters is the focus of
the current proposal. This proposal will investigate the impact of the local
assembly formed by spherical nanoparticles upon the addition of rod-shaped
particles, and their corresponding on the brilliance of structural color. The
project will outline a general strategy for synthesizing surface coatings with
never fading colors, which is not the case for dye or pigment-based
paints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The majority of currently used materials are the
ground state, equilibrium phases of the assembled nanoparticles, which have
well-defined properties but are bound by the limits of thermodynamics. To push
the limits of material design and encode unusual properties in the mesoscopic
materials, we need to look beyond the conventional equilibrium materials into
the domain of non-equilibrium assemblies of non-spherical particles. Currently,
there is a significant lack of understanding of principles governing the
formation of assemblies of non-spherical colloids, and even less is known about
their structure-property-function relationships. This knowledge gap exists due
to the inherent complexity of the interparticle interactions involved in the
assembly of non-spherical particles, corresponding dynamics, and control
parameters. This proposal aims at understanding these aspects using rods and
spheres as model nanoparticles. The proposal will address the following
fundamental questions: (a) How do non-spherical particles interact? and which
factors influence the interparticle interactions? (b) What is the effect of the
presence of non-spherical particles on the crystallization of spherical
nanoparticles? (c) How does the change in local crystalline order affect the
optical properties of the assembled material? These questions will be addressed
by performing systematic experiments on gold nanorods and nanospheres and
following their assembly dynamics/kinetics using liquid-phase transmission
electron microscopy (at Pacific Northwestern National Laboratory) and
x-ray/light scattering (at Louisiana State University). Additionally,
theoretical models will be developed which will provide a better understanding
of the surface forces driving the assembly and assist in developing processing
routes to synthesize nanoscale coatings of tunable properties such as structural
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.