* 2132055
* RII Track-4:NSF: Atomic-Scale Understanding of the Self-Healing Mechanisms of Ionic Polymers
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Jihong Ma, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 240,597.00

Plastic pollution has become one of the most pressing environmental issues
facing society due to the growing usage of disposable plastics. Developing
sturdy and recyclable substitutes for single-use plastics will significantly
reduce plastic waste. One way to reduce plastic waste is to develop self-healing
ionic polymers that are resistant to permanent damage. Despite a massive amount
of effort devoted to self-healing ionic polymer studies, the main mechanisms
that yield optimal self-healing performance remain obscure. The goal of this
fellowship is to provide an atomic-scale understanding of the self-healing
mechanisms of ionic polymers. This aim will be achieved via a highly accurate
large-scale accelerated molecular dynamics simulation technique developed at the
host lab, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Such a technique will allow the PI and
her graduate and undergraduate students to closely examine the interaction of
ionic polymers to acquire a complete understanding of their self-healing process
while also enhancing the research capabilities of the PI’s lab. Research
concepts will be then delivered to a broader audience by incorporating research
outcomes to the PI's undergraduate materials science class and communicating to
the younger generation through public outreach programs. Results from this
fellowship project will be published in journal articles and conferences, which
will expand the public's awareness of the University of Vermont and enhance the
university’s reputation. This fellowship will also strengthen the connection
between the University of Vermont and Oak Ridge National Laboratory and will
incite potential new collaborations between the two institutions in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to obtain
a clear and holistic atomic-scale understanding of the self-healing mechanisms
of ionic polymers, aimed to enhance their self-healing performance. To achieve
this overarching goal, the PI will establish a clear relationship between
polymer and ion compositions and their self-healing performance based on
atomistic modeling of polymer structure and dynamics. Atomic interactions and
reactive dynamics will be investigated via an accurate and efficient
methodology, i.e., the linear-scaling fragment molecular orbital (FMO) method
based on long-range corrected (LC) density-functional tight-binding (DFTB)
theory, which is highly suitable for studying ionic polymers. The physics-based
understanding of the self-healing mechanisms for different ionic polymer
compositions will accelerate high-performance materials selection, synthesis,
and manufacturing for sustainable applications. As a byproduct, the dynamic
information obtained via the FMO-LC-DFTB molecular dynamics simulations can be
used to analyze their ionic transport properties, which are also of particular
interest in flexible electronics. This proposed work will expand the PI’s scope
of knowledge and skillset across various disciplines and will stimulate the
research competitiveness in materials science studies at the University of
Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.