* 2132487
* CAS-Climate: Coupling Decarbonization of the Power System with Advance Planning for Integrating Negative Emission Technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Michael Craig, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 287,495.00

Electric power system utilities are engaged in work to reduce the carbon dioxide
emissions intensity of electricity generation. The ultimate aim is to reach
near-zero carbon dioxide emissions. Effectively mitigating climate change will
require power utilities to achieve negative, not near-zero, carbon dioxide
emissions though. The term, negative emissions, denotes removal of atmospheric
carbon dioxide that already was emitted, and meeting this goal will require
massive deployment of two key negative emission technologies: direct air capture
and sequestration of carbon dioxide (DACS) and bioenergy with carbon dioxide
capture and sequestration (BECCS). In DACS, sequestration is achieved through
geologic, long-term storage of captured carbon dioxide in underground
formations. In BECCS, energy is generated from burning fuels derived from
biological sources, such as switchgrass, and the carbon dioxide produced from
the combustion is again absorbed by growing new crops of this fuel source.
Further research is needed into how to integrate DACS and BECCS into existing
power generating systems. Robust approaches to evaluate how carbon dioxide
removal via negative emissions technologies can fit into different systems are
critically important. In this research project, the team will answer key
questions including, how accounting for large-scale negative emission
technologies integration in future power systems will affect near- or long-term
decarbonization plans, and how different decarbonization and negative emission
technologies integration pathways can be evaluated. Ultimately, the project will
develop a novel framework driven by a power system long-term planning model and
robust scenarios capturing the interactions between decarbonization of power
systems and integration of negative emission technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project has three specific research
objectives: reformulate, parameterize, and validate an optimization-based
capacity expansion model to be capable of integrating negative emission
technologies. Then, run this capacity expansion model through an experimental
design incorporating decarbonization and negative emission technologies
scenarios, analyze results, and then address uncertainty through sensitivity
analyses. Finally, actively communicate results with the research, education,
and power systems communities. Decarbonization decisions with near-term versus
with long-term negative emissions targets in mind could lead to power systems
with radically different generation, storage, and transmission features.
Different features, in turn, could drive divergences in cost and feasibility
and, ultimately, undermine achieving climate change mitigation targets. This
research project aims to create knowledge about how to ensure that near-term
actions are consistent with long-term carbon dioxide removal needs and how to
optimize feasibility. The project team will publish policy briefs and share
analyses through the Grid School at the Institute for Public Utilities, which
trains utilities personnel, regulators, and others. The team also will develop a
podcast miniseries introducing and contextualizing negative emissions
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.