* 2132798
* Collaborative Research: NRI: Integration of Autonomous UAS in Wildland Fire Management
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Mrinal Kumar, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 872,967.00

This research project, in cooperation with the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources (Division of Forestry), focuses on autonomous unmanned aerial systems
(UAS) for operations in hazardous environments to perform wildfire monitoring
during prescribed burns for fire prevention and mitigation. Climate change in
the US has exacerbated wildfires and intensified the Department of Natural
Resources activities in response. Experts from the areas of forest management
and ecology, uncertainty quantification, sensor fusion and data-driven modeling
and control collaborate to deploy autonomous aerial robotic systems in
unstructured, uncertain, and hazardous fire environments. The research from
these collaborations aids wildland-urban planning, preparing for and sustainment
of a safe wildland fire response; in particular, this research contributes to
understanding how topographic, atmospheric and forest fuel factors in temperate
hardwood forests influence fire intensity and rate of spread. This project
invites and encourages students to participate in robotics research. Through its
outreach activities, the project also informs the general public of the value of
robotics research for addressing societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theoretical, computational, and experimental
methods and materials developed in this work enhance situational awareness and
enables autonomous risk-aware decision-making in unstructured and uncertain
hazardous environments. UAS path planning will formulate and solve novel
resource chance-constrained optimization problems. UAS will bypass computational
heavy lifting to generate in-time micro-level local conditions by enabling
physics-informed learning through Koopman operator theory. New sensor belief
functions will be designed that accurately reflect sensing ignorance contained
in hypotheses related to the fire environment. Evidential information fusion
will effectively handle sensor epistemic uncertainty and allow reliable
integration in an environment where not all data is trustworthy. Data-driven
control will enable efficient and reliable operation of autonomous vehicles with
uncertain dynamics in real time by using available knowledge of applied inputs
and observed outputs, to learn the unknown inputs even without prior training
data or persistent excitation. Real-time estimates of disturbance forces and
torques acting on an UAS obtained by the disturbance observer will provide
information on the turbulence and air flow around a wildland fire
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.