* 2132049
* SPX: Collaborative Research: Memory Fabric: Data Management for Large-scale Hybrid Memory Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2021,01/31/2023
* Xiaoyi Lu, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 01/31/2023
* USD 202,709.00

New large-scale high performance computing systems being developed for the
national labs and by US industry, combine heterogeneous memory components,
accelerators and accelerator-near memory, and programmable high-performance
interconnects. These memory-rich designs are attractive as they provide the
compute-near-data capacity needed for improving the time to scientific
discovery, and for supporting new classes of latency-sensitive data-intensive
applications. However, existing software stacks are not equipped to deal with
the heterogeneity and complexity of these machine designs, which impacts
application performance and machine efficiency. The Memory Fabric (MF) solution
developed in this project provides new abstractions and mechanisms that permit
the systems software stacks to gain deeper insight into applications' data usage
patterns and requirements, and to coordinate the decisions concerning how data
should be distributed across different memories, or exchanged along different
interconnection paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Memory Fabric (MF) architecture
introduces new data-centric abstractions, memory object and memory object flow,
and accompanying memory and communications management methods. The higher-level
information captured in the new abstractions empowers the MF runtime to better
guide the underlying memory and interconnect management, and to mask the
complexities of the underlying memory substrate. Additional benefits are derived
from use of near-memory-fabric computation, including via dynamically inserted
application-specific codes, which further specialize and accelerate the
operations carried out by MF. MF is evaluated using several important
application domains, including big data learning and analytics, and traditional
high-performance scientific simulations. Its benefits include gains in
application performance and resource efficiency, while shielding applications
and application developers from the underlying machine
details.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.