* 2132774
* RAPID: Hot spring microbial response to magma intrusion at Fagradalsfjall volcano, Iceland
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Karen Lloyd, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 05/31/2023
* USD 90,969.00

On March 19, 2021 Fagradalsfjall volcano, near Reykjavik Iceland, began
erupting, resulting in a new and prominent fissure. Volcanic eruptions release
volatile gases underground that make their way to hot springs on the Earth's
surface. The purpose of this RAPID project is to sample and analyze the
microbial communities in the hot springs near the volcano. The PI and her team
will employ a recently developed approach to track hot spring microbes and their
activities on continental-scales. They will sample microbial communities across
many different geothermal hot springs along a geological gradient, using a broad
suite of simultaneously-collected geochemical measurements. A rapid response is
necessary to take these samples during active volcanic activity. The work is
being coordinated with collaborators in Iceland and will enhance international
scientific collaboration. Video of the expedition will be shared via social
media and in public presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her team
have demonstrated that measuring a large number of geochemical constituents
(e.g., carbon and nitrogen isotopes, metals, and noble gases in the aqueous,
gas, and solid phases) and microbiological data (16S rRNA gene amplicon
libraries, metagenomes, metatranscriptomes, and cell counts), enabled microbial
community compositions and functions to be linked to the most salient
geochemical factors for each part of the community. Beneath the Fagradalsfjall
volcano, seismic activity indicates that magmas are injected along a NE-SW
trending fault system, where abundant natural hot springs occur. This project
will test the hypothesis that the microbial communities in hot springs near the
volcanic activity will experience more pronounced reactions to volatile fluxes
than those in distal hot springs. By sampling hot springs variably influenced by
the nearby magmatic intrusions, microbial ecosystems will be tracked across a
gradient of volatile influence. Since these expulsions are short-lived, the
sampling campaign is extremely time-sensitive. This study will have
unprecedented access to a gradient of nascent magmatic disturbances to
hydrothermal ecosystems. It will link hot spring microbial communities with the
deep subsurface nutrients that may drive them, which has not yet been explored
in a plume-driven continental rift. Filmed products of the expedition and
scientific studies will be shared via social media and outreach with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.