* 2132022
* EFRI DCheM: Making Cement Green by Low-Temperature Manufacturing of Calcium Hydroxide from Distributed Waste Sources
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Robert Anex, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,920,892.00

Cement is arguably the world’s most important building material, but its
production is responsible for up to 8% of global carbon dioxide emissions,
representing a major impediment to meeting the carbon budget required to reduce
the rate of global warming. Decarbonization of the cement industry has been a
longstanding environmental challenge because the bulk of the industry’s carbon
dioxide emissions result from the chemical reaction that takes place during
limestone calcining, the first step in traditional cement production. Produced
by current practices, emissions associated with cement production alone would
account for as much as 40% of the world’s carbon budget in 2050, a figure based
on emissions allowable for a 50% chance of limiting warming to 1.5°C in 2050. To
address this challenge, a novel calcination-free LoTeCH (Low-Temperature Calcium
Hydroxide) process will be developed to produce calcium hydroxide that can
replace limestone as the key cement precursor from distributed waste streams
such as recycled concrete, coal ash, and metal-smelting slag. The resulting
LoTeCH calcium hydroxide can be seamlessly integrated into the existing cement-
making infrastructure to replace limestone calcination, reducing CO2 emissions
by more than 50% with the added benefit of reduced limestone mining. An
extension of this technology to create a distributed and extremely low-carbon
cement-making process that would consume carbon dioxide sourced from power-plant
flue gas also will be pursued to enable a potentially carbon-negative cement
industry. In addition to developing new technologies to transform cement
production into a sustainable industry, the project will train a diverse cohort
of students, working collaboratively to solve this environmental problem of
global concern, taking a multidisciplinary approach to problem solving. The
project will directly engage underrepresented minority undergraduate and
graduate researchers from two minority serving institutions (Ft. Lewis College
and University of Illinois at Chicago) within the research tasks and will
support their participation in UW-Madison campus programs that offer
undergraduate students opportunities to gain research experience. These
activities will be used by the project team to recruit and educate
underrepresented minority students. This project will also work to increase
public scientific literacy and public engagement to understand the ways that the
built environment is responsible for carbon emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop an energy efficient, low carbon-emission calcium
hydroxide production process for sustainable cement production. Towards this
goal, the project will generate fundamental engineering knowledge enabling a
four-step LoTeCH process cycle that uses ammonia and an ion-exchange process to
produce Ca(OH)2 from waste material feedstocks under mild pressure (2-3 bar) and
sub-boiling temperatures. The proposed work will generate fundamental insights
into dissolution, transport, and precipitation processes using in-situ
characterization methods. New covalent organic framework (COF)-based ion-
exchangers with tunable exchange characteristics and enhanced capacity and
stability will be synthesized to support the key pH-swing process step.
Predictive multiscale and multiphysics process modeling will leverage high-
throughput characterization data for model validation and will make possible
robust process optimization. Using these modeling methods and simulation
techniques, new process intensification schemes will be developed to create an
efficient, distributed production process suitable for feedstocks that are
expected to be highly variable in their composition. Process development will be
guided by techno-economic analysis (TEA), continuous material flow analysis
(C-MFA), and life cycle assessment (LCA), including an assessment of the impact
of this technology on the existing cement industry and the potential emergence
of a low-carbon cement industry in the future. By integrating expertise in
mineral dissolution and precipitation, material synthesis, reactor design and
process intensification, and environmental and sustainability engineering, this
project will broaden fundamental understanding of a critically important
industrial process and create a new paradigm for how cement is
produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.