* 2132299
* 2021 Virtual International Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop (mSBW)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Leonardo Morsut, American Institute of Chemical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 3,500.00

Mammalian synthetic biology is the design of genetic devices that enables the
study and control of biological processes in mammalian cells. Mammalian
synthetic biology provides the tools and design strategies to accelerate the
advancement of various therapies; therefore, many of the technologies being
developed will be useful for eventual medical use in the long term. The 2021
Virtual International Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop (mSBW) will highlight
the advances in the field and state-of-the-art technologies developed, as well
as encouraging the participation of students in order to train a new generation
of engineers. Funding for the conference will also support the attendance of
underrepresented groups in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
2021 Virtual International Mammalian Synthetic Biology Workshop (mSBW) is to
congregate the community of scientists and engineers at various career stages
working on mammalian synthetic biology to highlight new technological advances.
The project will aim to integrate the engineering sciences with the life
sciences, encouraging research and development in multidisciplinary areas,
educating the next generation of young scientists, aiding translational science,
and supporting cutting edge research to answer current and future challenges.
The workshop will emphasize novel computational tools/methods to aid in
predicting and quantitatively studying system behavior. The advances in
fundamental science, engineering techniques, and computation models will be
critical for the development of medicinal products in the long term as it will
be useful for improving understanding, monitoring, and treatment of disease. The
workshop will contain five technical sessions: (1) Foundational advances, (2)
Applications in stem cells, (3) Immunotherapy and cell therapy, (4) Gene
regulation, (5) Sensors and multi-input logic. The workshop will also host
several Q&amp;A discussions, networking breaks, as well as poster sessions that
allow students to present their work. It is our hope that the various networking
opportunities will give the attendees the ability to discuss the state-of-the-
art technology being presented, and that the discussions will lead to potential
collaborations that may accelerate development in the field. The white paper
that will be published will highlight the main points of the discussions, and
allow for the broader scientific community to gain insight regarding the new
advances discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.