* 2132651
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: ONSET:  Optics- enabled Network Defenses for Extreme Terabit DDoS  Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Ramakrishnan Durairajan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks continue to present a clear and
imminent danger to critical network infrastructures. DDoS attacks have increased
in sophistication with advanced strategies to continuously adapt (e.g., changing
threat postures dynamically) and induce collateral damage (i.e., higher latency
and loss for legitimate traffic). Furthermore, advanced attacks may also employ
reconnaissance (e.g., mapping the network to find bottleneck links) to target
the network infrastructure itself. In light of these trends, state-of-art
defenses (e.g., advanced scrubbing, emerging software-defined defenses, and
programmable switching hardware) have fundamental shortcomings. This project
will develop a new framework, referred to as "Optics-enabled In-Network defenSe
for Extreme Terabit DDoS attacks" (ONSET). The framework makes a case for new
dimensions of defense agility that can programmatically control the topology of
the network (in addition to the processing behavior) to tackle advanced and
future attacks. The project will facilitate the use of optical technologies as
an exciting visual medium for engaging K-12 students via suitable channels for
dissemination. The project will also result in new course materials at the
intersection of optical networking, software-defined networking, and network
security to enable students to become domain experts in this emerging problem
space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take an interdisciplinary approach
spanning security, optics, systems, and networks, to address fundamental
challenges along three thrusts: (1) novel "data plane" solutions to rapidly
reconfigure the wavelengths and switches and new capabilities in programmable
switches to rapidly identify malicious vs. benign traffic at line rate; (2)
novel "control plane" orchestration mechanisms for scalable resource management
algorithms and coordinated control across optical networking and programmable
switches; and (3) new "northbound application programming interfaces (APIs)" to
express novel defenses to combat current and future DDoS attacks (e.g., with
reconnaissance). This project will develop a new framework, referred to as
"Optics-enabled In-Network defenSe for Extreme Terabit DDoS attacks" (ONSET).
The research efforts will result in end-to-end prototypes using open-source and
standardized interfaces to demonstrate the novel defense capabilities of ONSET.
The efficacy of ONSET will be evaluated using pilot studies on operational
networks to create a roadmap to practical deployment, using real testbeds and
large-scale simulations. The project outcomes will be released as open-source
software tools, models, and simulation frameworks that will inform industry and
academic work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.