* 2132294
* SBIR Phase I:  Post-training deep neural networks certification against backdoor data poisoning attacks
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2022,06/30/2023
* David Miller, Anomalee Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,391.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to secure and certify deep learning models that are becoming
ubiquitous in many safety and security-sensitive applications, such as finance,
health, military/intelligence, cyber security, critical infrastructure, and
personal/consumer use. Strong growth in deep neural network (DNN) deployments is
forecast in the near term in several of these domains, some of which are subject
to regulatory requirements that artificial intelligence (AI) models be certified
to perform as advertised. This project proposes a new method to confidently
certify against backdoor attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project will provide the first commercial prototype
of a mathematically principled certification service for DNNs against evasive
backdoor attacks (BAs). The proposed method is wholly unsupervised, requiring no
known examples of poisoned DNNs nor any samples from the (possibly poisoned)
training set. This project will advance a broadly applicable and computationally
efficient approach through parallel computation leveraging cost-effective cloud-
computing services, to address challenges such as very large input feature space
dimensions and number of classes, as well as very large DNNs. Another challenge
is to make the detector insensitive to the mechanism (e.g., additive,
multiplicative) by which the backdoor pattern (BP) is incorporated into a sample
across different application domains. In addition to "static" DNNs and image
domains, the prototype will be able to: process recurrent DNNs; handle time
series, point cloud, and document data domains; and defend AIs used for time-
series prediction and regression. APIs will be developed to expand the prototype
to defend against related attacks, e.g., backdoor patterns that are perceptible
but "scene plausible" or test-time evasion attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.