* 2132538
* Energy-harvesting Light Source Arrays from Colloidal Double-Heterojunction Nanorods
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Moonsub Shim, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

With ever-increasing demand for more function and higher performance with
reduced size and weight, fabrication of devices like smart phones and tablets
are inevitably going to be more complex and more expensive. Their energy
consumption, both in use and in manufacturing, will also increase accordingly.
Recent advances to make semiconductors so small that their optical and
electrical properties can be tuned by their size and shape are allowing simple
ways to fabricate high-performance devices with high efficiencies and new
capabilities. For example, such tiny semiconductor materials may be made to not
only emit but also sense and harvest light, a feature that can be exploited to
develop devices such as displays with pixels that can generate its own power
through scavenging ambient light. This project aims to address the important
challenge of how electrons/charges can be efficiently placed in and out of these
tunable semiconductor materials â€“ a critical first step in any light emitting
and photovoltaic devices. The knowledge gained here will allow design and
fabrication of high-performance LED pixel arrays with multiple capabilities such
as solar energy harvesting and light sensing while simultaneously being a light
source. Multi-faceted challenges to be tackled here provide ample educational
and training opportunities for the students involved, helping them be better
prepared to become leaders in interdisciplinary fields. The PI is committed to
building on the results of this project to enhance teaching and promote the
benefits of emerging science and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterostructures of colloidal quantum dots
provide opportunities to improve device performance and to usher in new
capabilities. This project focuses on colloidal semiconductor nanorods that
allow a double heterojunction to be formed on a quantum dot. These materials
that the PI has recently developed have been shown to both emit and harvest
light. They can also be solution processed, opening up opportunities for
compact, energy-efficient multifunctional device arrays on arbitrary substrates
that can pave new paths to next generation of display, lighting, communication,
and related technologies. Incorporating these materials into
electronic/optoelectronic devices requires the understanding of how interfacing
materials, such as charge transport layers, affect carrier injection,
extraction, separation, and recombination. Through a combination of studies on
carrier dynamics and device physics, this project aims to elucidate how
different electron and hole transport layers affect electroluminescence and
photocurrent generation. The results of these efforts will guide the development
of optimum interfaces for designing the next generation of
electronic/optoelectronics devices with multiple functionality, especially those
that can reduce energy consumption both in use and in manufacturing. The
research efforts of this project will also help to create new lectures,
experiments for undergraduate laboratory courses, and demonstration materials
that will enhance classroom teaching and promote nanoscience and energy-
efficient technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.