* 2132150
* RII Track-4:FAST: An investigation of tropical cyclone intensity using synthetic aperture radars and complementary satellite ocean observations
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Justin Stopa, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 190,982.00

Tropical cyclones (TC) are one of the most dangerous natural phenomena impacting
the United States. Measurements of TC intensity such as wind speed are sparse
and uncertain. In this project, we use an all-weather satellite technology
called synthetic aperture radar (SAR) to collect high-resolution (10 m)
information about the atmosphere, wave, and ocean environment within TC centers.
The first objective is to improve the retrieval of wind speed and rainfall
intensity within TCs. The second objective is to expand our understanding of
air-sea exchanges through various satellite observations. Analysis of the novel
SAR TCs database will ultimately lead to improved forecasts of TC intensity.
This project will develop methods to extract the storm size, rainfall intensity
and wind speeds which increases the confidence in SAR imagery for operations
such as the National Hurricane Center. The project will foster new
collaborations between the University of Hawai’i at Manoa (UHM) and the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) / Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in
Pasadena, California, a premier, internationally renowned center for Earth-
observing satellites. The project will assist in future research projects
associated with satellite missions within the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We hypothesize that SAR-derived wind speeds, storm sizes,
and radial structure within TCs will provide useful insights to air-sea
exchanges and constrain forecast models under extreme forcing. C-band SARs are
sensitive to rain. In contrast, L-band SARs, like NASA’s planned NiSAR, are less
sensitive to rain. Therefore, the complementary analysis of these radars will
reduce contamination of rainfall on wind speed retrievals. We will build the
capacity of both C- and L-band co- and cross- polarized SARs to estimate
moderate to high wind speeds especially under rainfall. Other satellite
technologies measure sea surface temperature, sea surface height, and ocean
salinity. These variables in conjunction with the SAR wind speeds and a
theoretical model will provide a bottom-up view of TC ocean-atmosphere
characteristics. We will evaluate the ocean response as it relates to the storm
magnitude and size. We can directly evaluate the added benefit of the SAR-
derived variables and the underlying theories. The convergence of multiple
satellite technologies is expected to provide insights into the coupled ocean-
atmosphere system under extreme conditions within TCs. Both improving SAR wind
speed retrievals and assessing satellite observations will help NASA plan for
future missions especially those involving the retrieval of environmental
information within TCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.