* 2132506
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Algorithmic Persuasion: Re-creating the Success of Mechanism Design
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Haifeng Xu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 12/31/2022
* USD 453,382.00

In today’s increasingly connected world, particularly on the Internet,
interactions among people and algorithms lead to important social and economic
outcomes. Such interactions involve massive exchange of information, often by
self-interested parties, on the basis of which individuals make decisions and
choose their actions. An emerging research area termed "Bayesian persuasion"
studies the optimal design of information mechanisms for such strategic
communications, also known as signaling schemes. This project will promote this
area of research through the computational lens, and aims at bringing current
stylized models closer to practice and thus uncovering new structure that will
help make progress on longstanding problems. It will combine algorithmic and
game-theoretic tools to achieve better designs of information mechanisms,
towards enhanced social welfare and economic surplus. Since one of the main
characteristics of today’s digital economy is the collection of information and
its dissemination among many self-interested parties, developing a modern
algorithmic theory of persuasion is of imminent importance. As part of this
project, the PIs will organize education activities (tutorials, workshops and
surveys) to propel forward the relatively nascent research area of algorithmic
persuasion to the research community, and will integrate research findings into
courses to provide the next generation of computer scientists the ability of
reasoning about the strategic role of information in complex environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like mechanism design, persuasion is inherently an
optimization task. On a technical level, the main focus of this project is to
identify and expand multiple new research frontiers driven by key applications
of persuasion in today’s digital economy, with the ultimate goal of obtaining a
mature algorithmic theory of persuasion. This includes the following. (1) Going
beyond the basic models of persuasion studied algorithmically thus far, by
taking into account additional structure present in important applications of
persuasion, e.g., online advertising auctions. Utilizing structure is crucial in
overcoming the hardness and impossibility results with which the general
persuasion models are so rife. (2) Going beyond a flat model of persuasion to
more realistic communication on networks. For example, how would information
transmit over a social network when each agent is both an information sender and
receiver? (3) Designing optimal or approximately-optimal persuasion schemes
under realistic constraints: privacy-preservation, robustness, and communication
restrictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.