* 2132475
* Opportunities in Experiment, Computation, Theory and AI Virtual July 2021 Workshop with Focus on Metals and Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Mark Weaver, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2022
* USD 104,250.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a workshop that
will bring together experts from the materials science and engineering and data
science communities to identify research opportunities in metals and metallic
nanostructures that will address national priorities for the next decade. The
workshop will: (1) summarize current research trends and recent breakthroughs
and identify emerging research areas; (2) assess how research on metals and
metallic nanoparticles (MMN) and condensed matter and materials theory (CMMT)
contribute towards addressing current national priorities; (3) assess
instrumentation and cyberinfrastructure needs; (4) identify opportunities for
MMN research in the emerging digital environment; (5) identify needs and methods
for workforce development; and (6) Identify strategies to enhance community
engagement and collaboration with industry. The workshop will be held virtually
in July of 2021 and will include 75 to 80 participants representing academic
institutions, industry, and national laboratories. The workshop participants
will include a diverse group of attendees representing expertise in materials
science and engineering and data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our modern understanding of materials science and
engineering (MSE) is derived from an amalgam of fundamental knowledge from
physics, chemistry, biology, mathematics, and engineering sciences that enables
us to understand and control the structures, properties and performance of
engineering materials. Materials research exploits this interdisciplinary
framework to improve our understanding of the physical phenomena underlying
materials properties and applying that knowledge to produce materials to meet
societal needs, with an increasing emphasis on economic viability and
sustainability. Furthermore, rapid advances in computational tools are
accelerating fundamental materials discovery. This award will support the
“Opportunities in Metals and Metallic Nanostructures: Experiment, Computation,
Theory and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Workshop.” This workshop, which will be
a partnership between the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures (MMN) and Condensed
Matter and Materials Theory (CMMT) programs at the National Science Foundation,
brings the experiment and theory/computation elements of the MMN community
together to identify emerging research challenges and opportunities in MMN. The
workshop will identify fundamental research directions that could substantially
enhance the design, fabrication, and use of innovative metallic materials and
systems in applications that exploit their unique properties. The workshop will
address: (1) increasingly relevant roles of theory and computation, advanced
synthesis methods, emerging characterization approaches, structure evolution and
innovative property measurement approaches; (2) educational and workforce issues
that limit the impact of research in metals and metallic nanostructures; and (3)
unique roles of MMN and CMMT research in leveraging and/or meeting national
priorities, including the Materials Genome Initiative and the Advanced
Manufacturing Initiative, for advancing research into the future, ensuring
inclusivity, and continuing global leadership in science and engineering. This
virtual facilitated workshop is being planned to take place from July 19 through
July 24th, 2021 and will engage approximately 75 - 80 participants, representing
a broad range of educational and research institutions, industry, and will
include international representation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.