* 2132936
* Collaborative Research: NRI: Reducing Falling Risk in Robot-Assisted Retail Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Boyi Hu, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 382,479.00

Occupational injuries continue to adversely affect the wholesale and retail
workforce with persistently high incidence rates and injury counts, especially
fall-related injuries. Previous work has indicated that occupational falling can
be primarily attributed to a lack of understanding of the walking surfaces, such
as floors. Robots can be used not only to assess the walking surface better than
humans, but also can convey important safety related information more
effectively to co-workers as well as customers. The main goal of this project is
to investigate the health and safety implications of the wholesale and retail
crew collaboratively working with robots in a typical retail environment, and
use these opportunities to reduce personnel falling injuries. Compared to other
occupational settings where robotics and automation have been flourishing, this
environment presents challenges to be addressed before a comparable widespread
adoption of robots can be established. From the robotics systems point of view,
the research team aims to substantially reduce the falling risk exposure by
providing a real-time walkability map to people in the environment. From the
safety perspective, the research team will focus on comprehensive safety,
workload influence, and the psychological impacts on retail workers and
customers when working with/around mobile robots under varied
circumstances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three research thrusts to pursue
in this research work: Thrust 1 - identify and evaluate the risks associated
with the operation of mobile robots in retail environments under different
operating conditions. Thrust 2 - develop a new function that could augment a
wide range of retail robots to survey the indoor ground surface while performing
primary functions such as cleaning and inventory checking. Outputs will be
integrated to generate an indoor space walkability map informing the surrounding
pedestrians of potential risks of slipping or tripping. Thrust 3 - investigate
the effects of mobile robots and the walkability map on workers’ physical
falling risk exposure, cognitive workload and psychological impacts in real-
world retail sites. In addition, the research team will evaluate if the falling
prevention function can improve the overall technology acceptance among
professional workers and eventually lower the technology adoption barrier. The
education and outreach plan includes creating educational modules, training
opportunities for workers as well as graduate and undergraduate
students—especially those from underrepresented groups, and K12
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.