* 2132219
* EFRI E3P: A novel sequential catalytic solvolysis process for deconstructing municipal waste plastics
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* W. James Pfaendtner, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2025
* USD 2,000,000.00

Municipal plastic solid wastes represent a large, untapped source of energy and
chemicals. Upcycling discarded plastics into high-value products could result in
economic savings of billions of dollars and minimize negative environmental
impact. However, municipal plastic waste streams are a mixture of various
incompatible polymers such as polyethylene, polypropylene, polyvinylchloride,
polyethylene terephthalate, and polystyrene, as well as polymer additives, dyes,
and contaminants. As a result, recovering high-quality plastic materials from
mixed solid municipal wastes by physical sorting is a challenge. Thermochemical
recycling of waste plastics is not economical since the current processes
require intensive energy inputs and costly product upgrading. Therefore, energy-
efficient catalytic deconstruction processes are needed to overcome the chemical
and physical challenges of recycling mixed plastics. This project will develop
an innovative waste plastics chemical upcycling process that selectively
converts co-mingled waste plastics to valuable monomers and chemicals. It aims
to promote a plastics circular economy and mitigate the negative environmental
impact caused by accumulated plastic wastes. Education and outreach activities
will be integrated with the research program to facilitate student and workforce
development and encourage the participation of students from underrepresented
groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed waste plastics deconstruction
approach is centered around the sequential catalytic solvolysis (SeCatSol)
process. The SeCatSol process is a novel technology being developed at
Washington State University for the selective stage-by-stage deconstruction of
an individual polymer or classes of polymers in a polymer mixture using robust
organocatalysts and heterogeneous catalysts under mild conditions. The SeCatSol
process is designed to address the grand challenge in the plastic industry: how
to deconstruct co-mingled municipal waste plastics selectively. The SeCatSol
process sequentially produces monomers or value-added chemical products in each
catalytic conversion unit, providing a feasible “Chemical Sorting” method to
upcycle the complex municipal plastic mixtures at a molecular level. A
systematic team effort aims at developing highly selective catalysts and
efficient solvents for the SeCatSol process. In particular, the advanced in-situ
and operando characterization tools, such as NMR, ATR-FTIR, and Raman
spectroscopy, will decipher the complexity of deconstructing waste plastics.
Furthermore, novel predictive molecular computational methods will accelerate
catalyst design and solvent selection. The proposed technology framework fits
into a circular economic model that is restorative and regenerative by design.
This project represents the transformative work required for the significant
advancement of fundamental polymer science and engineering
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.