* 2132693
* TRTech-PGR: Development of highly efficient and unconstrained CRISPR systems for plant functional genomics
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Yiping Qi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,205,836.00

Emerging plant genome engineering technologies are tools designed to expand
basic research and translational research. In recent years, different genome
editing tools have been developed for generating targeted mutations in the plant
genome with single base precision. Since agronomic traits are caused by
mutations or DNA variation, genome editing technologies accelerate the breeding
of high yield, nutritious, disease resistant, and climate resilient crops to
meet the demand of an increasing world population and evolving diet. Genome
editing technologies are often used to inactivate or alter gene function. By
contrast, gene activation technologies can enhance gene function, which provide
new means for metabolic engineering and crop improvement. Currently, these
genome engineering tools have limited targeting scope, making many genomic or
gene sequences inaccessible for editing or activation. To overcome this major
bottleneck, we will develop a suite of improved genome engineering tools that
provide more flexibility for targeting and are of high efficiency and precision.
Furthermore, we will convert these new tools into a comprehensive all-in-one
swiss knife-like toolbox so that users can pick appropriate tools for different
genome engineering applications in plants. Such a toolbox will not only
accommodate small scale usage when targeting only one gene at a time, but also
facilitate large-scale genome-wide screens for trait discovery in model plants
and crops. Training future scientists, especially from historically under-
represented groups, is a core mission of this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant researchers have greatly benefited from the rapidly
evolving CRISPR-Cas9, Cas12a, C-to-T base editing and A-to-G base editing
systems. CRISPR-Cas9 has also been repurposed and engineered into efficient gene
activation systems which holds great promise in plant genomics, metabolic
engineering, and crop improvement. However, there are two major limitations. The
first limitation is genome targeting restriction defined by the protospacer
adjacent motifs (PAMs) of Cas9 or Cas12a. The second limitation is a lack of
versatile CRISPR vector systems tailored for genome-wide genetic screens in
plants. To overcome these two major limitations, this project aims to (1)
improve PAM-relaxed genome editing by CRISPR-Cas12a in plants, (2) Improve PAM-
less genome editing by CRISPR-Cas9 in plants, (3) Improve PAM-less base editing
systems in plants, and (4) Convert new CRISPR systems into all-in-one vectors
for large-scale screens in plants. These new genome engineering tools will be
tested in both monocot (e.g., rice) and dicot (e.g., tomato) plants, which
ensure the technologies’ applicable to all plants. These user-friendly CRISPR
vectors will be made available to other researchers through Addgene
(www.addgene.org), to help advance basic and translational research in plants.
The broader impacts of this project include training for undergraduate students
at University of Maryland at College Park and Howard University at Washington (a
premier HBCU). The project also brings STEM training to students from Montgomery
Blair High School and Eleanor Roosevelt High School (ERHS), which enrolls 60-62%
African Americans and 9-12% Hispanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.