* 2132510
* Community College Presidents Initiative - STEM (CCPI STEM)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* George Boggs, Prince George's Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2025
* USD 4,448,629.00

According to the National Science Board, by 2022 the U.S. will experience a
workforce shortage gap of approximately 3.4 million skilled technical jobs. This
and other similar statistics are a call to action for community colleges to
address the impending shortage and existing need for STEM education and
workforce development. This project, the Community College Presidents Initiative
in STEM (CCPI-STEM), serves the national interest through its efforts to
galvanize, enlighten, and inspire community college leadership including college
presidents, board members, and vice presidents to promulgate and support local,
state, and regional STEM Education, NSF ATE funding, and Workforce Development
on their campuses. The project has two major emphases: (a) the important
leadership role of administrators and Boards of Trustees in community college
external funding for STEM education, and (b) the institutional infrastructure
and capacity necessary for effective grant development and implementation,
overcoming challenges to success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four objectives will
guide the execution of this project. First is to catalyze the engagement of
community college presidents, boards of trustees, and other senior
administrators in developing STEM action items for their colleges and
communities. Second is to identify and analyze the needs and issues of interest
and importance to community college leaders by region. Third is to develop and
pilot test instructional curricular materials for existing and future community
college presidents and leaders that will strengthen their understanding of STEM
education issues. Fourth is to strengthen collaborations with the business
community that investigate and promote the economic impact of the ATE program.
Seven Regional Networks (RNs), each led by a community college president in
close collaboration with national organizations including AACC, ACCT, and the
League of Innovation, as well as with representatives of business and industry
will be developed. Each RN will formulate its own list of initiatives with input
from member community colleges, businesses and its community at large. CCPI-STEM
will also work with external organizations, such as Economic Modeling
Specialists Intl. (EMSI) and Burning Glass, to assess the economic impact of ATE
awards in select colleges. Curricular materials on ATE funding and program
implementation will be developed and tested in collaboration with leaders of
community college graduate programs. Diversity, equity, and inclusion in STEM
education will be addressed in the initiatives of the RNs and through the prism
of external funding and institutional infrastructure. CCPI-STEM results will be
broadly disseminated through the RNs, a website, and national, regional and
local conferences and venues. Specific guides and publications, including
“Models that Work,” will be developed and broadly disseminated. The CCPI-STEM
Annual Summit, to be held in conjunction with the AACC National Convention, will
provide a forum for interaction and dissemination on a national level. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.