* 2132922
* Transitions: Mechanical Regulation of Transcription Factor Dynamics, Chromatin Accessibility and Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Arpita Upadhyaya, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2024
* USD 748,910.00

The regulation of gene expression by the mechanical microenvironment, which is
essential for key biological processes such as development, wound healing, and
immune function is poorly understood. In this project, the PI will obtain
training and initiate a new line of research to study the regulation of
transcription by the mechanical properties of the cellular microenvironment. The
knowledge gained will help lead to an understanding of many aspects of cell and
tissue function. The Broader Impacts of the work include the intrinsic merit of
the research as cells encounter complex microenvironments with varied physical
properties and disruption of their ability to sense these properties leads to
pathologies such as cancer progression and metastasis. In addition, graduate
students and undergraduates will be trained in interdisciplinary research. The
PI will also work with programs at University of Maryland to host summer
research programs for students from mid-Atlantic minority-serving institutions
and provide graduate students with experience in mentoring a diverse group of
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable a shift in the research
focus of the PI to a new area at the interface between physics and biology – how
the mechanical microenvironment regulates transcription and gene expression. In
the professional development portion of the project, the PI, and members of her
lab, will learn and implement various techniques for monitoring transcriptional
dynamics in living cells using single molecule imaging and molecular engineering
of reporter systems. The PI and her lab members will also be trained in next
generation sequencing techniques to assess genome wide changes induced by
substrate mechanics. The long-term goal of this work is to apply these
transformative experimental methods and predictive theories to provide insights
into how the mechanical environment affects in gene expression
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.