* 2132318
* A1: Knowledge Network Development Infrastructure with Application to COVID-19 Science and Economics
* TIP,ITE
* 05/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Michael Cafarella, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jemin George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,960,313.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to build infrastructure
for efficient construction of knowledge networks and applications, as well as to
demonstrate the system with concrete knowledge networks that describe COVID-19
science and economics. In the short term, this work will lead to high accuracy
data resources that will be useful to scientists and policy makers in addressing
the virus and its economic impact. Sample goals include enabling a medical
researcher to quickly identify relevant candidate drugs, and a policy maker to
quickly evaluate the likely impacts of a novel law. The project will create
programming tools that will make knowledge networks and their applications far
less expensive to build. This infrastructure of programming tools will
facilitate the creation of a large and novel set of informational tools and will
also significantly expand the set of people who can participate in creating
knowledge network resources. Because knowledge networks combine unique data
analysis qualities with the topical breadth of the entire World Wide Web, the
potential growth of knowledge tools is very large and potentially
transformative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes partnerships with a
strong set of non-academic and academic partners. This convergence research team
will integrate their multidisciplinary expertise in data management, artificial
intelligence, programming languages, biomedical topics relevant to COVID-19, and
economics, with the other domains represented in the projects funded in the
Track A Phase II cohort. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating this knowledge
programming infrastructure and concrete knowledge networks will require solving
several technical challenges. The first is an intelligent “knowledge compilation
layer” that makes useful but rapidly-changing knowledge networks appear to be
stable enough for programmers to use them when writing reliable code. The second
is the creation of a mechanism for transparently sharing knowledge resources and
debugging information within and across organizations. The third is a method for
collecting knowledge provenance metadata — details about how every individual
data element was created — via automatic instrumentation of user software. A
last challenge is the creation of knowledge-from-document systems that can
produce high accuracy knowledge networks with very little explicit human
oversight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.