* 2132353
* CAS-Climate: Understanding the link between regional climate patterns and water supply in the Horn of Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Shuang-Ye Wu, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 04/30/2025
* USD 308,799.00

In recent decades, recurrent severe droughts in the Horn of Africa (HOA) have
led to devastating socio-economic consequences. They have highlighted the need
to understand the current availability and future sustainability of water
resources under climate change in a region dominated by rain-fed subsistence
agriculture. This project aims to establish the link between rain-producing
atmospheric processes and available water resources. It will provide a
comprehensive assessment of how climate change affects rainfall amount and
variability, surface water availability, and groundwater recharge in a
representative watershed in Ethiopia. This knowledge could provide important
insight for the strategic planning of the regionâ€™s long-term sustainable
development, particularly in terms of increasing food security, reducing
vulnerability, and building resilience to climate-related natural disasters. The
project will also foster international research collaboration between the US and
Ethiopian scientists and students, and provide training, mentoring, and career
development for under-represented groups in geological and hydrological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to establish the link between
regional climate patterns and water supply in the Horn of Africa (HOA). This
knowledge is critical in understanding the sustainability of water resources
under climate change in this region. To achieve this, the investigators adopt an
interdisciplinary approach that integrates synoptic climate analysis and isotope
hydro-geochemistry. The main objectives of this project include: (1) identify
rain-producing circulation patterns and establish their inter-and intra-seasonal
variability and past change in response to global warming, (2) establish
distinct isotopic signatures of rainfall from different weather types through
high-resolution precipitation isotope measurements in multiple sites across the
climatic and elevation gradients, and (3) quantify the contribution of rainfall
from different weather types to surface flow and groundwater recharge. The
outcomes of this study will bridge the gap between changes in the large
circulation patterns and their impacts on water resource availability at the
watershed scale. The results can also be used to improve predictions of future
rainfall variability and change, and assessment of future availability of
surface and groundwater resources. In addition, the new water isotope dataset
will provide a baseline for future hydro-climatic research and better
interpretation of isotope climate proxy in the geologic record in a region
important for human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.