* 2132730
* EAGER: Discovering the hidden functional trait diversity of Bees (Apoidea) and predicting functional diversity impacts on rendered ecosystem services
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Israel Del Toro, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,957.00

We often associate pollination with a few external characteristics in bees
(e.g., hairiness &amp; tongue length) but bees are complex organisms with a
plethora of unstudied morphological and physiological traits (e.g., gut
structure, muscular form, and thermal tolerance) that can strongly influence
their effectiveness as pollinators. This project will link unstudied, internal
morphological traits with bee physiological responses. At its core this work
links structure and function with the functional role of bees as pollinators.
MicroCT technology will be used to render high-resolution quantitative imagery
of internal morphological traits. Honeybees will be used as a model system and
the work will be expanded to obtain imaging and an analytical framework of 50
species of wild bees across multiple groups. By linking morphology and
physiology with functional diversity, this work has the potential to shape how
we think about and manage pollinator biodiversity. This work will provide
research and training opportunities to six undergraduate students that will work
on microCT imaging techniques, biological data science and experimental biology
on the physiology of bees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the
associations between functional diversity and morphological and physiological
traits that directly influence the ecosystem service of pollination provided by
bees. The project uses microCT technology to image both honeybees and native
wild bees over the course of two years. Specific emphasis is placed on internal
morphological traits in relation to bee’s physiological responses (e.g.,
respiration and thermal tolerance) to environmental stress and thus ultimately
impact a bee’s efficacy as a pollinator. The PI and undergraduate research
assistants will conduct thermal tolerance and respiration assays on bees to
determine potential links of functional trait morphology with important
physiological responses. This work will provide workforce development
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.