* 2132038
* RII Track-4:NSF: The Epistemology of Agricultural Science
* O/D,OIA
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Julia Bursten, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 01/31/2024
* USD 134,077.00

Non-Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Philosophers of science analyze the
logical and conceptual foundations (i.e. the epistemologies) of scientific
knowledge. Epistemologies of science elucidate why and how science works.
Understanding the nature of science enables philosophers and scientists to work
together to improve scientific methods and further scientific progress, as well
as to employ science to improve the welfare of the nation and the world. This
EPSCoR Research Fellowship will produce the first analysis of the epistemology
of agricultural science. Agricultural science is an interdisciplinary and
applied set of scientific practices that will feature prominently in solutions
to urgent, global 21st-century problems, including the energy crisis and food
shortages anticipated by climate change. Understanding the epistemology of
agricultural science will improve the abilities of scientists and policymakers
to employ the results of agricultural science to solve large-scale social
problems. The PI and a postdoctoral scholar will collect field data, receive
additional training members in science and values, and strengthen an existing
research collaboration at Michigan State University, to advance the PI’s
research on the epistemology of agricultural
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This EPSCoR
Research Fellowship will fund a research residency for the PI and a postdoctoral
scholar to collect field data, receive additional training, and strengthen an
existing research collaboration at Michigan State University (MSU), in order to
advance the PI’s research on the epistemology of agricultural science. The
Fellowship is co-sponsored by the MSU Department of Philosophy, the MSU Socially
Engaged Philosophy of Science (SEPOS) group, and the MSU Center for
Interdisciplinarity. The overall objective of the Fellowship is to accelerate
research in the epistemology of agricultural science by strengthening the
research partnership between philosophers at the University of Kentucky and MSU.
This will be accomplished via two types of research activity: 1) Collaborative
philosophical research with members of the sponsoring institutes. The PI and
postdoc will additionally receive training from SEPOS members in science and
values, a branch of philosophy of science for which MSU and SEPOS are widely
renowned; and 2) Collection of data from philosophical fieldwork on the
agricultural scientific activity being conducted at MSU. The PI employs
fieldwork methods to conduct research, including interviewing and shadowing
practicing agricultural scientists to examine how they generate concepts and
theoretical frameworks. Due to the localized nature of agricultural science,
comparative data across multiple locations, e.g. Kentucky and Michigan, is
required. Analysis of applied science, especially agricultural science,
innovates on the way epistemology of science understands the nature of the
scientific practice. This advances inquiry in the epistemology of science,
particularly impacting existing research in the philosophy of scientific
classification and the study of science and values. This Fellowship will expand
the scope of philosophy of science, and, via the collection of field data, it
will also generate a dataset that will catalyze additional new scholarship in
the epistemology of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.