* 2132591
* EAGER: SUPER: Light-Induced Room-Temperature Superconductivity at Light Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Liang Wu, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports theoretical
and experimental research, and education on using light to induce and probe
superconductivity. In conventional superconductors at sufficiently low
temperature, electrons form a collective quantum mechanical state with unusual
properties including the ability to conduct electricity without resistance.
Superconductivity typically often occurs under seemingly extreme conditions,
appearing either at very low temperatures where some common gases are liquids
or, as recently demonstrated for light-element hydrogen-based compounds, under
very high pressures approaching those found deep in the core of planets.
However, recent experimental advances in laser physics suggest that light, like
pressure, can act as a kind of "knob" to control the electronic behavior of
materials, suggesting a striking alternative possibility of attaining
superconductivity at much higher temperatures or more modest pressures
approaching ambient conditions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this
project is to leverage tailored irradiation with light to study and control
electronic properties of superconducting compounds. While conventional
superconductivity is well-studied in the steady state of equilibrium, the
response of electrons in superconductors to strong external fields such as a
light remains less understood and constitutes the main focus of this combined
theoretical and experimental effort. This project involves the development of
theoretical models to predict the response of light-element superconductors
driven out of equilibrium by targeted excitation of crystal lattice vibrations.
The PIs will focus on classes of carbon and hydrogen bearing materials known as
fullerides and hydrides. A specific aim is to chart pathways to utilize these
vibrational modes as a substitute for pressure, to drive transformations from an
insulating or metallic states to a superconducting state. Experiments will be
performed involving optical spectroscopy measurements as a function of time
synchronized to the time the laser pulse hits the material. Understanding the
responses could help guide theoretical modeling and help in the design of future
generation of electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project includes
several activities beyond standard professorial classroom teaching and mentoring
of postdocs and students. The PIs are working on new course development and new
outreach methods that will be a broad introduction of quantum materials to the
STEM students and the general public. Particularly, first-generation college
undergraduates will be involved in research problem to give them a sense of
modern research in superconducting quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
EAGER award focuses on the use of light to induce superconductivity in light-
element quantum materials. While unconventional cuprate superconductors hold the
record for highest superconducting transition temperature at ambient conditions,
a series of recent experiments demonstrated high transition temperatures in
light-element conventional superconductors. These range from the fullerides to
hydrides with landmark near-room-temperature superconductivity under pressure.
While superconductivity in these materials requires extremely high pressures,
recently a series of seminal experiments on cuprates, organic charge-transfer
salts, and hydrides suggest that irradiation with optical pulses can in
principle provide an alternative way to induce long-lived superconducting
signatures out of equilibrium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to demonstrate theoretically and experimentally that light can effectively be a
substitute in the role of external pressure and induce a non-equilibrium
superconducting state at much reduced pressures and high temperatures. To this
end, the PIs will perform theoretical modeling and optical-pump terahertz-probe
experiments on two classes of compounds, the fullerides and hydrides. For the
former, a key aim is the experimental demonstration and theoretical description
of a light-induced insulator-superconductor transition in the Mott-Jahn-Teller
insulator out of equilibrium and at elevated temperatures, with emphasis on
mimicking the role of external pressure through selective optical excitation of
phonons. For the latter, the PIs aim to demonstrate light induced
superconductivity in hydrides under pressure. To achieve a controlled
enhancement of electronic pairing, the PIs will investigate theoretically and
experimentally, targeted excitation of the phonon spectrum in these materials
and the role of anharmonicities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will represent an advance in the understanding of quantum phases driven
far out of equilibrium and may open new research directions towards achieving
light-element superconductivity at ambient conditions. Educational contributions
include the integration of teaching and learning activities that will enable
K-12 students and the general public to see macroscopic quantum phenomena
outside of research laboratories and to raise their awareness of the STEM fields
involved. These activities include mentoring postdocs and first-generation
college undergraduate students, as well as working with the Franklin Institute
Science Museum to perform demos onsite and record the videos into interactive
virtual learning programming for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.