* 2133397
* SBIR Phase II: Integrating Cognitive and Self-Regulatory Strategies to Improve Secondary Mathematics Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Nancy Weinstein, MINDPRINT LEARNING, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,157,935.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project will be improvements in math instruction, engagement, and outcomes
through a holistic approach to supporting social-emotional (SE), cognitive, and
academic skills in general education classrooms. By integrating these sources of
student-specific data, teachers will be able to effectively identify and address
additional factors that interfere with understanding, retention, motivation and
engagement, all of which are critical to academic outcomes. This data-driven,
scalable approach will pinpoint individual causes of students' mathematics
struggles and provide evidence-based, personalized interventions. The potential
to improve stagnant mathematics achievement outcomes at scale would translate
directly into economic benefits to the country. The innovation is expected to
have the greatest effect on minorities and girls whose motivation and engagement
in STEM are disproportionately impacted by implicit biases and stereotype
threat. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will enable teachers with the data to address student
variability across cognitive, SE, and academic skills, leading to increases in
student engagement and math achievement. This project leverages research that
cognitive assessment and student SE self-reports can explain over 60% of middle
school math outcomes. This project will demonstrate the specific evidence-based,
personalized interventions for engagement, social-emotional learning, and
academic instruction to improve math outcomes for individualized learner
profiles. This approach will advance the current state of research on engagement
by addressing individual differences in cognitive and SE skills. This research
will feature a longitudinal randomized control trial with a large sample
representing a broad range of socio-economic status, race, and ethnicity. This
rigorous design will develop the predictive validity and ability to effectively
address learner variability, as well as demonstrate outcomes in diverse student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.