* 2133017
* EAGER: Unravelling the Spatiotemporal Dynamics of Three-Phase Contact Line on Soft Surfaces by Transmission X-Ray Microscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Jiangtao Cheng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

Understanding and controlling the complex dynamics of liquid droplets that
impact and spread over solid surfaces has intrigued scientists for more than a
century because of the potential applications these phenomena have in broad
areas of technology, including fuel combustion, spray coating, pesticide
deposition, and inkjet printing. However, most research has considered impact
and spreading over rigid synthetic surfaces with uniform textures, which is not
the case, for example, in most biological systems. As a result, it remains
challenging to predict the behaviors and outcomes of droplet impact on soft
surfaces, mainly due to the complexity of the dynamic processes that occur at
the droplet rim and the three-phase (solid-liquid-air) contact zone. The goal of
this EAGER project is to uncover the fundamental mechanisms that govern contact
line dynamics on soft substrates. To examine the details of contact line motion,
the researchers will use ultrafast transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM). As a
powerful and non-destructive tool, TXM will provide unprecedented spatial and
temporal resolutions by imaging multiphase topography and transport in otherwise
opaque media. The outcome of this project will have a broad impact on a variety
of fields. New research opportunities from this project will be integrated with
educational endeavours involving underrepresented college students and high
school students in western Virginia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-phase contact
line dynamics on soft surfaces is a ubiquitous process, and its underlying
mechanism is of significant scientific and technological importance. TXM offers
unprecedented temporal and spatial resolutions, phase-contrast with the edge-
enhancement capability, and ultrahigh and nondestructive penetrability to
examine three-phase contact line dynamics on soft materials. Soft substrates
with well-characterized flexibility and elasticity will be fabricated. Liquid
droplet impact dynamics will be examined with TXM. By visualizing contact line
topology and tracking its dynamic evolution, droplet interfacial dynamics
including elasto-viscous effects, contact line friction and dissipation on soft
surfaces will be revealed for complex, mobile, multiphase and soft liquid-solid
interfaces. By imaging the air nanobubbles that may be trapped under an
advancing contact line, the mechanism of contact line slip may be revealed. The
proposed efforts could not only advance our understanding of the underlying
physics governing multiphase interfacial transport on soft surfaces, but also
open a new avenue to developing novel bio-inspired interfacial materials and
provide guidelines on modifying elasto-viscous properties for controlling
droplet impact behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.