* 2133818
* URoL:EN Quantifying the phytochemical landscape through Indigenous Knowledge, interaction diversity, genomics, and network dynamics
* BIO,EF
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2026
* Tod Swanson, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,999,552.00

This project seeks to understand emerging network dynamics from global to
molecular scales through convergent research that spans the most recent
methodological advances in biology, chemistry, mathematics, anthropology, and
traditional indigenous knowledge. The proposal specifically focuses on the
effects of harvesting balsa wood from Amazonian rainforests for wind-turbine
production in China on forest biodiversity and indigenous communities. The main
objectives are to: 1) enhance knowledge of forest species ecological and
chemical interactions through indigenous knowledge of biodiversity and medicinal
plant value, 2) measure the effects of balsa-harvesting on these species
interaction networks, and 3) use mathematical modeling to generalize these
processes and make predictions about ecosystem resilience and sustainability.
The project will be in collaboration with indigenous community members and will
incorporate their traditional knowledge of plant and animal species as part of
an integrated research team. This project directly increases our understanding
of the rules of life by gaining insight into the genetic, chemical and
ecological mechanisms at all scales of organization that maintain biodiversity
in tropical systems and predicting the subsequent effects on ecosystem
resilience in a changing environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantifying how
phytochemical and genetic variation are jointly structured across the landscape
and contribute to the maintenance of biodiversity can contribute substantially
to understanding this rule of life: the resiliency of complex ecosystems can be
predicted from carefully quantified genetics, ecological interactions, and
disturbances, many of which are mediated through biochemical networks. The
proposal specifically focuses on the effects of harvesting balsa wood for wind-
turbine production in China from Amazonian rainforests, and the research will
examine the effects of forest disruptions on Kichwa and Waorani communities and
on the phytochemistry and diversity associated with the tropical pepper shrub,
Piper. The proposed project will examine how these systems are linked across
multiple scales, from global networks focused on producing sustainable energy,
to networks of interactions with the indigenous peoples whose livelihoods and
medicinal plant communities are affected by those production networks, to the
ecological, chemical, and genetic networks that are the basis of species
interactions with plant communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.