* 2133424
* Collaborative Research: Coastal Cloud Chemistry during the Eastern Pacific Cloud Aerosol Precipitation Experiment (EPCAPE-CCC)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Suzanne Paulson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2025
* USD 291,231.00

This project is focused on the study of cloud chemistry in support of
improvements in how cloud formation is represented in climate models. A suite of
advanced chemical measurements will be made at the Scripps Pier and at nearby
Mt. Soledad to augment the Department of Energy’s Eastern Pacific Cloud Aerosol
Precipitation Experiment (EPCAPE) campaign to be conducted in La Jolla
California from February 2023 to January 2024. This effort will provide an
unprecedented characterization of cloud chemical processing that is expected to
help reduce a major uncertainty in climate model
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project adds advanced chemical
characterization of clouds to EPCAPE by leveraging recent instrument
developments of single-particle mass spectrometry techniques, miniaturized
static thermal gradient cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) instruments, and a
custom-designed instrument for measuring aqueous hydroxyl (OH) radicals formed
in nascent cloud droplets (the OH "burst"). The sampling strategy enables
testing of the following hypotheses: (1) The subset of the aerosol population
that is activated to cloud droplets is chemically distinct from the unactivated
particles, and its size-resolved chemical composition is further differentiated
by adding aqueous-oxidized components that can be identified in single-particle
mass fragments. The chemical changes lower the activation supersaturation
required for subsequent activation of particles, which in turn may affect cloud
structure and drop distributions. (2) Gas-phase compounds that are removed by
denuding will lower the supersaturation required for activation of each particle
by enhancing water solubility during the uptake process. The effect is expected
to depend on the amount of pollution influence, on the composition and
concentration of gaseous species, and on particle size. (3) Particles with
longer times between cloud cycles will produce a larger OH burst, and as a
result, larger changes to particle chemical composition during cloud cycling.
The OH burst activity, together with the availability of gas phase species will
explain much of the variation in the chemical changes observed between cloud
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort includes the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in instrument maintenance and measurement analyses to
prepare the next generation of scientists for conducting atmospheric
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.