* 2133379
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: A Community-Based Framework to Develop Shared Micromobility for Affordable-Accessible Housing (SMILIES)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Sarah Hernandez, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project presents SMILIES (Shared MicromobIlity for affordabLe-accessIblE
houSing): a community-engaged pilot project to improve accessibility to jobs and
essential services for residents of affordable housing communities by leveraging
the explosive growth of shared micromobility services (SMM). SMM includes
community usage of bikes and scooters, including electric ('e') versions.
Affordable-accessible housing is increasingly scarce in the U.S., particularly
in small and mid-sized cities in rural areas. As these cities offer only limited
public transportation options, low-income residents living in those areas may
struggle to access jobs and essential services. Thus, transportation solutions
that consider but do not rely on transit to improve the accessibility of low-
income workers in small and mid-sized cities in rural areas should be
investigated. SMM is emerging as a popular mode for recreation in large
metropolitan areas but has yet to be leveraged as an innovative solution for
jobs-housing transportation in affordable housing communities. The proposed SMM
pilot project generated through community engagement will fill this critical gap
by quantifying the impact of SMM on accessibility to jobs and essential
activities for affordable housing communities. This contribution is significant
because it would introduce strategies and policies to guide local governments,
community champions, and SMM operators in efficient management of SMM services
while ensuring the benefits are available and accessible to low-income
residents, ultimately promoting social equity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this project is to design and evaluate an SMM system for affordable
housing communities through a community-engaged research-centered pilot project.
This objective will be accomplished through a Community-Based Participatory
Action Research (CBPAR) methodology, supported with quantifiable models to
estimate the impacts of SMM on household travel and costs as well as the latent
demand for SMM services. The CBPAR team for this project includes diverse
stakeholders from universities, public planning and transportation agencies,
local businesses, and SMM vendors. The proposed research is transformative as it
will leverage community engagement to first design a community-centered SMM
system and then conduct real-world pilot deployments under community-defined
conditions. The pilot is to be deployed in Fort Smith, Arkansas, a mid-sized
city with high incidents of poverty and racial diversity, and a history of
transportation challenges centered on access to jobs and essential services
attributable to a lack of public transit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge, which is a collaboration of NSF,
Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.