* 2133179
* Designing Novel Tunable Colloids Via Inverse Statistical Mechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Salvatore Torquato, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2024
* USD 463,485.00

The design of many advanced materials relies on the ability to devise building
blocks, such as colloids and polymers, that interact with each other in specific
ways to self-organize and form materials with novel electronic, mechanical, or
optical properties. Scientists and engineers predict this process by specifying
an interaction potential between the building blocks and then computing the
material structure and its properties that arise from self-organization. This
award will support theoretical and computational research to discover new
materials using the opposite or ”inverse” approach. In the inverse approach,
designers start by specifying the desired material structure and properties and
then discover the required interactions between the building blocks that will
produce the desired structure. The project will emphasize finding interactions
that can be realized experimentally by combining currently available colloidal
interactions. Hence, the results should provide guidance to experimentalists to
fabricate designer colloids. The inverse approach will provide new ways to
control the degree of order/disorder of the material to achieve novel
properties, which will accelerate the discovery of materials by design. The
project will support training of graduate students and will provide
opportunities for undergraduates to participate in research. Algorithms
resulting from the research will be made freely available to researchers and
will be used to enhance student education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research for materials discovery by
inverse statistical-mechanical optimization techniques, which allows for a new
mode of thinking about the structure and physical properties of condensed phases
of matter. A major aim of this project is to further develop and apply inverse
statistical mechanics to yield optimized potentials, both isotropic and
anisotropic, including those subject to the constraint that they are
experimentally realizable in colloidal systems. Such soft matter systems provide
a rich testbed to study self-assembly, since both repulsive and attractive
interactions can be tuned (e.g., excluded-volume repulsions, depletion
interactions, Van der Waals forces, forces induced by functionalizing the
particle surface, and electrostatic repulsions) and therefore offer a panoply of
possible potentials that far extends the range offered by molecular systems.
Potential functions, for both single and multicomponent systems, will be
“tailored” to achieve the robust self-assembly of unique targeted crystal,
liquid and amorphous states of matter, including exotic disordered hyperuniform
systems. Examples of materials that will be designed include novel disordered
materials for photonics and structural color, materials with exotic
electromagnetic and elastodynamic properties, and materials with optimal
transport and mechanical properties. Both equilibrium and nonequilibrium routes
will be employed to achieve colloidal and particulate systems with novel
physical properties. Finally, the outcomes of this project are expected to have
the far-reaching benefit of providing guidance to experimentalists to fabricate
designer colloids with optimized interactions and to fabricate optimized
disordered hyperuniform materials via 3D printing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.