* 2133138
* ASCENT: Ultra-high Throughput Neural Recording using Flexible, Polymer-based Shanks as Terahertz Dielectric Waveguides
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Brain Machine Interfaces (BMI) are used to record the electrical signals of the
neurons in the brain and gain insights into the complex processes occurring in
the brain and nervous system. This understanding is crucial to repair or augment
cognitive and/or sensory and motor functions, which might be necessary, e.g.,
due to damage to the brain sustained by injuries or diseases. Traditional
recording by electroencephalography (EEG) or functional magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) is too crude, cumbersome, and slow for many of these tasks;
therefore, BMIs with implanted microelectrodes need to be used. However, state
of the art implantable electrode arrays (IEAs) made from rigid silicon not only
have short lifetimes but can also damage the brain tissue and cause scar
formation. Recently, IEAs have been developed using flexible polymer-based
shanks which minimize tissue damage during implantation, significantly
increasing safety and paving the way towards long-term recording. Unfortunately,
the number of electrodes, and thus the amount of data that can be recorded, is
very limited. To pave the way for new basic science discoveries in neuroscience
and the development of new, safe BMIs to treat individuals with brain injury or
disease, this project introduces a new, completely wireless approach that has
virtually unlimited data bandwidth for communicating data outside of the brain
and enables safe, long term brain recording via biocompatible, flexible polymer
electrodes. The system is expected to have a huge impact on advancing the state-
of-the-art in IEA technology by enabling, for the first time ever, safe and
high-density neural recording over multiple year-long durations. The
technological advances in hybrid silicon-polymer fabrication and chip-to-chip
communication via polymer waveguides will also hold scientific and practical
application value in their own right.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major problem
facing brain machine interfaces is achieving both high data throughput and long
lifespans when recording neural activity. To overcome current limitations on
recording density and lifetime, this project will develop and prototype a new
implantable electrode array technology that combines active silicon
complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)-based electrodes with a
biocompatible polymer shank. The Parylene C polymer is flexible and can be
microfabricated such that multiple custom, fully wireless CMOS neural recording
chiplets can be arranged along the length of each shank. The polymer shank,
acting as a dielectric waveguide, will carry both red light and Terahertz (THz)
radio-frequency energy from outside the brain to the chiplets for power
harvesting and backscatter data communication, respectively, obviating the need
for wires. On-chip photodiodes will rectify the incident optical light for
powering each chip, and on-chip THz antennas will be used to modulate the
locally recorded and amplified neuronal data onto the THz carrier signal inside
the polymer shank via backscatter communication. Extensive modeling will be done
of the electromagnetic characteristics of the polymer shank waveguides at both
optical and THz wavelengths in order to optimize the shank cross-section and
design of the THz surface coupling antennas for maximizing system efficiency and
communication bandwidth. Each chiplet will contain a dense neural recording
electrode array with active amplification, filtering, and spike detection
circuitry for recording, digitizing, and compressing neuronal data before
modulating it on the THz carrier signal and sending it to the base via the
polymer shank waveguide. Importantly, this paradigm achieves a completely
wireless system that maximizes the number of neural recording sites and
contributes a new hybrid silicon-polymer architecture capable of efficient,
high-bandwidth quasi-optical chip-to-chip
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.