* 2133187
* Collaborative Research: Two-photon absorption engineering in laser diodes for ultrafast pulse generation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Seth Bank, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Semiconductor lasers are one of the most impactful photonic technologies on the
market, with applications ranging from communications to medicine. However, the
amount of power that can be obtained from short pulses of light remains low,
despite decades of research. The problem is due to physical constraints, which
the project will address through an interdisciplinary effort combing emerging
materials synthesis with advanced optical physics to create short pulses with
power well beyond the current state of the art. This will enable significant
advances in both scientific understanding and practical performance, and will
yield sources ideal for applications ranging from laser radar for autonomous
vehicle navigation to advanced microscopy. The project will further benefit
society by integrating research results with education through courses, and into
an online course that was launched as part of the University of Colorado
Boulder's Master of Science in Electrical Engineering (an online Master's
degree). Additional dissemination and engagement will occur through avenues
ranging from undergraduate research opportunities, a diversity, equity, and
inclusion seminar series, ECEE Connects at the University of Colorado Boulder,
as well as science events at the Texas School for the
Deaf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinearities like two-photon absorption limit
semiconductor lasers in both the high power CW and ultrashort pulse arenas,
constraining the available peak powers, pulse widths, and pulse energies. For
pulsed sources, dispersion compensation provides some improvement; however,
less-compact alternatives, such as fiber and solid-state lasers currently offer
vastly superior performance. This project will combine recent advances in
crystal growth and optical laser pulse shaping techniques to solve these issues
and dramatically advance the performance of semiconductor ultrafast sources.
Specifically. high-bandgap semiconductor cladding layers can now be epitaxially
integrated with longer-wavelength gain media to reduce two-photon absorption by
orders of magnitude. When coupled with a new pulse shaping mechanism and pulse
stacking, it is anticipated that this approach will enable kW peak powers and
femtosecond pulses on a chip-scale semiconductor platform. The impact of the
project will be further enhanced through a number of engagements and outreach
activities and undergraduate research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.