* 2133779
* I-Corps: Developing technology for social-emotional learning for young children
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Nicholas Haber, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is making social
and emotional learning (SEL) accessible and fun for children worldwide. Social
and emotional learning starts at home and caregivers play a significant role in
SEL. Social and emotional development at preschool and kindergarten ages is
particularly important because even though social and emotional skills are
progressive, developing these skills at these early ages helps children get
ready for school, and perform better academically and socially. While some
children have various play and collaboration opportunities at their home and
preschools, some do not. The project will not only help children develop SEL
skills, but also help parents and teachers learn more about social and emotional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project includes a new learning
technology for social-emotional learning. It will enable children to transform
abstract emotions into tangible objects they can learn from and share. The
technology uses artificial intelligence to recognize the objects created by the
children and then creates digital content that strengthens social-emotional
intelligence. This technology can be used to strengthen child engagement with
existing learning tools. The resulting data will benefit social-emotional
learning research and will help children develop skills that are crucial for
their current and future wellbeing. The technology approaches the world of
social and emotional learning through a constructionist approach where learners
will be able to interact with abstract thoughts and emotions. Most existing
technologies in this space do not require user engagement and use passive
learning techniques. With this technology, children are empowered and excited to
actively participate and engage, while parents can discover insights and trends
into their children's day to day experiences and emotional expression
habits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.