* 2133323
* 79th Device Research Conference. To Be Held Virtually June 20-23, 2021.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Shaloo Rakheja, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Description: This project will use NSF support to increase student
participation and enhance technical training at the 79th Device Research
Conference (DRC), which brings together researchers from around the world to
share their latest findings in the areas of electronic, opto-electronic, and
quantum-based semiconductor devices. The 2021 DRC will be held virtually from
June 20 to 23, 2021, and all participants will join remotely. The DRC offers
unique training and networking opportunities particularly to its student and
young investigator attendees, helping them advance their careers in materials
science, semiconductor technology, and device engineering. The DRC is committed
to fostering greater diversity and equity for all attendees and at all levels.
By stimulating an open and frank discussion of recent breakthroughs and advances
in electronic and photonic devices, the DRC will remove barriers for
underrepresented minority groups and also support the NSF’s Diversity Mission
related to “preparing a diverse, globally engaged science, technology,
engineering and mathematics workforce.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description: The 2021 DRC will feature three plenary talks from world-renowned
researchers in heterogeneous integration, III-nitride technology, and van der
Waals materials. The conference will include presentations on devices for IoT,
spintronic devices, memory devices, RF and terahertz devices, thin-film devices,
and heterogeneous integration. In addition to plenary talks and oral
presentations, the 2021 DRC will offer a half-day technical shortcourse in the
area of “Quantum Computing Devices and Materials” taught by prominent experts
from academia and industry. The 2021 DRC will also feature a rump session titled
“Ferroelectric-based devices: What is the future?” to engage the audience in a
vigorous and open discussion on the future of ferroelectric devices. The
conference program, including the rump session and the shortcourse, will greatly
enhance the usefulness of the conference to all attendees. The information will
be disseminated through online video presentations, downloadable posters and the
conference proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.