* 2133405
* MoCeIS-DCL: Planning Workshops for Synthesis of Massively Parallel Assays and Molecular Physiology
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Liana Lareau, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 91,415.00

A diverse group of experimentalists, theorists, and computational experts will
meet to design a communication framework that will maximize data sharing and
integration and therefore current investments in research in the molecular
biosciences. Workshop attendees will be tasked with a challenging question: how
can one assemble the enormous amounts of data produced by distinct technologies,
to answer apparently unrelated questions, so that one might see something beyond
what the original experiments that produced the data sought to explore? Is there
a way to synthesize the data acquired in distinct, individually focused
experiments in such a way that one may obtain a global understanding of how
multiple cellular processes are coordinately orchestrated? Could one then
understand how distinct processes communicate, or regulate each other across
multiple spatial, temporal, and energetic scales? A strategy to answer these
questions can significantly increase the information one can extract from
experimental data, and will ensure the participation of diverse investigators
with their distinct perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An unassembled mosaic of
molecular physiology lies waiting to be synthesized from Massively Parallel (MP)
Assays and high-throughput (HT) experiments, which have revolutionized molecular
and cellular biology over the past decade. Three technologies underlie the
hundreds of variants of these assays: Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS), mass
spectrometry, and to a lesser extent, fluorescence. NGS-based MP assays, for
example, can measure nearly all aspects of transcription, translation, and RNA
degradation â€“ from the location of every genome-bound transcription factor, DNA
and RNA polymerase, every transcriptome-bound ribosome and ribosome bound factor
at each stage of transcription and translation at nucleotide resolution, and the
relative abundance of each mRNA. Mass spectrometry can report on interacting
cellular components as well as their structural properties, while fluorescence
techniques can monitor the real time location and kinetics of transcription and
translation within cells. When coupled with pulse-chase strategies or high-
throughput mutagenesis, these techniques can measure the rates of subcellular
processes, detect essential molecular interactions, and characterize connections
between genotype and phenotype. Thus, combining the nucleotide resolution of
NGS-based techniques with the compositional and structural information from mass
spec, and the spatio-temporal measurements from fluorescence, provides an
opportunity for a multi-dimensional mosaic of molecular physiology to be created
and synthesized with the quantitative and physical approaches characterizing
NSF-MCB funded researchers. Furthermore, advances in artificial intelligence
offers the opportunity to accelerate synthesis from these diverse datasets. A
series of workshops to identify how the community can most efficiently use these
data to promote synthesis will be held.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.