* 2133655
* NSF-AoF: Impact of user, environment, and artificial surfaces on above-100 GHz wireless communications
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Andreas Molisch, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2024
* USD 490,000.00

Over the past 30 years, wireless data rates have increased continuously, from 10
kbit/s in early digital systems to more than 1 Gbit/s in 5G. This trend will
continue for 6G systems, with more than 100 Gbit/s required for new applications
such as holographic communications. Such high data rates will require the use of
previously unused spectrum with very high carrier frequency, called the
Terahertz spectrum, because only in this frequency range is there enough
bandwidth to enable the high data rates. A major challenge at these very high
frequencies is that coverage is much more spotty, and can be more easily
interrupted by small objects, and even by the person holding the wireless
device, than at lower frequencies. This project will therefore firstly develop
tools to assess the coverage and reliability of such Terahertz systems, and
secondly, will create new technology for improving performance, through the
development of smart wall coverings that can redirect wireless signals. Together
with the appropriate deployment planning tools (e.g., where to put the access
point), these developments will constitute a significant step towards enabling
ultra-high-data-rate wireless services at lower cost. The project will
contribute to workforce development by creating research experiences, involving
both theory and experiments, for a diverse team of both undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, several aspects of the
100-500 GHz wireless systems will be covered: (i) The modeling of antenna arrays
in portable devices and wave propagation environments under realistic
operational conditions; this includes the effects of user hand, head, and body
being close to the antennas, which are particularly important at high
frequencies; (ii) The design of novel aggregate reflection surfaces and
waveguiding surfaces that effectively transfer energy from one device to another
in non-line-of-sight (non-LOS) conditions, and the measurement of their
performance; (iii) The development of new point-cloud based tools for predicting
coverage with dramatically increased accuracy under reasonable runtime -- this
is important not only for planning deployment but also to improve the
understanding of the nature of wave propagation at these high frequencies; and
(iv) Coverage optimization through neural networks and deep learning -- the
massive amount of propagation data generated through the point-cloud based tools
will be used to train these neural networks, thereby allowing the performance of
a particular deployment to be assessed, and the locations of access points and
reflective surfaces to be optimized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.