* 2133336
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B Convergence, Inventory, Matching, and Assignment (CIMA) to Optimize Post-event Housing Repair for Displaced Vulnerable Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Joshua Behr, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,900.00

Severe weather events have the potential to inflict wide-spread structural
damage to homes, resulting in population displacement. Displaced households
suffer enormously. The length of time between initial displacement and
returning, once again, to stable housing varies greatly across populations, with
low-to-moderate income households and medically fragile households tending to
have lengthy displacements. Following an event, volunteer labor and donated
materials flow into the impacted region. However, the matching of supply
(donated materials and volunteer labor) with the need for repair among
particularly vulnerable households is less than optimal. It is essential to
more-optimally match supply with the need so that lengthy displacement times
common among vulnerable households will be meaningfully reduced, thus addressing
fundamental inequities in recovery and wellbeing. This project will develop,
pilot, and field the Convergence, Inventory, Matching, and Assignment (CIMA)
platform to provide this needed capability. CIMA, when used by nonprofit
recovery organizations, will increase efficiency in matching supply with need
and promises to meaningfully decrease displacement times among vulnerable
households. The project will have multiple societal impacts. It will (a) lessen
disparities in displacement times and, by extension, lessen longer-term
disparities in health and wellbeing; (b) advance equity and justice issues in
recovery; (c) partner with underserved communities; and (d) support the training
of graduate students inclusive of racial and ethnic minorities and
females.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will progress through high-level
conceptual, implementation, and execution stages. More precisely, the CIMA
architecture is a decentralized, stateless system conforming with
Representational State Transfer (REST) in the creation of the underlying
client/server protocols and Application Programmer Interfaces (APIs). The CIMA
development and fielding processes shall (a) advance research in optimization
and scheduling algorithms; (b) improve user experience interfaces consistent
with user needs and expectations; (c) perform internal and external validation;
and (d) stress test CIMA against common storm assumptions as well as outlier
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the joint CIVIC
Innovation Challenge program which includes Department of Energy Vehicle
Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology
Directorate, Federal Emergency Management Agency, and the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.