* 2133595
* RI: Small: From a Machine Detector to a Machine Detective:  Decisions and Queries with Uncertain and Incomplete Information
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Junier Oliva, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Much of machine learning is devoted to unrealistic, sterile settings where all
relevant information for a prediction task has been pre-recorded and fed to
one’s algorithm. This is incongruous with many real-world problems where
predictions and decisions must be made with incomplete and muddied information.
Moreover, the current machine learning paradigm is unprepared for the automated
future where algorithmic agents are not just passively given information, but
instead are able to actively obtain information from their environment as they
make decisions. This project will extend past the current paradigm to develop a
‘machine detective’, a system that is capable of reasoning with incomplete
instances and interacting with the environment to obtain new information, or new
clues, on-the-fly as it is making decisions. The project shall not only increase
machines’ predictive abilities in domains like health-care where recorded data
is abounding with missing values, but shall also enable more efficient and
robust predictions in interactive domains like computerized adaptive testing for
education assessment and customer-service/troubleshooting chatbots where the
machine can interact with a user (or the environment) to obtain new and relevant
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work stemming from this award will serve
as the underpinnings to intelligent agents that reason robustly about their
decision-making process and weigh the cost of an incorrect prediction (e.g., a
false positive or false negative) and the cost (e.g., in time, risk, or money)
of obtaining additional information. This extends the typical paradigm in
machine learning to give machines the ability to sequentially query for
unobserved features to make more certain predictions through the following aims.
First, the project develops methods that may infer with partially observed
instances through novel generative models that learn conditional dependencies
among features. Second, the learned dependencies are used as a foundation to
learn non-greedy policies for acquiring informative unobserved features of a
particular instance on hand. Lastly, the project builds models that may acquire
data over a spatial-temporal domain, where features are indexed by spatial
coordinates (e.g., when collecting information in the field), or are indexed by
time (e.g., when collecting from sensors at specific
moments).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.