* 2133252
* I-Corps: Automatic mood tracker that analyzes facial expressions and emotions  against social media activity during social media engagement
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Gregory Lewis, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an accurate mood detection technology to address social media
impacts on young adult patients' mental health. According to the National
Institute of Mental Health, young adults aged 18-25 years had a higher incidence
of mental illness (29.4%) compared to adults aged 26-49 years (25%) and those
aged 50 and older (14.1%). The proposed technology will focus on facial
recognition and facial expression to track emotions using a software
application. Non-contact sensors used to detect mood decline may have
significant application to health and wellness. In addition, enabling biometrics
such as facial recognition and facial expressions may have significant impact on
education, marketing, and surveillance. The proposed technology may address the
problem for both the practitioners and their patients and provide a tool for
impacting wellness and treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of an automatic mood tracker that analyzes facial
expressions and emotions during social media engagement. The proposed software
accesses the end-users webcam (with their permission) and uses emotion
artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms to analyze facial micro-
expressions. When a neutral or negative expression is emoted, the software
captures screenshots of social media content and saves it onto the user’s
dashboard for self-reflection. In addition, the user’s emotions are analyzed in
real time using facial expressions and averaged on the user’s dashboard as an
emotional score for their daily mood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.