* 2133577
* Workshop for Writing Grants for Early Career Scholars in STEM and Learning Sciences Focused on Racial Equity
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Eli Tucker-Raymond, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Deena Khalil
* 08/31/2022
* USD 88,565.00

Persistent racial injustices and inequities in the United States and in STEM
fields underscore the need for creative, research-based approaches to address
these concerns. In particular, creative approaches are needed for studying and
addressing racial injustices and inequities in STEM education, where racial
equity and STEM learning are both given careful and thoughtful consideration.
This project focuses on supporting emerging scholars who have new ideas and
approaches for approaching racial equity in their scholarship and work. This
workshop, implemented as a series of sessions over the course of a year, will
support early career scholars in STEM education and the learning sciences in
preparing proposals to submit to the National Science Foundation. The workshop
is designed to serve scholars who are within five years of obtaining their PhD
and who have never before been principal investigator or co-principal
investigator of a federally-funded grant. Participants will include early career
scholars who focus their work on racial equity. Too often, such scholars have
indicated that they have received little to no training on writing grant
proposals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten participants will be supported by the
project through a year-long series of workshops that include different aspects
of the grant writing process including reading through a solicitation, writing a
narrative, and creating a budget. In addition to these workshop sessions, the
project approach also considers the importance of a professional network and of
mentoring, informed by a Communities of Practice theoretical framework and
existing research on mentoring practices. As such, each early career scholar
will be paired with a senior mentor in the field whose work is aligned with the
mentee's. The outcomes of the workshop for early career scholars will include a
complete or nearly complete proposal that is aligned with one of the programs
within the NSF's Division of Research on Learning. The workshop will highlight
strategies for developing CAREER proposals along with considerations for
preparing proposals for other programs. More generally, the workshop will create
a model for supporting and mentoring early career scholars in proposing STEM
education projects centered in racial equity work and will be able to identify
areas of need for successful grant proposal writing. All workshop materials will
be made freely available to the general public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. This
project is also funded through the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL), CS
for All: Research and RPPs, and Innovative Technology Experiences for Students
and Teachers (ITEST) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.