* 2133398
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Hoomalu Halelea - Community-led Innovation for Integrated Flood Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Yinphan Tsang, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,699.00

In this project, a team of academic and community partners will combine diverse
methods and sources of knowledge of watershed changes over time to enhance
community resilience to increasing threats of extreme flooding in coastal
communities. Like other locales around the world, the project's site of Halelea,
a rural district on Island of Kauai, Hawaii, is on the cusp of the climate
crisis. In April 2018, an extreme rain event in Halelea set a new US 24-hr
rainfall record (49.7‚Äù) and caused $19.7M in losses due to flooding. Since then,
flooding and landslides have reoccurred frequently. Traditional knowledge and
oversight of water resources, built across generations, is no longer sufficient
due to changes in rainfall, species invasion, and land use change. In
collaboration with community members, nonprofits who have led flood and disaster
response, and the Kauai Emergency Management Agency, this project will enhance
resilience to increasing flood risk in coastal communities by strengthening
connections of community members with one another and their environment, as well
as with local government, tourists, and newer residents. Additionally, the team
is distilling best practices in developing an inclusive, community-based
environmental management approach for coastal areas and participating in on-
going knowledge sharing with coastal communities including the Pacific Islands
and the continental US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this project is to
enhance social and ecological community resilience to increasing flood risk by
linking Indigenous knowledge, local observations of ecological change, and data
from scientific instrumentation. This approach will improve capacity for
mountain-to-sea watershed management, while connecting future generations to
their responsibilities for reciprocal care. The work addresses the following
specific project goals: (1) Collaborative Research: Work with community members
to integrate diverse methods and sources of knowledge of watershed changes over
time to enhance local level care and management of streams; (2) Restoration:
Enhance effectiveness of stream clearing and restoration efforts; (3) Monitoring
and Communication: Improve availability of historical and real-time
hydrometeorological data to enhance understanding of flood hazards, and promote
use of social media to improve community connectedness before, during, and after
extreme events; and (4) Community Education and Training: Provide classes and
educational material, in community-identified topics, to enhance holistic
resilience to future climate-change induced disasters. This project is part of
the Civic Innovation Challenge, a collaboration between NSF, the Department of
Energy's Vehicle Technology Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.