* 2133576
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Advancing Sustainable and Distributed Fertilizer Production (CASFER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Yang Shao-Horn, Texas Tech University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,500,000.00

The NSF Engineering Research Center for Advancing Sustainable and Distributed
Fertilizer Production (CASFER) will strive to solve one of the most pressing
problems facing humankind: how do we feed the growing world population while
protecting and sustaining our environment? By 2050, the world population will
exceed 10.5 billion, increasing the demand for food by 70%, with only an
additional 10% land available for agriculture. To meet this demand, nitrogen-
based fertilizers (NBFs) are required for the formation of plant proteins.
Currently, more than 50% of the world population is supported by synthetic NBFs,
produced via the Haber-Bosch process (HB) a carbon intensive process, however,
the high volatility of prices remains a challenge in the US and developing
countries. Furthermore, only 20% of NBFs produced translate into food with 80%
lost to the environment creating significant environmental, health, and
socioeconomic impact. Therefore, society requires new cost effective, resilient,
and secure ways to produce NBFs with minimum environmental and socioeconomic
impacts. CASFER will enable resilient and sustainable food production by
developing next generation, modular, distributed, and efficient technology for
capturing, recycling, and producing decarbonized NBFs. CASFER will create a
transformative engineered system that takes the US from nitrogen cycle pollution
to a Nitrogen Circular Economy (NCE), from a linear economy to a circular
economy with multidimensional social, environmental, and economic growth. CASFER
will capture and recycle nitrogen from waste to reach over 50% of the US NBF
consumption. Instead of expending resources, energy, and money to deactivate
diluted reactive nitrogen from waste streams, nitrogen from waste will be
captured and recycled for crop production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CASFER brings
together a diverse leadership and the convergence of a multidisciplinary team
drawn from Texas Tech University, Florida A&amp;M University, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Case Western Reserve University, and Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. CASFER convergence research will advance modeling, monitoring and
distributed control; capture and recycling; and modular and distributed
production and delivery of NBFs. CASFER will enable an organic but synthetic
approach to NBF production, with ingredients, predictability, and reliability
designed to stimulate plant growth. CASFER technologies will integrate
nanotechnology, electrochemical science, and data science for modularity,
synthesis, and separations, and resolve economic pressures, logistics issues,
public and industry acceptance, regulatory, and safety issues. CASFER will
advance fundamental knowledge in key areas of interfacial processes,
separations, catalysis and electrocatalysis, and properties of materials to
tolerate heterogenous and harsh environments to enable synthetic chemistry
pathways to convert waste into NBF. CASFER will lead to advances in sensor
science and multiscale modeling to deliver NBF near point of use by farmers.
CASFER Innovation Ecosystem will bring together key industry members,
agriculture cooperatives, facilitators, investors, regulatory advisory boards,
and Society Visionary Champions to commercialize CASFER research discoveries and
maximize benefits to society. CASFER will train the next generation of engineers
and technical workforce at the intersection of engineering, agricultural
sciences, and environmental science with the skills to advance the NCE. CASFER
will empower agents of change and influencers to promote the NCE targeting
formal and informal education along the K-gray spectrum. CASFER will engage a
diverse range of communities underrepresented in STEM through the NCE by
acknowledging the varied backgrounds and experiences of each participant and
facilitating their engagement in engineering through multimodal, multilevel
entry points and cut across socioeconomic and cultural boundaries. CASFER will
establish a fully sustainable innovation ecosystem to expand fundamental
knowledge and leverage CASFER platform technologies to recover phosphorous,
nutrients, and other resources from waste streams. Through all these activities,
CASFER will lead the US toward a Nitrogen Circular Economy, fertilizer
independence, an affordable and resilient price range for NBF, while sustaining
and preserving the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.