* 2133388
* Breaking the Barrier for Acoustic Resonators: High Performance Filters at Millimeter Waves
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Gianluca Piazza, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2024
* USD 408,572.00

Communication standards at millimeter waves are meant to revolutionize society
by facilitating high speed data links for augmented and virtual reality,
unmanned air vehicles and self-driving cars, remote health and infrastructure
monitoring, and the broader Internet of Things. The millimeter wave systems that
are being commercialized do not rely on filtering at the antenna element. It is
predictable that as the number of deployed systems will increase, interferers
and hence the lack of filtering will be a bottleneck for these communication
systems, resulting in large power consumption by the baseband electronics. As
more millimeter wave systems are deployed, and the spectrum is getting
congested, increase power consumption will be required to handle interfering
signals. The needs to eliminate interferers through mm-wave filtering at the
antenna element will become a fundamental bottleneck to further deployment of
these networks. The design and implementation of bandpass filters at these
frequencies in the form factors required by on-chip/portable/wearable devices is
particularly challenging. This research project proposes to use acoustic
elements to deliver sharp filtering directly at each antenna element.
&lt;br/&gt;If successful, this project will have broader impacts beyond the
specific millimeter wave applications proposed herein. By overcoming the
fundamental challenges associated with the design and synthesis of millimeter
wave acoustic resonators, the research effort will devise a general resonator
platform for investigating other phenomena associated with quantum information
science, computing and sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extending the range of
operation of acoustic resonators to millimeter wave frequencies comes with
fundamental questions related to the ability to operate at such high frequency
with low loss and appropriate impedance levels. Attaining high performance at
millimeter waves is a fundamental barrier for acoustic devices. Answering these
questions calls for investigations into materials, nanofabrication processes and
resonator designs that challenge the state-of-the-art in acoustic devices. The
intellectual merit of this work consists in: investigating fundamental damping
mechanisms in thin films of suspended structures at millimeter waves; devising
innovative resonator designs that minimize damping while preserving resonator
characteristic impedance matching; and developing nanofabrication methods that
enable the co-existence of nanoscale features with micron-scale structures with
high yields. The ultimate applied goal of this project is to devise a bandpass
filter operating at millimeter waves using an ensemble of acoustic resonators
arranged in a conventional ladder configuration. This project is also
investigating various novel techniques for generating two nearby-frequency
resonators and for real-time tuning of the filter
bandwidth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.