* 2133504
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Precision Microbiome Engineering (PreMiEr)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Joseph Graves, Duke University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,500,000.00

Microbes have colonized and adapted to most every environment on Earth,
including the built environments that humans have created, such as the homes
where we live and the pipes that bring us drinking water. It has been well
established that microbial communities, or microbiomes, that colonize people
have a direct influence on human health. The microbiome of the built
environment, in particular, has gained increasing recognition for its key role
in human health through its interaction with the human microbiome. However,
despite this knowledge, no systematic infrastructure exists to decipher how
microbial systems adapt to and grow within built environments, impeding our
ability to diagnose built environment health and harness the power inherent to
those microbiomes. The Engineering Research Center for Precision Microbiome
Engineering (PreMiEr) will create microbiome-based diagnostic tools and develop
microbiome engineering approaches to monitor and operate built environments that
maximize human health protection. Informed by societal needs and research-
stakeholder teams, PreMiEr’s research design will work to prevent the spread of
infectious agents, promote the colonization of beneficial microorganisms, and
lead to strategies for controlling pandemics and antibiotic resistance—phenomena
that have led to over six million deaths worldwide (as of June 2022) and cost
the global economy an estimated $8 trillion in the last year alone. Integral to
its research vision, PreMiEr will create diverse and inclusive interdisciplinary
research and training hubs where engineers, microbiologists, social scientists,
and ethicists work alongside theorists, model builders, and computational
scientists to develop technologies that enable transformative engineering
discoveries in safe, sustainable and responsible ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
capacity to engineer microbiomes requires a fundamental understanding of
concepts of community ecology and an ability to track, control, and model those
interactions. To apply microbiome engineering to real-world systems, community
level interactions must be integrated into a comprehensive, scalable modeling
framework that requires iterative evaluation and validation in model testbeds.
PreMiEr’s research organization is designed to generate fundamental
understanding across these levels and functionalities, culminating in the
development of a framework that enables the biodesign of smart and healthy built
environments. PreMiEr will leverage advances in high-throughput genomic
sequencing, high-resolution mass spectrometry, computational performance, and
statistical modeling to unravel previously unknown mechanistic interactions.
Enabling technologies will be developed to detect and define interactions in the
built environment, including approaches that probe microbial dark matter for the
development of built-environment health diagnostic tools; methods for targeted
delivery of desired genetic features and microbial vectors; tools for fine in
situ functional tuning; and predictive scalable statistical microbiome
engineering models that consider high dimensionality, sparsity, and
heterogeneity. These new technology elements will enable us to test hypotheses
related to microbiome assembly and function. Importantly, by incorporating
social scientists and ethicists into PreMiEr’s research framework, non-social
scientists’ work will be informed by consideration of the ethical, societal, and
policy implications of their microbiome engineering discoveries. Through
rigorous evaluation and iterative refinement of curricula, and institutional
practices designed to support a culture of convergence and the dissemination of
findings, PreMiEr will contribute to best practices in domestic training. The
PreMiEr ERC will include targeted recruitment of trainees from underrepresented
groups, building upon existing partnerships with our nation’s largest HBCU, and
will provide immersion in research and training at the interface of multiple
disciplines to address complex challenges. PreMiEr will train the next
generation of diverse and highly motivated engineers and scientists in technical
and professional skills to compete in the emerging arenas of microbial science
and engineering. Ultimately, our work will advance collaborations and discovery
focused on environmental microbiomes to engineer healthy built
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.