* 2133160
* SHF: Small: Transforming Computer Architecture Evaluation with Statistical Model Checking
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Daniel Sorin, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 10/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is developing a statistically rigorous framework for the
experimental evaluation of computer processors. The evaluation of a new
processor design involves many experiments, in which the processor is simulated
in different hardware configurations and with different software running on it.
The current state of the art is to perform some number of these experiments and
present the results, but this methodology provides no statistical guarantees;
there is no bound on the probability that subsequent experiments would show very
different results. This project is adapting and enhancing a rigorous statistical
technique, called statistical model checking (SMC), that is used in other fields
that have required stronger guarantees, like cyber-physical systems (e.g.,
implanted medical devices). With the newly enhanced SMC that this project is
developing, it is possible to not only provide statistical guarantees, but it is
also possible to evaluate system properties that are not analyzable with current
methodologies (e.g., security hyper-properties that depend on the differences
between multiple experiments). Enhancements to SMC are necessary to accommodate
computer architecture research and to enable, for the first time, rigorous
analysis of important issues, like the impact of very rare events and the
processor’s behavior in worst-case scenarios. The project’s infrastructure will
be made publicly available, so computer architects in academia and industry can
benefit from it, with the ultimate result being better processor designs in
which architects and society can be more confident. This project involves
undergraduate research assistants through Duke’s Data+ and Code+ programs, two
well-established university-wide summer outreach programs with exceptional
diversity. The project’s research is also incorporated into a new cross-listed
(ECE and CompSci) class in Experimental Evaluation of Computer Systems. The PI
and co-PI will develop and present a tutorial on SMC for computer architects at
a major computer architecture conference. The project’s results and framework
will be transferred to industry via the extensive industry contacts of the PI
and co-PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pioneers the use of statistical
model checking (SMC) in computer architecture, thus enabling architects to
reason about their experimental results with statistical rigor. This project
provides architects with a novel framework for performing experimental
evaluations. Part of the development of the framework involves the development
of expressive properties and hyper-properties that allow architects to evaluate
conditions and situations they do not currently consider. This project uses SMC
to mitigate the longstanding problem of how to evaluate the impact of rare
events, through a new event injection methodology. This project also uses SMC
and machine learning to provide the first statistically rigorous scheme for
identifying the worst-case situation when using a mechanism (e.g., power
management, computational sprinting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.