* 2133248
* Identifying Barriers and Building Capacity: A Conference Series to Explore Factors that Lead to Increased Success in Securing External Funding for STEM Initiatives
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Kizzy Morris, Cheyney University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2022
* USD 71,799.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying barriers facing
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) scholars, particularly
those of color, in the successful creation and implementation of sponsored
research funded activities. Two hybrid-delivered conferences will be held during
the course of the project. Faculty and staff from open access two-year colleges,
broad access four-year universities, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), and other Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) will be
invited to attend each conference. To ensure attendance by as broad an audience
as possible, participants can select to attend virtually or face to face. Though
other conferences have focused on providing information to faculty on how to
write a competitive grant proposal, this conference is taking a more enriched
approach. During the conference meetings faculty and staff will discuss
potential barriers that exist within their institutions or their institutional
systems that, if addressed, could improve successful grant writing and project
implementation. Attendees at varying career levels and institutional types in
STEM undergraduate education will be brought together to form a network of
scholars focused on sharing best practices with regard to being successful in
securing external funding. Model programs that have resulted in sustainable
change at the institutional level will also be shared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is building upon work through the Institute for the Contemporary African
American Experience, an initiative at Cheyney University, a state HBCU in
Pennsylvania. It is a well-documented phenomenon that though the number of
people of color receiving STEM degrees of all levels (baccalaureate, masters,
and doctorate) is increasing, the number of people of color in STEM who receive
external support is decreasing. This conference seeks to better understand and
address this phenomenon in several ways. First is to have participants engage in
Racial Healing Circles for the purpose of identifying potential barriers,
particularly for people of color, in securing sponsored research funds. Second
is to create an authentic network of individuals dedicated to research and
development in STEM education for the purpose of collaboration, mentoring, and
increased understanding related to securing external research support. And third
is to identify and share sustainable approaches to decreasing barriers and
increasing support, particularly for people of color with regard to seeking and
obtaining sponsored research funding. Targeted evaluation will occur with
conference participants for the purpose of better understanding how activities
like Racial Healing Circles, Mock Panels, Interactive Panels of Peers, and other
activities can identify and address racial equity barriers and solutions. The
findings will be disseminated to all attendees and their institutions through
two follow-up virtual presentations, through targeted conference presentations,
and publication of findings. Funding for this project is provided by the NSF
IUSE: EHR Program which supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Institutional
and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform
and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and
disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.