* 2133481
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Small: Co-Design of Prediction and Control Across Data Boundaries: Efficiency, Privacy, and Markets
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Sandeep Chinchali, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2024
* USD 310,000.00

Today, operators of cellular networks and electricity grids measure large
volumes of data, which can provide rich insights into city-wide mobility and
congestion patterns. Sharing such real-time societal trends with independent,
external entities, such as a taxi fleet operator, can enhance city-scale
resource allocation and control tasks, such as electric taxi routing and battery
storage optimization. However, the owner of a rich time series and an external
control authority must communicate across a data boundary, which limits the
scope and volume of data they can share. This project will develop novel
algorithms and systems to jointly compress, anonymize, and price rich time
series data in a way that only shares minimal, task-relevant data across
organizational boundaries. By emphasizing communication efficiency, the
developed algorithms will incentivize data sharing and collaboration in future
smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key motivation of this work is that
today's representations of time series data are designed independently of an
ultimate control task, which often causes unnecessary temporal features to be
sent, private features to be revealed, and the most salient trends to be under-
valued. Accordingly, this project will develop a unified approach to co-design
succinct, private representations of rich time series data along with an
ultimate control task. Here, co-design means that the forecast representation is
learned within the broader context of a control objective while accounting for
bandwidth constraints, privacy, and economic costs and incentives for data
processing. The algorithms will compute a controller's sensitivity to prediction
errors, which can arise from data compression, forecast uncertainty, as well as
artificial noise injected by modern privacy tools. Crucially, the controller's
sensitivity will in turn be relayed to a network operator to guide its
optimization and learning (e.g., co-design) of a concise, task-relevant forecast
representation that masks private attributes and naturally prices temporal
features by their importance to control. The research will, for example, enable
operators to flexibly use the same underlying cell demand data to emphasize
peak-hour variability for taxi routing, while seamlessly delivering fine-grained
throughput forecasts to a mobile video streaming company without revealing
private user mobility. Finally, the case studies in this project will be
integrated into courses on learning-based control at UT Austin and Cornell.
Broader impacts also include outreach and inclusion efforts to engage students
from groups that have historically been under-represented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.