* 2133630
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Hybrid Autonomous Manufacturing Moving from Evolution to Revolution (ERC-HAMMER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Glenn Daehn, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,498,592.00

The Engineering Research Center, Hybrid Autonomous Manufacturing, Moving from
Evolution to Revolution (HAMMER), will advance national goals to assert American
leadership in advanced manufacturing by developing and transitioning new
manufacturing technologies to industry use. Simultaneously, the Center will
drive new technical education and provide credentials that will prepare,
upskill, or reskill the relevant workforce, and expand capabilities across the
manufacturing supply chain to meet national needs. Core partners of the Center
include The Ohio State University, Northwestern University, North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University, Case Western Reserve University,
and the University of Tennessee. They will work with collaborators from more
than 70 industries, educational, and technical organizations to develop and
implement new manufacturing technologies for agile, high-performance and
quality-assured components. Through basic, applied, and translational research,
HAMMER will accelerate the development and deployment of intelligent autonomous
manufacturing systems that will use multiple processes to control material
properties and component dimensions to allow rapid customization and high
assured performance. These systems will learn from each operation, improving
themselves over time. Importantly, as HAMMER works to develop a new class of
engineers and technicians, it will also actively work to enhance diversity in
the manufacturing talent pipeline, building on the evidence-based success of Fab
Labs and Makerspaces to attract students and improve outcomes. Special emphasis
will be focused on including urban, military, and Appalachian communities in
educational pipeline programs. Ultimately, HAMMER will ensure this country’s
competitive advantage, rebuild the U.S. industrial base, create new high-
skilled, highly paid jobs, and unleash American ingenuity by providing cost-
effective, local, customized production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;HAMMER’s primary
goal is to enable the concurrent design of products with novel manufacturing
processes using hybrid (or multi-tool) manufacturing systems and pathways. This
approach will automate and greatly extend the flexibility and ingenuity of
practicing human artisans. The HAMMER framework will use designs that will
enable leveraging recent developments in robotics and sensors, leading to novel
convergent processes. New control, autonomy, and intelligence approaches will
guide, and learn from prior manufacturing processes. Quality will be assured
through understanding and predicting the local structure and properties of the
material being processed within quantified uncertainty limits. Ultimately,
HAMMER will advance the current state of technology to unite design, tools,
artificial intelligence and computational materials engineering into a single
framework, enabling the agile production of components. These components will
possess locally optimized materials chemistry, microstructure, and properties in
ways that are not attainable currently. The relevant systems are expected to
improve in efficiency and performance with experience. Specific use cases to be
considered include: 1) numerically controlled deformation sequences and
equipment to create complex components that may be currently produced as closed
die forgings, but with reduced lead-time and improved performance, 2) employing
numerically-controlled deformation to locally optimize properties in additively
manufactured components, 3) expanding capabilities for point-of-care
manufacturing wherein automated operations including deformation are used to
rapidly tailor medical devices to the patient anatomy, and 4) developing low-
cost, desktop training systems that provide students hands-on learning in
programming, operating, and maintaining new manufacturing systems, as well as
experiences creating new physical products using incremental deformation and
hybrid processes. Strong partnerships with industry, educational and technical
organizations will enable HAMMER to train personnel at many levels from pre-
college to practicing engineers. HAMMER will lead next-generation certification
standards to facilitate widespread adoption of these technologies by the
associated workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.