* 2133334
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Low-Cost Efficient Wireless Intelligent Sensors (LEWIS) for Greater Preparedness and Resilience to Post-Wildfire Flooding in Native American Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2023
* Mark Stone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,016,000.00

The combined impacts of wildfires and subsequent post-wildfire floods have
changed the lives and landscapes of New Mexico’s Native American Communities
over the past 20 years. Native American communities, national and state
agencies, university researchers, and others, have all stepped up to contribute
to recovery efforts. Beyond recovery, researchers have also begun to initiate
the process of fundamentally changing our approaches to building resilient
communities and landscapes by learning from our tribal partners and civic
partners. Specifically, tribal communities have indicated that they can benefit
from building and designing their own sensor networks at a low cost, as opposed
to using commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) sensors. This paradigm shift empowers
the community as the sensor designer and builder: a new approach to enhancing
community resilience. Community members of the Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo will co-
design, co-build, and implement their own Low-Cost Efficient Wireless
Intelligent Sensors (LEWIS) networks. This self-built, customized, and
distributed sensor network will inform the community of trends and thresholds in
landscapes that can help to prevent wildfires and provide critical information
to early warning systems when floods occur. Our long-term vision is to develop
scientific practice and evidence that will enhance the resilience of
communities. The Ohkay Owingeh Pueblo in New Mexico will co-plan this project
with researchers from four academic units of the University of New Mexico,
consultants and evaluators, educators, national labs, the New Mexico Department
of Transportation represented by the Tribal Liaison, and Native American Leaders
in Native American Resilience in New Mexico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
in action project addresses a critical area of need in the American Southwest –
building resilience of tribal communities to the natural hazards of wildfires
and post-wildfire floods. This community-based project will create a blueprint
and framework for incorporating sensor data into decision support platforms.
Participation from tribal youth will also increase the long-term sustainability
of this project by building technical capacity within the community, which
enables workforce development and training. The research will contribute to the
following fields: (1) advancement of knowledge of the processes and outcomes for
co-generation of knowledge between Native American communities and academic
researchers; (2) incorporating place-based knowledge for co-developing
resilience indices from LEWIS networks developed by the community, and decision
support platforms; and (3) exploration of novel approaches to management,
security, and selective sharing of data in ways that support the advancement of
science, build community resilience to natural hazards, and respect concerns
over data sovereignty. This project is part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge
which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department of Energy's Vehicle Technology
Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's Science and Technology
Directorate and Federal Emergency Management Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.