* 2133543
* ECO-CBET: GOALI: Environmental Convergence in Chemical Process Systems - Integrating CO2 Capture and In-Situ Conversion with Ethylene Manufacture
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* David Allen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,272,948.00

The project applies convergent environmental research to the mitigation of
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions associated with one of the world’s major
commodity chemical processes – the steam cracking of ethane to produce ethylene
(a building block molecule used widely in chemical manufacturing). Steam
crackers are a major source of CO2 emissions (18.8 million metric tons/year in
the U.S. in 2014), resulting in about 0.5% of all stationary-source CO2
emissions in the U.S. The project focuses on research that integrates capability
for CO2 capture and conversion into existing steam cracker units, thereby
dramatically reducing the carbon footprint of those units. Environmentally
convergent research will be realized through an assembled team of academic and
industry researchers bringing specialized expertise in four critical areas: 1)
CO2 capture, 2) CO2 conversion to higher-value chemicals, 3) process systems
engineering integration, and 4) environmental sustainability assessment. Beyond
the technical aspects, the project will pave a direct path to technology
implementation, as aided by the collaboration with industry partner BASF.
Educational and outreach efforts, focused on enhancing convergent R&amp;D
practices in both industrial and academic settings, will promote a future
workforce much better equipped to tackle the world’s most pressing scientific,
engineering and sustainability challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
integrates CO2 capture and conversion to methanol into an ethylene production
unit, where the CO2 comes from the flue gas of the steam cracker furnace, and is
reacted with H2 byproduct, utilizing waste heat from the cracker to run the CO2
capture and conversion process. Specially designed ionic liquids (ILs) will be
employed for CO2 capture, with research emphasis on the fundamental chemistry
needed to balance the capture, CO2 activation, and catalytic conversion steps in
an economically viable low-temperature methanol synthesis process. To that end,
fundamental developments at the molecular level will be converged with extensive
process modeling, simulation, and design optimization. Rigorous life cycle
assessment (LCA) will be conducted for representative ethylene and methanol co-
production facilities, and compared to stand-alone process units, with and
without integrated CO2 capture and conversion. Highlights of the educational and
outreach activities include, 1) a seminar series revolving around research
presentations on CO2 capture and conversion by the university team balanced by
lectures on industrial opportunities for CO2 capture and conversion by BASF
engineers, 2) graduate student internships, and 3) a CO2 capture and conversion
module for high school students to be disseminated through the
UTeachEngineering: “Engineer Your World” program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.