* 2133509
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Resilience and Social Transformation in Middle-Range Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* John O'Shea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on social
transformations that occur in “middle-range societies” (societies that according
to traditional social evolutionary models fall between bands and states) and the
factors that affect the resilience of their social and cultural systems during
large-scale socioeconomic changes. While questions of major social
transformations, especially collapse and disintegration, are typically framed in
the context of states or empires, there is much to be explored about these
processes in less complex societies. Middle-range societies -due to their
diverse forms of sociopolitical organization and interaction systems - provide
an invaluable source of information for researchers who study social responses
to large-scale change. This project focuses on a unique form of middle-range
society, those that are integrated within an emergent regional system. The
research evaluates how local societies become integrated into larger macro-
systems with emergent properties and explores how prior conditions and current
patterns of interaction affected their resilience in the face of major
disruptions. The research highlights the diverse forms of past sociopolitical
organization and helps to develop a vocabulary to capture the complexity these
societies represent, as well as providing more general models for explaining
social change among middle-range societies. The studied processes of
interaction, communal integration and social responses to large-scale changes
are broadly applicable and provide relevant information for research well beyond
the societies analyzed in this investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
integrates a multi-scale interaction model with resilience theory to evaluate
specific patterns of social change. The research focuses on the factors
underlying the markedly different social trajectories of two neighboring regions
following the disintegration of a macro-regional system, and evaluates the
degree to which distinct patterns of social change can be attributed to prior
local, macro-regional, or external factors in two neighboring areas. The
research utilizes archaeological materials from previously excavated sites and
surface collections, and applies ceramic stylistic analysis and funerary pattern
analysis as the primary methods to evaluate how the different factors affected
the local developments. The timing of local developments within the two areas
will be monitored via high precision radiocarbon
dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.