* 2133863
* URoL:EN: Towards a unified theory of regulatory functions and networks across biological and social systems
* BIO,EF
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Sidney Redner, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 10/31/2025
* USD 2,199,383.00

Complex organizational structures range from the very small (such as cells) to
the very large (such as a system of government), and maintaining these
structures requires a lot of energy and resources. Consider, for example, the
part of the US legal system that is devoted to handling lawsuits and resolving
conflicts. The structure of the legal system includes the law itself, the
attorneys, judges, and all the other people involved in bringing a lawsuit
forward and ensuring that it is resolved. As a result, US companies spend a lot
of funds on litigation alone. In US colleges, administrative spending is
comparable with instructional spending and has been cited as a key factor in the
increasing tuition of US universities. The continuing growth of these kinds of
costs is a major challenge, but they aren't understood very well. When these
costs are studied, they are often viewed as hidden or unintended expenses that
are unique to the systems in which they are found. The research supported by
this grant develops a unified theoretical framework for studying regulatory
mechanisms across different kinds of systems, from single cells to entire
societies. The research improves society by suggesting ways to make the
organization of institutions, such as companies, universities and governments,
more efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regulatory functions and mechanisms are a
necessary, essential, and ubiquitous feature across all biological, social, and
mechanical systems. Bacteria have regulatory genes, companies have managers, and
car engines have engine control units. Indeed, the challenge for all complex
adaptive systems that aim to survive in multi-faceted and competitive
environments is to optimally manage internal functions and interactions. The
presence of regulatory mechanisms in complex systems is therefore a universal
rule of life, and network structures emerge under the rule of life. This grant
develops a unified science of regulatory functions and their associated emergent
structures to answer questions such as: What causes an increase in regulatory
costs? Can we predict the amount of regulatory costs an organism or organization
needs, based on its size, function, and complexity? Is it necessary to grow the
administrative or regulatory functions of a system to ensure the continued
functioning of the system, or is it an unnecessary burden? This research
develops scientific measurements to determine the appropriate or optimal size
and network structure of bureaucracy for a system to perform its tasks. The
research takes place in two steps: 1) gathering and organizing datasets that
span biological and social systems; and 2) using these datasets to develop a
theory for regulatory structures across a wide range of systems. The theory will
start from a mathematical framework that describes cost as a function of the
size and complexity of a system and integrate this theory with new results and
models of the functional diversity of organizations and their
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.