* 2133027
* NRI: Liquid-Solid Metal for Embodied Intelligence in Semi-Soft, Human-Collaborative Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Robert Webster, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,489,077.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) grant supports research that will
contribute new knowledge to the design and control of a novel semi-soft robot,
promoting both the progress of science and enhancing national industrial and
healthcare objectives. Flexible robots are able to navigate through restrictive
environments. As such, they have the potential to revolutionize a variety of
robotic tasks including industrial inspections, search-and-rescue operations,
and minimally invasive surgery. Existing flexible robots are either soft (made
of rubbery elastic elements), which makes them safe, or hard (made of rigid
support structures), which makes them able to lift heavy loads. The team
supported by this award seeks to create a new kind of semi-soft robot that
leverage the benefits of both paradigms. The researchers will pursue fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge in the design and control of robots with
internal skeletons that can transition from liquid to solid metal. A semi-soft
robot will be able to compress itself to pass through small openings, and then
stiffen beyond, to manipulate its environment. Such a robot has the potential to
benefit the U.S. economy and society with broad applications in infrastructure,
manufacturing, disaster response, and medicine. This research involves several
disciplines including mechanical engineering, mathematical modeling, control
theory, computer science, and robot motion planning. The research approach and
associated outreach activities will help to broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in robotics and positively impact engineering and
computer science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-soft robots will possess
capabilities beyond existing robot designs via the phase transition of low
melting point metal alloys, enabling the robot to control its stiffness from
very soft (to deform through narrow openings), to very stiff (so that the robot
can lift heavy loads and interact forcefully with its environment). These semi-
soft robots will also have curved control tendons, endowing them with the
potential to take on more complex shapes than current robots, which use straight
control tendons. However, scientific barriers remain before the potential of
effective, controllable semi-soft robots is realized. This research will
investigate the integration of the design, modeling, control, and motion
planning of semi-soft robots. More specifically, the research team will (1)
perform finite element modeling to understand the mechanical properties of a
variety of low melting point alloy structure designs and their interaction with
curved tendon actuation; (2) develop Cosserat Rod- and machine learning-based
mechanical models of the robot; (3) investigate the use of resolved rates and
model predictive control; (4) develop fast motion planning algorithms and a user
interface that enables safe and accurate supervisory human control of the robot;
and (5) validate these systems and concepts in simulated lung
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.