* 2133270
* RAPID: Cicadas as catalysts: Quantifying the population, community, and evolutionary effects of a periodic resource pulse.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Lau, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 09/30/2023
* USD 182,486.00

The Brood X cicada emergence is a unique event as billions of cicadas emerge
after accumulating resources belowground for seventeen years and transfer those
resources to the soil surface. This rapid transfer of resources from belowground
to aboveground acts like plant fertilizer and increases soil nitrogen
availability. Because nitrogen is frequently the nutrient plants need most, this
fertilization will likely affect plant community composition (which species are
present and most abundant), promote invasive species, and alter plant
interactions with insect herbivores and both beneficial and harmful
microorganisms. The abundance of resources caused by decaying cicada carcasses
also may affect plant demography (whether the plant population expands or
declines) and how plants and microbes evolve. Even though the resource pulse is
short-lived, many of these effects may affect forest understories in the region
for years to come. The goal of this project is to study the effect of cicada
emergence on plant communities and plant-microbial-insect interactions. The
project also capitalizes on the charismatic cicada emergence to generate
excitement about science in K-12 classrooms. The researchers will collaborate
with a K-12 teacher who will work alongside undergraduate students, graduate
students, and the PI to develop hands-on classroom STEM
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of rare events on ecology and
evolution is challenging to study because of their largely unpredictable nature.
In this case, this project capitalizes on the cicada emergence to install
experiments that quantify both the immediate and long-term effects of periodical
resource pulses. The project involves adding and removing thousands of cicada
carcasses from plots in the forest. This experiment will be used to answer
questions in the fields of evolutionary ecology, community ecology, and
population ecology. First, the researchers will measure natural selection on
plant traits to investigate how nitrogen affects plant evolution and will
isolate nitrogen-fixing rhizobia to test theoretical predictions that increased
resources cause the evolution of less cooperative rhizobia. Second, the
researchers will test how cicada carcass treatments affect plant-herbivore and
plant-microbe interactions, plant community composition, and whether the
resulting resource pulse creates "invasion windows" that promote invasive
species. Finally, the researchers will conduct demographic studies on focal
species to test how the resource pulse contributes to population increases (or
declines). In sum, this project investigates how a rare event alters forest
understory ecology and evolution immediately, but also sets the stage for
investigating long-term effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.