* 2133373
* Phase-field Model of Electromechanical and Optical Properties of Ferroelectric Domain Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2026
* Long-Qing Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2026
* USD 375,223.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education to develop computational models and tools for studying
piezoelectricity and light transparency of ferroelectric crystals. The
piezoelectricity of a material characterizes the ability of the material to
generate an electric voltage difference when it is subject to a mechanical
stress or to generate a mechanical motion when the materials is subjected to an
electric voltage difference or electric field. Light transparency of a solid
measures the fraction of the incident visible light transmitted through the
material, and it is limited by the amount of light reflection and scattering on
the outside surfaces as well as the internal interfaces and the light adsorption
inside the solid. Ferroelectrics are materials that contain high density of
electric dipoles or polarization in the absence of an applied electric field,
and they are the major class of piezoelectric materials exhibiting high
piezoelectricity. However, the ferroelectric crystals that possess the highest
piezoelectricity tend to be those containing many spatial regions of uniform
electric polarization with different polarization directions separated by so-
called ferroelectric domain walls. Most of these domain walls scatter and
reflect light, and thus even single crystal ferroelectric materials are not
completely transparent or tend to be opaque at best. The PI will develop
computational models and tools to study both piezoelectricity and light
transparency of ferroelectric crystals. The models and tools will be employed to
find the optimal combination of optical transparency and piezoelectricity
through understanding the roles of the ferroelectric domain wall orientations
and domain wall density. Transparent ferroelectric crystals with high
piezoelectricity have potential applications in high-throughput photoacoustic
biomedical imaging, transparent actuators, self-energy-harvesting touch screens,
and invisible robotic devices. The project will train graduate students to
become experts in the areas of computational materials science, physics of
piezoelectricity, and light propagation in inhomogeneous solids. Graduate
students will also be trained in mentoring by co-supervising the research of
undergraduate students in materials science and engineering or physics in the
PI’s group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research, and education with the main goal to
fundamentally understand the science underlying the roles of domain structures
in both piezoelectricity and light transparency of ferroelectric crystals. The
award will support the development of a phase-field model of ferroelectric
domains and piezoelectricity in both multidomain single crystals and
polycrystalline ceramics in the presence of electronic and ionic defects and a
spectral method in space with frequency-domain description in time for solving
the Maxwell equations of light propagation and obtaining the light transmission
spectrum for arbitrary ferroelectric domain structures. The PI and his graduate
students will use the computational tools to study the evolution of domain
walls, piezoelectricity, electronic charge carriers, and the light transparency
at different frequencies under different ferroelectric polarization poling
protocols. The developed computational framework and advance in fundamental
understanding will then be harnessed to guide the design of ferroelectric domain
structures to achieve desired electromechanical and optical properties, and to
search for ferroelectric crystals possessing both high piezoelectricity and
light transparency. The PI’s group has hosted numerous undergraduate students in
the past for research training in computational materials research, including
two recent NSF-REU students subsequently awarded NSF graduate fellowships.
During the proposed project period, the PI’s group will continue to actively
recruit both undergraduate students from its home institution and those from
other institutions through the Penn State NSF-REU program(s) for research
training as well as for mentoring training for the graduate students involved in
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.