* 2133229
* A Community Laboratory Facility for Exploring and Sensing of Aerosol-Cloud-Drizzle Processes: The Aerosol-Cloud-Drizzle Convection Chamber
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Richard Flagan, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,903,682.00

Atmospheric cloud chambers operate by mimicking the natural conditions that form
clouds within a controlled environment. Scientists can vary the temperature,
moisture, and particles within the chamber to assess how each of these factors
controls the development and characteristics of cloud droplets. However, current
cloud chambers are either too small or do not allow for the kinds of air motions
that are ubiquitous in real clouds. This award provides funding to a cohort of
researchers to conduct preliminary design work on a large cloud chamber that
would be capable of producing droplets up to the size of drizzle, which is a key
transition point for fully understanding the development of precipitation. At
the end of the design project, the team will have solid plans to propose the
construction of the cloud chamber. The proposed chamber would be a world-class
facility and dramatically expand on the US research communityâ€™s ability to
conduct laboratory studies of clouds. The design project has significant student
and post-doctoral training aspects, including a student visitor program that
will engage underrepresented individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This design
project is for a large-scale Aerosol-Cloud-Drizzle-Convection Chamber (ACDC2)
and accompanying instrumentation to explore chemical and physical interactions
and evolution of aerosols, cloud droplets, and drizzle within turbulent clouds.
Understanding and quantifying the full chain of events from aerosol activation
to drizzle formation, and the associated feedbacks to the aerosol through
chemical and physical processes, all within a turbulent cloud are some of the
central uncertainties of atmospheric chemistry and physics, and are keys to the
cloud-climate puzzle. The ACDC2 chamber would be a world-class facility as the
only cloud chamber designed to explore problems linked to drizzle production.
This project has three main objectives: 1) Design of chamber characteristics to
achieve drizzle formation and aerosol processing, 2) Design of measurement
system for aerosol, cloud, and drizzle characterization, and 3) Design of
engineering and technical aspects, including a Project Execution
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.