* 2133340
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: IMPERIAL: In-Memory Processing Enhanced Racetrack Inspired by Accessing Laterally
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sanjukta Bhanja, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 179,979.00

Next generation mobile systems require memory and storage with unprecedented
density and access speed that meets strict power/energy and reliability
constraints. Moreover, these systems can benefit from application specific
acceleration on data intensive workloads. For instance, Internet of Things (IoT)
devices are tasked with acquiring, storing, and processing vast amounts of
acquired information. Edge systems may slightly relax power/energy constraints,
but can benefit from acceleration of machine learning, security, or other
application specific tasks while maintaining quality of service on tasks from
simultaneous disparate users. This project explores applying a new and
understudied emerging memory technology called domain-wall memory (DWM) and its
application to the needs of mobile and edge devices. DWM has properties that can
be exploited to increase storage density, access speed, and to relieve the
memory access bottleneck that exists in modern systems. The PIs will leverage
their expertise to create a cross-layer design approach spanning the
device/circuit- through system-level to develop a novel cross-DWM (XDWM) memory
architecture with lateral read and write access capabilities. These innovations
will revolutionize storage and processing for next generation mobile and edge
devices by providing synergistic data storage and efficient processing-in-memory
(PIM) with hooks for reliability. A cross-layer evaluation methodology will be
adopted to cover prototype fabrication, device-level characterization,
architecture-level simulation, and full system integration and emulation to
explore the PIM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transformative nature of this
research is a disruptive new memory system that is dense, reliable, energy-
efficient, ultra low latency with compute capability that can revolutionize the
storage and processing capabilities of next generation computing systems. Such
systems particularly include IoT, mobile and secure shared use edge systems but
also apply to high performance computing and cloud systems. Further impacts of
the proposed research include the integration of various education and advocacy
activities based on the resources available to the two PIs such as (i) outreach
for local K-12 students through Pitt's “Investing Now” summer school and USF's
“Engineering Day” and Expo, where Engineering solutions are showcased to
approximately 10,000 K-12 students/parents/teachers. (ii) inclusivity: Both PIs
have a track record of including Under-represented Minority (URM) students..
They will continue to focus on URM representation in their team. (iii)
curriculum: course integration of the research at both
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.