* 2133106
* ASCENT: Multimodal chest e-tattoo with customized IC and deep learning algorithm for tracking and predicting progressive pneumonia
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2025
* Hongyu Miao, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Coronavirus infections may cause life-threatening pneumonia with a mortality
rate more than 10% in certain populations, which could quickly overwhelm any
medical care system. Continuous monitoring of the infected and suspected at the
hospital or under self-quarantine can help optimize triage and treatment.
However, so far there is no available mobile device and algorithm platform that
can perform reliable, comprehensive, continuous and long-term monitoring and
assessment for pneumonia patients in either clinical or free-living
environments. The goal of this ASCENT research is to develop, integrate, and
test foundational technologies required for a scalable monitoring and triage
system for patients who have contracted pneumonia. The objective is to integrate
a wireless, noninvasive, week-long wearable, and multimodal physiological sensor
platform (e-tattoos) with a dedicated integrated circuit (IC), connect it to an
FDA (U.S. Food and Drug Administration) cleared virtual patient monitoring
platform (Sickbay) which also hosts a customized deep learning algorithm, for
the continuous monitoring and assessment of the severity of progressive
pneumonia. The result will be a gamechanging hardware and software system that
provides continuous monitoring and intelligent assessment for highly-infectious
and critically-ill patients but also protects healthcare providers from
infection and contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a longstanding
systems challenge that the world lacks long-term, high-fidelity, continuous and
scalable clinical surveillance platforms for infectious disease patients to
battle with global pandemic like COVID-19. The progression of pneumonia is
associated with the changes in vital signs such as core body temperature,
respiratory rates, heart rates, blood oxygen saturation and so on. Since
clinical deterioration of patients at risk of developing pneumonia can be short
and unpredictable, continuous multimodal monitoring and accurate assessment is
necessary for this population, whether in the hospitals or at home. The five
investigators bring together well-established expertise in multimodal wearable
sensors (Lu), mixed signal IC design (Li), time-series data analytics (Miao),
clinical systems integration and scalable patient monitoring (Rusin), as well as
critical care medicine (Jain). This multidisciplinary engineering and clinical
team attempt to address this system-level challenge through: 1) development of
wireless wearable sensors called e-tattoo with dedicated IC capable of
noninvasive and week-long multimodal patient monitoring; 2) data analysis and
deep learning algorithm development and integration with e-tattoo through an FDA
(U.S. Food and Drug Administration) cleared virtual patient monitoring platform,
Sickbay; 3) e-tattoo and algorithm validation on 20 patients with progressive
pneumonia at Texas Childrenâ€™s Hospital. The broader impacts for the society are
dramatically improving how critically ill patients are monitored as well as
training next generation engineers to carry out convergent research. The
ultimate vision is to establish a scalable means of safely surveilling patients
and orchestrating high-quality care across the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.