* 2133156
* RAPID: Fingerprinting new water-carbon interactions in the Arctic: Isotopic measurements through the Northwest Passage and in Baffin Bay
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2023
* Douglas Causey, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 05/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

The Arctic carbon and water cycles are undergoing fundamental changes as the
Arctic experiences an entire suite of new conditions. At the core of this
restructuring is rapid Arctic warming, the loss of sea ice, shifting atmospheric
and ocean circulation patterns, increasing precipitation, permafrost thaw, and
enhanced melt of the Greenland Ice Sheet and other mountain glaciers and ice
caps. These changes have resulted in the simultaneous freshening of the Arctic
seas and humidification of the Arctic atmosphere due to more evaporation from
what was previously ice-covered ocean. Concurrently, riverine discharges are
driving the fertilization of the Arctic seas and increasing ocean water
productivity by carrying ancient carbon and old nutrients from thawed permafrost
into the fjords, bays, and ocean. It is urgent to monitor and quantify these new
ice-ocean-land-atmosphere interactions to understand the magnitude and
variability of carbon and water cycle changes across the Arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project capitalizes on an autumn 2021 research
expedition of the USCGC Healy Icebreaker. The project will use continuous
isotope fingerprinting to delineate key linkages between ice-ocean-land-
atmosphere interactions along the west coast of Alaska, through the Northwest
Passage and in Baffin Bay. The project will measure carbon and water isotopes of
marine air and ocean water continuously with some spot intense sampling
locations. These measurements will enable quantification of the geochemical
patterns that record freshening, fertilization, evaporation, and productivity
variations driven by differing degrees of ice-ocean-land-atmosphere
interactions. These data will be the first of their kind in terms of
coordination at this large scale with a transect spanning ~15 degrees of
latitude and over 100 degrees of longitude in the western and central Arctic.
This project will: 1) delineate the intensity of land-ice freshwater injections
including the extent to which these freshwater plumes carry new sources of
ancient (permafrost derived) carbon and nutrients that may drive productivity
increases and ocean carbon exchange; 2) quantify the connectivity of and
mechanisms controlling Arctic Ocean water evaporation and atmospheric
humidification which may be altering precipitation patterns in the Arctic and in
the mid-latitudes; and 3) determine ocean carbon gain or loss continuously
across the Arctic seas with implications for marine food webs, support of
subsistence hunting, and climate warming via atmospheric carbon dioxide and
methane concentrations. This project will offer valuable contributions and data
to studies of Arctic change by groups examining changing atmospheric, ocean,
cryospheric processes, and marine and terrestrial
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.