* 2133662
* NSF-AoF: CNS Core: Small: AERIAL: Air-to-Ground Channel Modeling and Tracking at Millimeter-Wave
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Sundeep Rangan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 464,000.00

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are becoming indispensable in many emerging
industries. The explosive proliferation of this technology has resulted in the
creation of a plethora of new applications that pose stringent wireless
communications performance requirements. Exchanging large volumes of sensory
data in the minimum amount of time is critical in most operations such as
surveillance, disaster response monitoring, and search-and-rescue. For this
reason, the massive amount of available spectrum in the millimeter-wave (mmWave)
bands represents a key enabling technology for future aerial wireless
communications. In this realm, several fundamental questions remain unanswered.
In particular, characterizing the mmWave signal propagation in mid-air as well
as designing the channel tracking mechanisms to maximize aerial connectivity
remain important open questions. Channel models represent a key building block
to design wireless systems. However, global cellular standardization bodies rely
on mmWave channel models that are based on terrestrial measurements. The goal of
this project is twofold: (i) Conduct real-world UAV mmWave channel measurements
to derive accurate channel models and (ii) design channel tracking algorithms
that are aimed at maximizing UAV connectivity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to advance the understanding of UAV mmWave channel propagation
and, accordingly, design novel directional channel tracking algorithms to
improve UAV mmWave connectivity. To do so, the team plans plan to: (1) Develop a
custom UAV-based mmWave channel sounder with beam steerable phased array antenna
to enable channel measurements that are optimized for UAVs; (2) Conduct
extensive A2G and A2A mmWave measurements using the channel sounder developed in
(1); (3) Train generative neural networks to derive realistic aerial mmWave
channel models and compare them with existing 3GPP models; (4) Develop AI-based
aerial channel-tracking algorithms to improve UAV mmWave connectivity. The
approach adopted by the team will accelerate innovation in a multitude of UAV
applications that demand high data rates and low
latency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.