* 2133911
* STTR Phase I: Creating a virtual reality clinic to serve individuals with autism
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jung Sun Kim, VRIENDS CORP
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve treatment outcomes and quality of
life for individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). Approximately 3.5
million American children and adults have a diagnosis of autism. ASD is
considered a lifelong pervasive disorder and, without proper treatment,
individuals with ASD may have challenges functioning in society. The cost to
treat an individual with autism is approximately $50,000 per year, according to
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and in all 50 states, both
public and private insurance companies are mandated to pay for applied behavior
analysis therapy delivered by board-certified analysts. However, since the
typical model for delivering therapy is either home-based or clinic-based, many
specific populations of U.S. citizens cannot access therapy. Patients who live
in remote areas, do not have access to transportation, or need treatment outside
of normal work hours are unable to access treatment. Parents of children
diagnosed with ASD have additional challenges of facing long wait times and lack
of input for the behavior analyst’s treatment plan. While tele-health treatment
has increased during the COVID-19 pandemic, speaking by phone or by screen
doesn't provide the same social-skills therapy as in-person interactions. To
solve these challenges, this project will create a Virtual Reality (VR) Autism
Clinic: an immersive virtual reality environment where certified therapists
would provide real-time treatment rooted in the research of applied behavior
analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop software that incorporates tenets of applied
behavior analysis as a simulation tool for individuals with ASD to improve their
social skills. The project will develop an interactive and immersive software
system specifically designed to meet the research-based requirements of applied
behaver analysis. This system will include mechanisms for practitioners to
provide live feedback and will incorporate methods that leverage the motivation
of individuals diagnosed with autism. The inability to access therapy because of
location, lack of transportation, or scheduling issues may be significantly
reduced by the envisioned end product. The anticipated technical result of the
proposed project is a remote virtual reality platform that simulates and
achieves in-person social-skills therapy results. The envisioned virtual autism
clinic would enable ASD-affected individuals to learn, connect, and engage with
others in a transformative, scalable, secure, and technically-advanced
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.