* 2133423
* ECO-CBET: Sustainability from the Bottom Up: A Holistic Solution to Balancing the N-Cycle
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Steven Little, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,313,638.00

This project addresses the global challenge of rebalancing the nitrogen cycle by
developing an innovative, sustainable technology to deliver nitrogen to crop
roots more efficiently using minute spherical sacs called liposomes. The goal of
the work is to use these liposomes as nitrogen carriers to reduce the amount of
nitrogen that is added to farm fields and increase the percentage of nitrogen
that is absorbed by the plant. The research is motivated by the immense
environmental and human health costs associated with excess nitrogen use,
including eutrophication in lakes and coastal waters, associated cyanotoxins
produced by algal blooms, greenhouse gas emissions from production of nitrogen-
based fertilizer, on-farm greenhouse gas emissions from nitrogen processes, and
contaminated drinking water sources. The proposed technology is a holistic
solution to address global food challenges by including sustainable and
performance design criteria as well as considering the environmental impacts
during the design and development stages. The proposed research aims to
transform crop production from a net polluting system to a sustainable system
and to align the needs of feeding society while protecting its
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary team of engineers and
scientists includes collective expertise in chemical processes, transport
phenomena, transport of natural resources in Earth systems, sustainable material
design, and systems analyses. The research leverages an emerging chemical
process, continuous flow processing, to develop new liposome compositions that
result in novel carriers for delivering nitrogen to crops. Isotopically labeled
nitrogen-15 will illuminate partitioning and transport of the delivered nitrogen
through soil-plant systems. Systems-level analysis will be integrated throughout
the project to inform material choice, processing decisions, and feasibility
assessment. Results from greenhouse studies will inform the nutrient carrier
performance in terms of crop production and reducing leached nitrogen. These
data will be used in a watershed model to project positive ecosystem impacts.
The team will also develop initiatives that educate and train students across
disciplinary silos in a convergent, collaborative environment through an
interdisciplinary approach to mentoring, learning, and research. The research
team will engage with stakeholders through the Pittsburgh Collaboratory for
Water Research, Education, and Outreach, housed at the University of Pittsburgh
(a network of over 100 governmental, non-governmental, advocacy, academic
partner organizations, and over 300 individual water stakeholders), and the
public through programming at the University of Pittsburghâ€™s field station,
Pymatuning Lab of Ecology, in the Shenango River
watershed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.