* 2133879
* HCC: Small: Understanding Impaired Muscle Activity to Improve Human-Technology Interfaces for Pediatric Prostheses
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jonathon Schofield, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,957.00

Children born with upper limb deficiencies face several unique challenges when
operating prosthetic limbs, for example their affected muscles will never have
moved a complete hand. So, while many prosthetic limbs are operated by measuring
activity in these muscles, the degree to which children can purposefully control
the affected muscles or how best to measure this muscle activity for effective
prosthetic operation is still not fully understood, which is one of the reasons
advanced robotic prosthetic limbs are not widely available for children even
though many "hand-like" systems are available for adults. This research will
investigate how well children born with upper limb deficiencies can control
their affected muscles, and will then use that information to develop AI
algorithms to recognize the movements a child wishes to achieve with their
missing hand. The long-term goal is to better understand the capabilities of
these children so as to enable creation of more helpful prosthetic limbs that
are tailored to relevant factors such as age, gender, and learning. Project
outcomes will include datasets, algorithms, and a deeper understanding of the
capabilities of children born with upper limb deficiencies, which will
ultimately help medical professionals decide on prosthetic treatment options and
will also lead to control techniques for other robotic devices for children,
such as exoskeletons. Additional broad impact will derive from the fact that
this project will support annual involvement in a multi-day summer camp program
designed to help children with upper limb deficiencies learn about their
capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will capture muscle activity in
children's affected limbs by measuring muscle movements below the skin's surface
and the electrical activity of these same muscles. Two human-technology
interfaces will be employed: sonomyography, which uses a small ultrasound
sensor, image processing, and machine learning to infer the user's intended
missing-hand movements from the affected muscle deformations; and
electromyography (sEMG) pattern recognition, which uses machine learning to
infer the user's intended missing-hand movements from multiple sensors measuring
the electrical activity of the affected muscles. The capacity of children ages
5-17yrs to control their affected muscles will first be characterized using
ultrasound imaging and sEMG measures. Post-hoc analyses of this data will then
be performed to fine-tune machine learning algorithms that extract classifiable
missing hand movement data from the ultrasound imaging and sEMG signals.
Finally, the real-time performance of sonomyography and sEMG pattern recognition
will be characterized as well as participant learning effects, as subjects
perform videogame activities with these systems across multiple testing
sessions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.