* 2133684
* Collaborative Research:  ANT LIA Integrating Genomic and Phenotypic Analyses to understand Microbial Life in Antarctic Soils
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Noah Fierer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 03/31/2025
* USD 329,005.00

Not all of Antarctica is covered in ice. In fact, soils are common to many parts
of Antarctica, and these soils are often unlike any others found on Earth.
Antarctic soils harbor unique microorganisms able to cope with the extremely
cold and dry conditions common to much of the continent. For decades,
microbiologists have been drawn to the unique soils in Antarctica, yet critical
knowledge gaps remain. Most notably, it is unclear what properties allow certain
microbes to thrive in Antarctic soils. By using a range of methods, this project
is developing comprehensive model that discovers the unique genomic features of
soils diversity, distributions, and adaptations that allow Antarctic soil
microbes to thrive in extreme environments. The proposed work will be relevant
to researchers in many fields, including engineers seeking to develop new
biotechnologies, ecologists studying the contributions of these microbial
communities to the functioning of Antarctic ecosystems, microbiologists studying
novel microbial adaptations to extreme environmental conditions, and even
astrobiologists studying the potential for life on Mars. More generally, the
proposed research presents an opportunity to advance our current understanding
of the microbial life found in one of the more distinctive microbial habitats on
Earth, a habitat that is inaccessible to many scientists and a habitat that is
increasingly under threat from climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project explores the microbial diversity in Antarctic soils and links specific
features to different soil types and environmental conditions. The overarching
questions include: What microbial taxa are found in a variety of Antarctic
environments? What are the environmental preferences of specific taxa or
lineages? What are the genomic and phenotypic traits of microorganisms that
allow them to persist in extreme environments and determine biogeographical
differneces? This project will analyze archived soils collected from across
Antarctica by a network of international collaborators, with samples selected to
span broad gradients in soil and site conditions. The project uses cultivation-
independent, high-throughput genomic analysis methods and cultivation-dependent
approaches to analyze bacterial and fungal communities in soil samples. The
results will be used to predict the distributions of specific taxa and lineages,
obtain genomic information for the more ubiquitous and abundant taxa, and
quantify growth responses in vitro across gradients in temperature, moisture,
and salinity. This integration of ecological, environmental, genomic, and trait-
based information will provide a comprehensive understanding of microbial life
in Antarctic soils. This project will also help facilitate new collaborations
between scientists across the globe while providing undergraduate students with
'hands-on' research experiences that introduce the next generation of scientists
to the field of Antarctic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.