* 2133725
* Mechanistic and structural approaches for sulfur acquisition in the two-component FMN-dependent monooxygenases
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2021,01/31/2022
* Holly Ellis, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Pui Ho
* 01/31/2022
* USD 140,677.00

Many transformations that occur in nature are enhanced by enzymes. Enzymes play
an important role in all of life processes, and use unique strategies to
optimize the processes they catalyze. Often, enzymes involved in different
chemical reactions incorporate similar strategies to ensure the reaction occurs.
An important role of enzymes is maintaining appropriate levels of sulfur in the
environment to sustain life. An intriguing aspect of enzymes that play a role in
sulfur maintenance is that they utilize similar strategies and features, but are
involved in different environmental reactions. For example, they all employ a
version of riboflavin, vitamin B2. This award from the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program in the Chemistry Division to Dr. Holly Ellis of Auburn
University provides a unique opportunity to understand how essential enzymes
that maintain environmental sulfur levels carry out their reactions. The
experiments are designed to evaluate distinct features and strategies of these
enzymes, which can be used to study other enzyme families. These investigations
are providing graduate and undergraduate students with diverse scientific
training and mentoring. Similar experimental techniques are being incorporated
into a summer program for incoming freshman underrepresented in the STEM fields
at Auburn University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of the project
is to determine how enzymes belonging to the same family utilize common
structural motifs to catalyze different metabolic reactions. The enzymes that
catalyze metabolic reactions utilized by bacteria to obtain sulfur have evolved
a complex mechanism for sulfur acquisition. These reactions are vital in
maintaining adequate cellular sulfur levels. The primary goal of these studies
is to determine how the substrate specificity of the two-component FMN
monooxygenases is maintained, and evaluate how the structural properties
contribute to the specificity and desulfonation mechanism. The structural
similarity of two-component FMN-dependent monooxygenases suggests that these
enzymes utilize a similar innovative mechanism to catalyze carbon-sulfur bond
cleavage. A comprehensive experimental approach is being employed to provide
insight into the structure and functional properties of these enzyme systems.
The studies proposed are utilizing a tractable system to evaluate a family of
enzymes with similar structural and catalytic properties that are involved in a
common metabolic goal. The studies described are providing an in-depth
investigation on how the structural features of enzymes dictate function, and
are providing innovative approaches that can be applied to other enzymes that
utilize similar structural features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.