* 2133661
* Collaborative Research: Continuous Biomanufacturing using Decoupled Growth and Production Stages for Efficient Production and Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Hal Alper, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 313,259.00

The range and scale of biomanufacturing operations continue to grow, sustainably
and locally producing fuels, chemicals, materials, foods, beverages, and
medicines. Currently, most biomanufacturing facilities operate as batch
processes, a chemical manufacturing technology developed over 70 years ago that
has effectively reached its limits in productivity gains and cost reductions
achievable through process optimization. Over this same period, significant
progress has been made in the ability to synthetically engineer microbial cells
to enhance their desirable traits and, ultimately, their ability to produce
valuable bioproducts. This motivates revisiting the design of current batch and
fed-batch manufacturing processes, technologies that have fallen behind the fast
pace of modern metabolic engineering advances, limiting the true conversion
potential of the newly rewired cells. This project aims to establish a novel
continuous biomanufacturing platform that overcomes the major limitations of
conventional (fed)-batch processes, leading to significant increases in reactor
system productivity and a substantial reduction in manufacturing costs. The
engineering knowledge and scientific discoveries generated from this project
will enable the transformation of most current (fed)-batch biomanufacturing
facilities to cost-effective continuous processes for large-scale production of
fuels, chemicals, and other high-value products, strengthening the U.S. global
lead in biomanufacturing. This interdisciplinary, multi-university project will
engage a team of researchers with a diverse set of skills, experiences, and
educational backgrounds, providing a unique research environment for high-
school, undergraduate, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
integrates advanced technologies in process system engineering and synthetic
biology to develop a novel continuous biomanufacturing platform for production
of hydrophobic products such as lipids or lipid-derived high-value products from
cellulosic feedstocks. Intracellular lipids and extracellular free fatty acids
(FFAs) from Yarrowia lipolytica and fatty acid ethyl esters (FAEEs) from
Saccharomyces cerevisiae will be used as archetype bioproducts to develop the
continuous biomanufacturing platform. First, a two-stage continuous fermentation
process equipped with a smaller growth bioreactor and a larger production
bioreactor will be developed so that cell growth and product formation can be
decoupled and where process operating conditions can be independently optimized
to maximize the production of both biomass and target product simultaneously.
Second, the two representative yeasts, Y. lipolytica and S. cerevisiae, will be
engineered to enable distinct growth and production phases controlled by
environmental and/or genetic switching. Y. lipolytica will be engineered to use
both C5 and C6 sugars derived from cellulosic biomass to produce either
intracellular lipids or extracellular FFAs with greater than 80% dry cell weight
(DCW) or equivalent. S. cerevisiae will also be engineered to produce high
levels of FAEEs. Due to the low density and buoyant force of the lipid products,
the product recovery can be easily achieved via simple phase separation. A
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) study on lipid distribution in bioreactors
will be conducted to help further guide the design and optimization of the
continuous biomanufacturing process, coupling product formation and in-situ
product removal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.