* 2133700
* SBIR Phase I:  Utilizing Reinforcement Learning to Optimize Ocean Wave Energy Capture
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Alexander Orona, OCEAN MOTION TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,558.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to facilitate the blue economy’s continued transition to a big-
data paradigm. Currently, there is no cost-effective power solution for off-
grid, small-scale, energy capture applications at sea. The project deliverables
may benefit the commercial ocean sector as well as the Federal government and
local municipalities by enabling cheaper and more reliable power at sea. This
enabling technology may contribute to the ability for planners and decision-
makers to anticipate and adapt to changing marine conditions, which will
ultimately reduce costs and increase reliability for taxpayers. Additionally, to
achieve its commercial objectives, the participating small business is committed
to sustainability in its growth plan and aims to reduce carbon emission by
working with local vendors and locally-sourced, recyclable materials. The small
business will also continue its existing partnerships with local technical
training/trade schools and workforce development programs to mentor underserved
students and create jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to leverage advanced artificial
intelligence for optimizing power output. The project seeks to demonstrate the
application of advanced machine learning techniques to improve the efficiency
and energy capture, and reduce the intermittency, of renewable ocean-based power
generation. The project enables adaptability by using an advanced control model
methodology which adjusts the device hardware based on ambient environmental
conditions for optimized performance. Due to the deployment environment, this
project will capture training data under a laboratory setting, train the control
model offline, and apply it in the field by leveraging edge
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.