* 2133400
* Collaborative Research: LTREB Renewal: Long-Term Dynamics of Amphibian Populations Following Disease-Driven Declines
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2027
* Erica Rosenblum, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2027
* USD 149,431.00

This project will examine the processes of invasion of a novel pathogen into a
population for the case of a fungal pathogen that causes the disease
chytridiomycosis in frogs and salamanders. Outbreaks of emerging infectious
diseases are increasingly recognized as major threats, not just to human
populations but also to wildlife, and they increasingly threaten global
biodiversity. The initial invasion of a novel pathogen into a susceptible host
population can cause a disease outbreak resulting in high levels of mortality
and declines in population size. When this happens, natural selection can occur
for both the host and pathogen populations resulting in evolutionary changes in
the host's susceptibility and tolerance to infection by the pathogen and the
pathogen's ability to damage the host (virulence). These changes can in turn
determine whether the host population can persist and recover from the disease.
Understanding these evolutionary processes is crucial in development of
conservation strategies for threatened species. Chytridiomycosis has had
catastrophic effects on amphibians worldwide, and has been linked to numerous
species extinctions in recent decades and many more species at risk. The
researchers will investigate the patterns of evolutionary change in both the
pathogen and the host (mountain yellow-legged frogs), following the invasion of
the disease into hundreds of high elevation lakes in the California Sierra
Nevada. This project will contribute to the understanding of the role of
infectious diseases, such as chytridiomycosis, as agents of evolutionary change
in natural populations. It will provide critical information to state and
federal agencies, facilitating endangered species recovery and will train and
educate undergraduates, graduate students, and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on data from a long-term study
of the population dynamics of mountain yellow-legged frogs (Rana sierrae and
Rana muscosa) in the complex landscape of the California Sierra Nevada, and the
affects of Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis (Bd) as it has invaded and spread
through hundreds of frog populations. In most cases, invasion of Bd results in
outbreaks of the disease chytridiomycosis, rapid frog population declines, and
local extinctions. In some cases, long-term persistence of frog populations
occurs with Bd in an enzootic state in which the impact of the pathogen is
greatly reduced. The research will extend and leverage 25 years of host
population and disease data and archived genetic samples from R. sierrae/R.
muscosa and Bd. These resources will provide insight into how populations of
both host and pathogen change during the transition from pre-pathogen arrival,
to disease outbreak, to enzootic disease, to potential recovery of the pre-
disease host population abundances. This dataset will be used to investigate the
genetic basis for differences in host resistance/tolerance and pathogen
virulence. Cutting-edge genomic analysis of existing frog and fungal samples
will complement laboratory experiments on Bd virulence and frog susceptibility
using Bd cultures and frog mucosal samples from wild host populations. Continued
surveys of wild host populations will identify new disease outbreaks and
describe the transition from initial outbreak to persistent enzootic
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.