* 2133290
* SBIR Phase II:  Development Of An Orally Administered Gene Therapy For Granulocyte Colony-Stimulating Factor
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Timothy Day, DNALITE THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 967,336.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is an oral delivery platform that can deliver
various drugs to the gastrointestinal tract. The market for novel biologics and
oral formulations of currently injectable biologics is increasing rapidly, as is
the market for gene therapies, necessitating a versatile oral drug delivery
platform. This platform would positively impact society by reducing the need for
repeated injections. This system would improve ease of administration of
injectables by improving oral availability and the transport to the intestinal
cells, and subsequent secretion of the protein into the bloodstream. This would
also allow for local delivery of therapeutics for intestinal diseases which
currently are hampered by poor mucus penetration and represent a multibillion-
dollar market. Successful translation of this technology would benefit
pharmaceutical companies, patients, and payers by providing an oral delivery
platform for a broad range of therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the problem of
improving systemic expression of a protein from the gastrointestinal tract
following oral lipid nanoparticle delivery. The role of digestive tract is to
breakdown lipids and nucleic acids and it has therefore been very challenging to
for gene delivery vehicles to survive and deliver cargo to the intestine. The
project advances a new lipid nanoparticle system able to protect the genetic
cargo to generate protein expression in intestinal cells later secreted into the
bloodstream for systemic circulation. This process converts previously injected
protein drugs into an easily administered oral drug. The research objectives are
to screen and optimize several of the lipid components as well as the nucleic
acid to improve secreted expression of a protein into the blood after oral
delivery. This research will screen multiple formulations and cargos in vivo and
measure serum protein levels after oral lipid nanoparticle delivery. The
anticipated technical results are that the level of secreted protein will
improve 10x from the initial formulation, further increasing the scope of
potential therapeutic targets for the oral lipid
nanoparticle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.