* 2133233
* SCC CIVIC-FA Track B:  Visualizing Resilience: BIPOC Youth Advocacy through Mapmaking
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Mildred McClain, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,999.00

This project will engage Black, Indigenous, and People of Color (BIPOC) youth
living within frontline coastal communities in disaster resilience planning
through mapmaking and advocacy. Map Spot, a creative and accessible mapmaking
tool, as well Youth Advocacy for Resilience to Disasters (YARDs), a curriculum
adapted from a validated program, will be introduced to educate and empower
middle-school age participants to advocate for infrastructural improvements in
their neighborhoods related to disasters and their effects. Beyond the potential
for the proposed infrastructural improvements to be realized, participating in
these activities can help youth increase self and collective efficacy, as well
as connect to a broader network of allies and advocates. Research has shown that
engaging youth in advocacy and disaster preparedness can substantially enhance
disaster resilience. The framework will be with coastal communities on the west
side of Savannah, Georgia, where the project team already has significant
experience in disaster-related data collection, community engagement, and
resilience planning. Following the pilot, the Visualizing Resilience framework
will be transferred to other communities at risk of disasters in Georgia and
across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The custom, open source,
mapmaking tool and tailored curriculum will guide middle-school aged
participants enrolled in after-school clubs to: 1) map the effects of
intersecting disasters in their communities and identify infrastructural
improvement projects to address them, and; 2) advocate for themselves and their
neighbors by presenting their maps to community leaders, local experts and
public officials. The project will contribute to research in three different
areas: 1) It will strengthen disaster resilience scholarship by illuminating how
BIPOC youth, a vulnerable yet relatively understudied group, can promote
resilience in their communities; 2) It will introduce and evaluate a tool as
well as a paired curriculum for digital civics, which can help BIPOC youth do
the work of resilience planning. 3) It will benefit scholarship on youth
advocacy by demonstrating its relationship to self-efficacy, collective
efficacy, and broadening community networks. These outcomes can contribute to
resilience at the individual, group, and societal levels. While youth are
directly engaged through Visualizing Resilience, the benefits of this project
will extend to their communities, as well as the public officials, local
organizations, and resilience researchers that envision a more sustainable
future for all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC
Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, Department of Energy
Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security Science and
Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.