* 2133207
* Purification of bacteriophages using cascade-driven electrokinetic separation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Blanca Lapizco-Encinas, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2025
* USD 452,499.00

Bacteriophages, or phages, are viruses with the unique ability to infect and
kill bacteria. Many different types of phages exist because each typically
targets a specific type of bacteria. This kind of bacterial specificity and
lethality has great potential as a means to control antibiotic-resistant,
pathogenic bacteria, which cause an estimated annual 2.8 million infections and
35,000 deaths in the United States alone. Before a biomanufactured phage can be
used as a treatment by doctors or healthcare professionals, however, it must be
purified to remove any remaining pathogenic cells or cell debris that could make
a patient very ill. This purification step remains a significant hurdle limiting
the use of phage therapy, as no single purification method is suitable for all
phage types. In fact, many phages do not survive the most common purification
procedures. Thus, there is an urgent need to develop a widely applicable phage
purification strategy such that their potential therapeutic value can be
realized. One possible solution is to apply electric fields within microfluidic
systems to manipulate phages inside the microchannels via electrokinetic
effects. This project will examine the efficacy of electrokinetic-based
separation methods for rapidly purifying viable phages. The research outcomes
are expected to advance the current state-of-the-art in phage purification as
well as inform the broader field of electrokinetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to purified phages is essential to the development
of novel phage therapies, which are a growing alternative treatment for
antibiotic-resistant bacterial infections. Accordingly, this project aims to
develop a novel phage purification workflow based on electrokinetics that
ensures both viability and purity. The team will apply a technique called
insulator-based electrokinetics, wherein microfluidic channels that contain
embedded insulating structures are employed. When an electric potential is
applied to the channel, the insulating structures distort the electric field
distribution inside the channel, creating zones where the electric field is more
intense. The strong electrokinetic effects that arise in these zones will enable
the rapid and selective concentration of the target phages based upon the unique
electrokinetic signature displayed by each phage. A two-stage process to purify
the phages will be employed. The first stage will remove the host cells and cell
debris, and the second stage will selectively concentrate the phages of interest
while allowing other similar particles to pass and be removed. Preliminary
experiments demonstrate that phage viability can be preserved in these
purification devices. The research objectives are to (1) define the
electrokinetic signatures of a diverse set of phages; (2) formulate purification
protocols that optimize phage stability during the electrokinetic separation of
virions from cellular material; and (3) characterize the molecular composition
of the electrokinetics-treated phage samples. The project is a collaborative
endeavor that weaves together concepts from engineering and biological sciences
and will, thus, provide unique interdisciplinary research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students. The Rochester Institute of Technology’s
Women in Engineering and Women in Science programs will be leveraged to broaden
the participation of women in STEM activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.