* 2133391
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: CaReDeX: Enabling Disaster Resilience in Aging Communities via a Secure Data Exchange
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Nikil Dutt, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,199,996.00

Disasters disproportionately impact older adults who experience increased
fatality rates; such individuals often live in age-friendly communities and
senior health facilities (SHFs). During a crisis, older adults are often unable
to shelter safely in place or self-evacuate due to a range of physical
conditions (need for life-sustaining equipment, impaired mobility) and cognitive
afflictions (e.g. dementia, Alzheimer’s). First responders assisting older
adults could benefit from seamless, real-time access to critical life-saving
information about the living facilities (e.g., floor plans, operational status,
number of residents) and about individual residents (e.g., health conditions
such as need for dialysis, oxygen, personal objects to reduce anxiety). Such
information, siloed within organizational logs or held by caregivers, is
inaccessible and/or unavailable at the time of response. This interdisciplinary
project brings together IT, geriatrics and resilience experts with disaster-
response agencies and SHF providers to create information preparedness and
transform disaster resilience for older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team
will design, develop and deploy CareDEX, a novel community contributed data-
exchange platform, that empowers SHFs to readily assimilate, ingest, store and
exchange information, both apriori and in real-time, with response agencies to
care for older adults in extreme events. The CareDEX information pipeline
enables SHFs to capture individual information about changing health conditions
and personalized needs and share them with responders to help improve response.
Information co-produced with civic partners will identify and refine resident-
specific data via tools for proactive collection/update. Given the sensitive
nature of personal information, e.g., health-profiles, CareDEX will incorporate
policy-based information sharing mechanisms that balance needs for individual
privacy with authorized information release. CareDEX’s hybrid-cloud architecture
seamlessly enables data to be securely stored on-premise (at SHF) and in the
cloud for remote access by responders and temporary caregivers. Relocation of
older adults requires regional information (e.g. road-conditions, facility
status) - CareDEX will integrate GIS tools to provide first-responders with
uptodate region-level situational awareness for dynamic decision-support. The
prototype CareDEX platform will be co-developed with core civic partners, e.g.
Front Porch (a nation-wide senior-care provider) and deployed at a SHF in
Anaheim, CA. Collaborations with local response agencies (Los Angeles, Orange
County, San Bernardino, San Diego) and national entities (FEMA, Red Cross,
NFPA/FPRF) will mesh needs of emergency responders with caregivers. CareDEX will
be evaluated using diverse scenarios - a wildfire event triggering relocation,
wildfires coupled with a pandemic, and rapid onset earthquake events with small
warning times and increased uncertainty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIVIC
Innovation Challenge is a collaboration with Department of Energy, Department of
Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate, Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), and the National Science
Foundation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.