* 2133276
* Collaborative Research: MODULUS: Nuclear envelope shape change coordination with chromosome segregation in mitosis in fission yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2026
* Mary Elting, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2026
* USD 336,762.00

For over 100 years, biologists have worked to make sense of how cells move
chromosomes to the correct locations for successful cell division in a process
known as mitosis. Because mitosis depends on dozens of protein types, it is
challenging to predict how mitosis works. Therefore, this project is building a
mathematical model of mitosis. An analogy for mitosis is that the cell first
builds a crane (the mitotic spindle) and then uses it to move large objects (the
chromosomes) to their correct places (chromosome segregation). Starting with the
details of a subset of the key molecules, including the chromosomes and the
mitotic spindle, new algorithms are simulating mitosis as a whole. The model is
developed hand-in-hand with experiments in fission yeast. This project is going
beyond previous work to address closed mitosis, in which the nuclear envelope
remains intact, and chromosome segregation and nuclear division occur together.
To understand closed mitosis as a whole, this project is identifying the
mechanisms by which the spindle affects the envelope and the envelope affects
the spindle for successful mitosis. Building this more realistic model of
simultaneous nuclear division and chromosome segregation in mitosis will
ultimately allow study of mitosis across life, particularly in nuclear envelope
function (closed, semi-open, and open mitosis). Understanding how cells divide
is important in the long run for helping correct errors in cell division. The
project is developing interdisciplinary education in biophysics, cellular
biology, and mathematical biology. The project is extending an international,
online biophysics seminar that makes research results broadly available outside
elite institutions and at no cost, broadening participation in
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is modeling closed mitosis by
bringing together membrane and cytoskeletal modeling tools, which are
challenging to integrate and implement with tractable algorithms. The first
objective is extending a model of mitosis to include a deformable elastic
nuclear envelope, to integrate the spindle and chromosomes with boundary-
integral and triangulated-membrane models of the nuclear envelope. The second
objective is to identify how nuclear envelope forces and deformation drive
successful chromosome segregation in closed mitosis, by modeling and measuring
envelope shape, spindle dynamics, and chromosome movement in cells with
perturbations to the nuclear envelope. The project is developing new algorithms
and software for simulation of membrane-cytoskeleton interactions, which are
difficult to model currently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.