* 2133297
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Community-Centric Pre-Disaster Mitigation with Unmanned Aerial and Marine Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Samuel Brody, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 383,591.00

Each year, floods, hurricanes, and wildfires result in over $125 billions of
dollars of losses and loss of life. Unfortunately, Texas, the state with the
greatest number of annual federally declared disasters, and over $100B in
economic losses since 1980, is no exception. Often BIPOC and low-income
communities are impacted the most. Low-cost ($1-12K) unmanned aerial systems
(drones) and unmanned marine surface vehicles (robot boats), coupled with
advances in artificial intelligence and geospatial software, could revolutionize
how communities prepare, prevent, and minimize losses. However, Texas emergency
managers currently lack the workforce and knowledge to investigate and implement
these technologies in a meaningful way. Advances in disaster science are slow in
part because researchers do not have access to comprehensive, longitudinal
datasets to apply computer vision/machine learning (CV/ML) to the most pressing
needs. This one-year, $384K pilot program under the direction of the Texas
A&amp;M Institute for a Disaster Resilient Texas will create a sustainable
research-centric civic engagement cycle in three vulnerable communities: rural
(Bryan), urban (Houston), coastal (Galveston). Emergency managers, working with
research and development partners, will annually determine pressing needs.
Approximately 90 students are expected to work in some form with five emergency
management agencies, five universities including CMU and UC Berkeley, three
companies, and two non-profits. The students, taken from the schools where 76%
are economically disadvantaged, 23% African-American, and 57% Hispanic, will be
trained to collect or process pre-disaster mitigation data. These activities
will amplify their STEM and career certificate courses, robotics clubs, and
incubator experiences. The data and data products will be immediately available
to state and local pre-disaster mitigation agencies. Data in the first year can
result in savings on the order of $21K per parcel by informing common planning
decisions, such as protecting open space and buying out vulnerable housing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component will contribute to fundamental
advances in disaster science, robotics, AI, and urban land use planning by
providing access to data that can answer six fundamental research questions. It
will create the largest comprehensive, longitudinal datasets of unmanned vehicle
imagery for pre-disaster mitigation. The datasets will establish the
trustworthiness of CV/ML for disaster science, develop new algorithms for
recognition of vulnerabilities during different seasons and weather conditions,
and further the fundamental understanding of transfer learning. Performance data
will lead to an informatics-based model of sampling that captures the technical
tradeoffs between accuracy, resolution, and frequency on identifying objects and
scene understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC
Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, Department of Energy
Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security Science and
Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.