* 2133029
* NRI: An Ecologically Curious Robot for Monitoring Coral Reef Biodiversity
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Aran Mooney, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,499,986.00

This grant will fund research that enables monitoring and management of coral
reefs, which are critical biodiversity hotspots that provide direct economic
benefits for subsistence and commercial fishing, tourism, and through coastal
protection, thereby promoting the progress of science and advancing the national
prosperity and welfare. Coral reefs worldwide are under threat from
anthropogenic disturbances including climate change and associated ocean
acidification. New tools are needed to scale up monitoring of coral reefs to
understand reef ecosystems, rapidly assess biodiversity, and measure the
efficacy of interventions. This interdisciplinary project will address this need
by creating an autonomous robotic system that can navigate a complex ecosystem
and intelligently sample its environment to estimate local biodiversity and
ecosystem health. While the project will focus on an underwater system for
monitoring coral reefs, the approach for estimating biodiversity is directly
applicable to monitoring of other complex and threatened ecosystems such as
rainforests, or for seeking out and mapping biodiversity in other remote
habitats. A partnership with a minority-serving institution in the US Virgin
Islands, the site for planned field expeditions, as well as participation in the
Woods Hole Institute Summer Student and Minority Fellowship program, will help
broaden participation in STEM of students from currently underrepresented groups
and the institutions that serve them.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims
to make fundamental contributions to the integration of robotic technologies in
an underwater autonomous vehicle that is capable of intelligent path planning,
decision-making, and locomotion in a complex environment using high-dimensional
information gained from acoustic and visual measurements. It will achieve this
outcome by developing a novel seafloor hopping robot that is able to alternate
between long stationary periods of observing its environment, while minimizing
disturbances to animal life and conserving its energy budget, with short bursts
of swimming activity from one landing spot to the next. The project will develop
a novel solution to the informative path planning problem particular to
categorical data associated with observations of different types of habitat,
plants, and animals. It will model this problem as a partially observable Markov
decision process and will explore new approaches for computing expected reward
rollouts in terms of the error between the estimated and true biodiversity of
the environment, enabled by deep learning techniques and Bayesian
nonparametrics. Field expeditions will include validation of visual reef survey
algorithms for habitat classification, collection of training data for machine
learning algorithms, and tests of the path planning algorithm for locating
biodiversity hotspots and long mission durations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.