* 2133960
* Collaborative Research: Predicting Real-time Population Behavior during Hurricanes Synthesizing Data from Transportation Systems and Social Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2020,09/30/2022
* Aron Culotta, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 72,395.00

This project develops new methods to forecast real-time population behavior
during natural disasters, potentially transforming the current state of
emergency response in a cost-effective way. To understand how individuals,
infrastructure systems, and emergency services should prepare and respond during
such disasters, this project utilizes data available from multiple sources
including from transportation systems and online social media. Using innovative
data science approaches to integrate data from multiple sources increases the
quality of the data available for emergency response prediction and improved
evacuation traffic management. Research outputs will be shared with the
practitioner community to facilitate improved decision making for emergency
agencies in hurricane evacuation and disaster management. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare. In this case, the benefits will be
insights to improve emergency response, which will save lives, economic losses,
and reduce panic, anger and confusion during a future
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines heterogeneous data sources from
transportation systems and social media, in a unified framework-providing better
information for modeling dynamic population behavior during hurricanes. To
accurately predict evacuation demand, this project leverages large-scale real-
time data, rarely used by existing emergency decision support tools. It advances
the data science of disaster management by developing novel information fusion
techniques to represent population and its behavior while employing government
survey and social media data, text-mining approaches to extract evacuation
intent from social media data, and evacuation traffic prediction models to
optimize transportation resources. Through its innovative data gathering and
modeling approaches, this project will enhance our ability to deal with future
hurricanes. The project engages a broader participation of graduate and
undergraduate students including from under-represented groups and plans a
broader dissemination of results to traffic engineers and emergency management
officials from local counties and cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.