* 2133980
* Travel: Secure Knowledge Management Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Shambhu Upadhyaya, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 14,140.00

With the advent of revolutionary technologies such as Artificial Intelligence
(AI), cloud computing, big data, and Internet of Things (IoT), secure knowledge
management (SKM) continues to be an important research area that deals with
methodologies for systematically gathering, organizing, and disseminating
information in a secure and privacy-preserving manner. The recent development of
AI in the security field shows a promising future, and there is no doubt that AI
can provide new ideas and tools for secure knowledge management. In order to
prepare the next generation, high caliber researchers in SKM areas, it is
important to expose graduate students in state-of-the-art research, such as
those covered in the SKM workshop, which was initiated with NSF support in 2004,
and has been held every two years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus
on supporting extensive student attendance through travel grants at the SKM 2021
Workshop and foster their interaction with researchers and practitioners from
academia, industry, and government. The supported students will attend
presentations and participated in discussions related to the most recent
innovations, trends, and concerns including practical challenges encountered and
solutions adopted with special emphasis on AI. The value of this event will be
the multi-disciplinary exchange with emphasis on topics such as machine
learning, privacy, trust, risk, and social and economic aspects, and technology
domains such as IoT, cloud computing and big data. Topics include (a)
cybersecurity, privacy, and ethics of AI, and (b) AI tools to enhance
cybersecurity, trust, and privacy. The conference includes graduate students and
makes a concerted effort to reach out to students and faculty of minority
institutions. The students that attend this event will get a better
understanding of cutting edge topics in these STEM areas, and a clearer picture
of the state-of-the-discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.