* 2133996
* MCA: The Neurophysiology of Teaching Secondary Mathematics for Transcendent Purpose and Cultural Relevance
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jamaal Matthews, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 08/31/2024
* USD 406,813.00

The project examines how teachers’ culturally supportive mathematics
instructional practices engage and shape adolescents’ brain networks in ways
that predict their math identity, achievement, and sense of purpose over time.
The investigator also will assess the neurophysiology of how critical
consciousness develops in mathematics teachers. The project synthesizes
neurobiological, developmental, and culturally situated perspectives to explore
adolescents’ and teachers’ socio-emotional cognition in secondary mathematics
classrooms. The project includes a professional development plan that will
enable the investigator to receive disciplinary and research methodological
training from a collaborating partner to ultimately create an asset-based
cultural neuroscientific approach that is inclusive of the experiences of
diverse and underserved youth. The training will be conducted in collaboration
with the Center for Affective Neuroscience, Development, Learning and Education
at the University of Southern California. The project will forge new discovery
on adolescent thinking as well as teacher thinking and how those beliefs
position them to better support students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will use observational methods to examine concrete and abstract processing
opportunities in secondary math classrooms in conjunction with physiological and
neuroimaging methods of adolescents recounting their experience of these classes
to make meaning of the content. The research aims to (1) understand the multiple
instructional attributes of teaching mathematics for transcendent purpose, and
observe when and under what conditions mathematics teachers are leveraging those
multiple instructional techniques; (2) assess the psychophysiology and neural
networks at play when adolescent students recall their experiences of these
classes and the meaning of mathematics they derived from them; and (3) assess
the psychophysiology and neural networks at play through teachers’ explanations
of why and how they teach mathematics for transcendent purpose. The investigator
will use the Belonging-Centered Instruction observational protocol, the
investigator will evaluate videoed classrooms using state space grid analysis to
study the co-occurrence of distinct instructional phenomena within a two-
dimensional space. Participants will be recruited from mathematics classrooms in
Ohio, New York, and the Algebra Project. The combination of observational and
neuroimaging methods can elucidate the link between teacher pedagogy and student
cognition and address practical questions regarding how teachers can best
position students to recognize and create big picture messages in math and for
themselves. The project will allow the investigator to explore the social
cognitive qualities of math classrooms and teacher pedagogy to understand how
teachers synthesize concrete processing, abstract thought, and student affect
into high-quality mathematics instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by the Mid-Career Advancement program that supports opportunities for
scientists and engineers to advance and enhance their research program through
synergistic and mutually beneficial partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.