* 2133356
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B UNUM: Unification for Underground Resilience Measures
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rae Zimmerman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,949.00

The importance of extreme events from climate change, weather, and accidents
continue to have critical impacts on infrastructure. Underground infrastructures
are interconnected within one another and with above ground infrastructure.
These interdependencies often have cascading impacts on electric power, water,
transportation and communication with extreme social and economic impacts.
Increasing community resilience depends upon identifying underground
infrastructure data and data sharing. Such underground infrastructure data are
not readily known, available, or interoperable. Furthermore, they are typically
under multiple jurisdictions. The UNUM project provides a collaborative
mechanism for data sharing among government, industry, utilities, and community
groups with different data security requirements. Two pilot areas are used
within New York City, midtown East (Manhattan) and Sunset Park (Brooklyn),
contrasting in the types of underground conditions, stakeholders, and
demographic and economic diversity. In Stage 1, commitments to participate in
data sharing were obtained from over 40 stakeholders through a data repository
managed by a City agency that provide the foundation for Stage 2. This Stage 2
project has broader impacts in providing a roadmap and two testbeds for a data
model, data needs, sharing, and security protocols for underground
infrastructures transferable to other areas to improve their
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Goals and Scope of Research and Methods and
Approaches: UNUM Phase 2 expects to develop a methodology to standardize
underground infrastructure and geological data sharing so that all subsurface
utility information is made interoperable: capable of being brought together on
a common basemap for integration and analysis. This will better enable (1) to
identify hazard and disaster vulnerabilities, (2) devise strategies to reduce
accidents and emergencies, and (3) to harden infrastructure in case of natural
disasters and other large-scale threats like sea level rise and global warming.
Based on relationships and agreements with utilities established in UNUM Stage
1, UNUM Stage 2 will collect infrastructure data related to water and sewer
networks (NYC DEP), transit (MTA), electric power (Con Edison and National
Grid), etc. Subsurface utility data will be transformed into a common format,
registered to NYCâ€™s photogrammetric basemap, and securely stored. The data will
conform to the MUDDI data model now in advanced development by the Open
Geospatial Consortium, and will be closely related to underground infrastructure
ASCE 38 and 75 standards for engineering quality and accuracy. The UNUM team
will co-develop with community groups art and engineering activities to improve
community-based infrastructure literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF,
Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.