* 2133798
* EAGER: Self-incompatibility in elderberry
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Bruce McClure, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 162,000.00

Roughly half of the approximately 352,000 species of flowering plants on earth
possess mechanisms that favor cross-pollination. This reproductive strategy is
crucial for generating and sustaining the genetic diversity that plants need to
survive and adapt. Humans rely on plant diversity both directly, for crop
improvement, and indirectly, for ecosystem support. Many plants have evolved
ways to recognize and reject self-pollen and pollen from close relatives. These
so-called “self-incompatibility systems” are among the most common and effective
mechanisms that prevent self-pollination and favor cross-pollination. To date,
the genes controlling self-incompatibility, called S-genes, have been identified
in only three systems that operate in a handful of plant families. This project
will identify S-genes in elderberry, an emerging specialty crop rich in
antioxidants that is used in wine, supplements, and other products. Candidate
genes were identified using a novel approach prioritizing DNA sequence
differences that could relate to pollen recognition as well as expression data.
Experiments will evaluate these candidate genes by testing whether the presence
or absence of particular S-genes reliably predicts what types of pollen are
accepted or rejected. Other experiments will identify additional S-gene
variants. The approach used to identify elderberry S-genes may be applied to
additional self-incompatibility systems and, thus, further contribute to
understanding maintenance of plant diversity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Self-
incompatibility (SI) systems are among the most important genetic mechanisms
plants use to control mating. Typically, the genes controlling SI, S-genes, have
numerous allelic variants, and, basically, SI allows plants to reject pollen
from potential mates with similar alleles. SI species are obligate outcrossers
because self-pollen always has the same S-alleles as the pistil. Notwithstanding
their outsized importance for plant diversity, evolution and adaptability,
S-genes have only been identified in a handful of SI systems. Here, the overall
goals are to elucidate a new SI system, identify the controlling S-genes, and
facilitate their use in the scientific and agriculture communities. We
characterized SI in elderberry (Sambucus canadensis) and used RNASeq to identify
candidate S-genes. Genetic experiments will ascertain whether these candidate
S-genes truly control SI in elderberry. Four populations segregating for
distinct S-allele candidates will be genotyped and test pollinated to determine
whether they reject pollen from plants bearing the same alleles. Elderberry is
an emerging specialty crop valued for potential health benefits, and additional
S-alleles will be identified in elderberry and related plants to support the
elderberry improvement community. Specifically, the project will allow breeders
and producers to predict the crossing behavior of commercial varieties. Project
activities related to elderberry production and improvement will be broadly
disseminated via presentations, video, and Extension publications. The project
also will contribute to human resource development by providing undergraduate
research training in both laboratory- and field-based plant
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.