* 2133553
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: From Molecules to Sustainable Reef Platforms: Engineering Ecosystems for Coral Recruitment and Survival
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Forest Rohwer, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 162,146.00

Coral reefs are large underwater structures composed of the skeletons of corals
that support entire ecosystems. They also provide substantial benefits to
society that are estimated to total $1 trillion annually. These benefits include
providing storm protection to shorelines, as well as supporting sport and
commercial fisheries and tourism. Unfortunately, the global loss of living coral
from coral reefs has resulted in greatly reduced benefits to ecosystem health
and society. Coral reproduces by generating swimming larvae that must find a
safe surface on the reef to attach and grow. This process has a low success rate
because the underwater surfaces of reefs no longer support juvenile coral
survival. Relatively little is known about the how coral reef surfaces influence
coral attachment and growth. The goal of this research is to address this
knowledge gap and develop engineered surfaces to promote coral larvae settlement
through a collaboration of materials engineering, fluid physics, microbiology,
and conservation biology. Engineered surfaces will be deployed and tested on
floating underwater platforms that are designed to support growing coral
attachment and increase survival of coral by increasing water flow and oxygen
availability. Successful completion of this research will transform the field of
coral reef restoration, resulting in improved nearshore water quality and
increased reef resilience to climate change and ocean acidification. Benefits to
society result from improved recreational and commercial fisheries, as well as
tourism. Further benefits result from interdisciplinary environmental research
training for college students and early-career scientists to improve the
Nation’s STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During sexual reproduction,
swimming coral larvae must locate an appropriate substrate on which to settle
and grow. Unfortunately, fundamental knowledge about the role of substrate
properties that control successful coral larval settlement is lacking. This
knowledge gap is particularly critical as coral reefs are in decline on a global
basis due to climate change, ocean acidification, and other environmental
disturbances. The goal of the project is to address these knowledge gaps and
increase understanding of the physical and biochemical cues that enhance larval
settlement and growth. This will be achieved by a convergent research approach
that includes materials science and engineering, fluid mechanics, coral
reproduction, marine microbiology, and reef ecology. The specific research
objectives designed to achieve the overall goal are to: i) tailor material
properties to release organic and ionic additives from natural hydraulic lime
substrates that enhance the attraction, attachment, and settlement responses of
coral larvae; ii) quantify fluid-substrate interactions, attachment, and
microscale coral larvae transport near diverse substrate topographies using
computational simulations and particle tracking experiments in custom-built
oscillating flume chambers; iii) combine state-of-art materials characterization
techniques and metagenomics methods to determine how substrate properties alter
the microbiomes and skeletal growth of juvenile corals during and after
successful settlement; and iv) deploy and test engineered substrates on floating
restoration platforms designed to keep coral away from low flow, hypoxic, and
algae-dominated benthic environments. Successful completion of this research has
the potential to transform the field of coral restoration science and facilitate
the restoration of coral reef ecological function. Restoration of critical coral
reef resources will have numerous ecological and societal benefits, including
supporting fisheries and tourism economies, as well as providing shoreline
protection. The project will provide convergent, multidisciplinary training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and underrepresented
students in the Mathematics, Engineering, Science, Achievement (MESA) program.
Additional benefits result from the training of a new generation of scientists
in crossing disciplinary boundaries to solve societal grand
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.