* 2133502
* RAPID: Influence of the Brood X Cicada Emergence on Soil Water Infiltration
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Darren Ficklin, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Boyer
* 05/31/2023
* USD 19,331.00

In the Spring and Summer of 2021, billions of Brood X cicadas will emerge from
the soil, leaving burrows and emergence holes that will potentially affect soil
water infiltration rates (the movement of water into soil) and thus surface
water and groundwater volumes. The current understanding of how burrowing
affects soil water infiltration rates comes from individual locations with
localized burrowing, which can limit our understanding of how these biological
processes affect large-scale or regional hydrology. By taking water infiltration
measurements at many locations in central and southern Indiana with and without
cicada emergence holes, this work will advance the understanding of how
widespread burrowing can disrupt soil water hydrology. Understanding how this
semi-rare cicada emergence (last one was 17 years ago) affects regional
hydrology has implications for many environmental science topics such as
vegetation water use, river volumes, groundwater table heights, and changes in
water quality. The work will also provide valuable research experience for two
undergraduate and two graduate students. Results will be disseminated in
manuscripts, conference presentations, news releases, and public data portals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, infiltration rates will be measured at
multiple locations with and without cicada emergence holes, to improve
understanding of how large-scale soil disturbances affect regional hydrology.
Using portable infiltrometers in varying landscapes and soils throughout central
and southern Indiana, they will measure the influence of cicada emergence holes
at two scales: the macropore scale (e.g., one cicada emergence hole) and multi-
macropore scale (e.g., many cicada emergence holes). Results generated from this
work will improve understanding of how soil disturbance affects infiltration
rates, which has important implications for hydrological processes (e.g.,
surface runoff, groundwater recharge), water quality (e.g., agricultural
leeching), and watershed management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.