* 2133154
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Algorithms for Graph-Based Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Mary Wootters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/28/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Error-correcting codes are a fundamental tool for protecting data in
communication and storage. Graph-based codes – codes constructed and analyzed
using tools from combinatorics and graph theory – are an important class of
error-correcting codes. This project will develop new algorithms and techniques
for graph-based codes. Such algorithms will have applications not only in
communication and storage, but also in areas like algorithm design and
complexity theory. This project also involves educational and outreach
components, such as the development of publicly available teaching materials,
including a series of YouTube lectures; and research opportunities for graduate
and undergraduate students, with an emphasis on recruiting from groups
underrepresented in computing. This project is an international collaboration,
made possible through joint funding with the US-Israel Binational Science
Foundation (BSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this project will develop
techniques for list- and local-decoding of graph-based codes. In the standard
unique decoding problem, a receiver wants to reconstruct a sender’s message
exactly; in list-decoding, the receiver is allowed to produce a short list of
possible messages; in local-decoding, the receiver is only responsible for a
small portion of the original message. While graph-based codes are extremely
well-studied for unique decoding, especially in the setting of stochastic
errors, they are much less common for list-decoding or local-decoding. This
project will make progress on two major open problems in coding theory, beyond
graph-based codes: to achieve linear-time capacity-achieving list-decoding
algorithms, and to perform local decoding with high rate and low query
complexity. Moreover, progress in these areas will feed back into unique
decoding, leading to uniquely decodable codes with extremely efficient decoding
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.