* 2133983
* EAGER: New superdiffusive pastes from self-motile active particles with extreme penetration capabilities enabling breakthrough biomedical technologies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2023
* Orlin Velev, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 207,967.00

This EAGER project will seek to prove the feasibility of new high-risk, high-
reward, interdisciplinary ideas in the field of self-propelling active
particles. These new classes of particles can convert their internal chemical
energy, or energy from external fields, into motion. The motile particles have
highly unusual properties and can form the basis of new biomedical products with
very high efficiency and radically improved performance. However, the present
types of active particles are complicated or require a special medium for
propulsion. This project will explore new types of active particles, which will
propel themselves by simple osmotic effects, while a portion of the particles
dissolve in the medium. A new system made of such particles called a
“superdiffusive paste” will have extraordinary properties in being able to
rapidly permeate any medium with interconnected pores, infusing any crevice,
pore, and cavity, as the motile particles move through the pore network. This
system could be used to deliver compounds in challenging situations. For
example, a superdiffusive paste loaded with disinfectant will be able to
penetrate the complex inner channel network of teeth and kill microbes concealed
within this network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project will explore new
physical principles for particle self-propulsion without an external source of
energy or special media and will apply these principles by constructing a new
type of suspension in the form of a superdiffusive paste. The introduction of
the superdiffusive paste could spark new areas of fundamental research due to
the rich variety of mass-transport effects that will emerge in such novel active
particle systems. The most exploratory and interdisciplinary element will be the
application of the superdiffusive paste in biomedical systems. Specifically, the
project will seek to demonstrate that the high permeation capability of the
superdiffusive paste can lead to future transformative products for disinfection
of open teeth, tissues, and wounds. The development of the novel paste will be
done in collaboration with experienced dental investigators. The broader impacts
of the project include providing training ground for a new diverse group of
engineering students in the emerging areas of active materials. These students
will master multidisciplinary topics ranging from chemical engineering, to
design of new active materials, to their translation to biomedical use. It will
also contribute to the research team's ongoing activity in maximizing
undergraduate and graduate researcher diversity and preparing enticing materials
for hands-on outreach demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.