* 2133869
* I-Corps: Development of machine learning technology for matching under a variety of realistic and largescale preference structures
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Lexin Li, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of new technologies for achieving efficient two-sided matching under
the constraints of fairness and trustworthiness. Numerous technologies presently
exist for two-sided matching of supplies and demands. Those assessments that are
fair and trustworthy tend to lack efficiency for commercial applications and
lack adequate performance specifications, while those with ideal efficiency are
too computationally expensive for large-scale markets. The proposed program
explores implementation and commercialization opportunities within the project's
initial application focus of small to medium-sized businesses in manufacturing.
The proposed technologies have a broad application potential, and can materially
reduce the time of finding suitable suppliers and lowering prices. Additionally,
the longer-term development of the technology may prove disruptive in markets
such as call centers and student tutoring websites. The developed technologies
may also improve the supply chain and better allocate scarce resources, e.g.,
vaccines and medicines, while ensuring social efficiency and fairness in the
matching process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
premise that the intersection of state-of-the-art machine learning and economic
principles leads to disruptive innovation. The project's technologies offer a
fundamentally different approach to two-sided matching than those developed in
the past six decades. This project pursues a data-driven solution to a dynamic
two-sided matching problem. Previous progress on this project has focused on the
theoretical development of the mechanism design and experimental verification of
algorithms in small-scale markets with hundreds of users. By contrast, this
project enables a widely scalable approach for millions of users to be matched
in real-time and allowing realistic uncertain preferences. The approach not only
yields maximum efficiency but also guarantees outcomes such as trustworthiness
and fairness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.