* 2133014
* EAGER: SUPER: Search for high-temperature superconductivity in heterostructured two-dimensional organic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Andrey Rogachev, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,214.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The project sets the goal to design and
fabricate single- and multi-layer organic materials which can host
superconductivity, potentially at room temperature and ambient pressure.
Obviously, this discovery would be a revolution across all technologies but in
particular in microelectronics and energy transfer and generation. But even if
this grand goal is not achieved, the development of the protocols for growth of
multilayered organic materials with programmed functionality enables
applications in semiconductor and renewable energy industries, optics and
lasing. On the educational side, the project brings into the PI’s group an
entirely new area of research linked to organic chemistry. Through group
meetings and direct participation in the research, graduate and undergraduate
students broaden their knowledge and expertise in organic and quantum chemistry,
fields that are typically not part of physics education. The project supports
training of undergraduate students in organic chemistry, semiconductor
processing and transport, magnetic and optical measurements. It also creates
opportunities for undergraduate research during summer, to be offered to the
students from Department of Chemistry, thus exposing them to many aspects of
physics lab. This engagement makes students ready for future collaborative
multi-disciplinary work in industrial and academic
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The research
team uses the state-of-the-art method of organic molecular beam epitaxy (OMLE)
to fabricate several series of organic heterostructured materials anticipated to
have superconducting properties at high temperatures. OMLE allows to construct
unique molecular intra-layer and inter-layer arrangements inaccessible by
standard methods. They include self-assembled monolayers and multilayers made
from aromatic molecules such as picene, chrysene, NTCDI, and anchored fullerenes
in the configuration of field-effect transistor, which allows to inject carriers
by adjusting the gate potential. Molecules with donor and acceptor properties
are mixed to imitate molecular arrangements in charge-transfer organic
superconductors. The physical properties of materials are characterized by
transport and magnetic measurements in the range 1.5-300 K in the PI’s lab. The
growth of the materials is monitored by in-situ spectroscopic ellipsometry. The
charge states, electronic band formation, charge-transfer and optical properties
are studied using University of Utah shared facilities: x-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, optical absorption, and Raman
spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.