* 2133650
* III:Small: Interpretable Deep Generative Models for Drug Development
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Srinivasan Parthasarathy, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2024
* USD 499,995.00

Drug discovery is time-consuming and costly: it takes approximately 10-15 years
and between $500 million to $2 billion to fully develop a new drug. Molecule
optimization is a critical step in drug discovery to improve desired properties
of drug candidates through chemical modification. For example, in lead
(molecules showing both activity and selectivity towards a given target)
optimization, the chemical structures of the lead molecules can be altered to
improve their selectivity and specificity. Conventionally, this process is
facilitated based on knowledge, intuition and experience of medicinal chemists,
and is done via fragment-based screening or synthesis. Such an approach is not
scalable. The objective of this project is to develop a new class of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) methods and tools to conduct in silico molecule generation.
Specifically, this project will focus on the following important aspects in AI-
based in silico molecule optimization: 1) major scaffold retention, 2) molecule
diversity, 3) molecule synthesizability; 4) multi-property optimization; and 5)
interpretability. The central hypothesis underlying the proposed research is
that the increasing amount of publicly available molecule data, including
molecule properties, synthesis pathways and drug-likeness, contains a wealth of
information that, if properly analyzed and utilized, can provide key insights in
revealing, characterizing and automating the computational molecule generation
and optimization process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing a new class of AI
methods for in silico drug molecule optimization will require the development of
novel AI models and methods for in silico molecule optimization. Examining
designs based on new deep generative models, deep graph convolutional networks,
conditional sampling approaches and reinforcement learning methods that learn
from pairs of molecular graphs, and accordingly generate new molecular graphs
with improved biochemical and biophysical properties, is necessary. The proposed
research will also provide a holistic framework to explore prospective molecules
that are sufficiently different from one another; and will investigate molecular
graph search approaches and Bayesian optimization methods to guide search in the
latent embedding (representation) space. For multi-property optimization, the
proposed research will provide a pipeline structure and new reinforcement
learning approaches. To understand and facilitate interpretable generative
models, the proposed research will develop a set of novel methods including
network dissection, perturbation-based attribution methods, self-explaining
methods and disentanglement. This project will have substantial societal and
educational impacts, and will enhance diversity in STEM through education and
research dissemination. The broader scientific contributions of the will be the
development of innovative AI methodologies and tools that will aid drug
development. These technical innovations will not only address the key
computational challenges in generative models for molecules, but also
potentially generalize to other problems (e.g. cheminformatics, materials
design) in which generation of structural data is highly needed and
interpretation of such generation process is critical. The proposed research can
potentially reduce the investment costs during drug discovery, increase its
successful rate significantly, and ultimately aid in the improvement of the US
health care quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.