* 2133396
* Guaymas Basin Stratigraphy, Event Bed Origins, and Correlation: Maximizing Results from the 4 km of Core Recovered on IODP Expedition 385
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Kathleen Marsaglia, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 268,676.00

Ocean basins form and grow through the tectonic processes of continental rifting
followed by seafloor spreading. The Gulf of California (GOC) is one of few
places on earth where the sediment fill and volcanic products of a young ocean
basin can be obtained through seafloor drilling. Then, the basin history can be
studied from recovered sediment cores. The focus of this study is ~4 km of
sediment cores recovered during recent drilling and exploration of the Guaymas
Basin, Central GOC, Mexico. These will be analyzed and interpreted to find out
what controlled the sediment composition, how the sediment was transported and
deposited, and how to match the sedimentary layers among drill sites. This study
helps to train women and underrepresented minorities in geoscience, supporting a
research team of three master’s degree students mentored by two female
professors. The work results will be communicated to the public through outreach
activities in the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area. This location
is the largest urban park in the United States. The project team will create new
geologic field-trip materials to help visitors learn about park geology. The
field-trip stops will include outcrops with marine sedimentary and volcanic
rocks similar to those found in the Guaymas Basin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lithofacies and petrofacies analyses of International
Ocean Discovery Program Expedition 385 cores and integration with prior Deep Sea
Drilling Project Leg 64 drilling results are necessary steps for unraveling the
patterns and controls of sediment delivery and accumulation in the Guaymas
Basin. Integral to this basin analysis is the definition of potential datums,
volcanic ashes and other sandy event (storm, seismic) beds, that can define
packages of sediment that are linkable in time across the basin, to show
patterns in sediment accumulation rates. Ash and epiclastic volcanic sand-silt
beds newly discovered on Expedition 385 will be fingerprinted using a variety of
petrographic and imaging techniques, and their provenance further documented
using analyses of their major and minor element geochemistry, and elemental
composition of mineral phases. Sandy gravity-mass flow beds in the deep basin
will show facies and detrital mode patterns indicative of their delivery
mechanisms, for example: A) delta-front flood and mass-wasting; B) seismic-
induced mass wasting along the continental slope; and C) tropical storm flushing
of coastal sediment. This study, in combination with other Expedition 385
research, will make the Guaymas Basin arguably the best studied young ocean
basin in the world and a model for the early sedimentary history of nascent
ocean basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.