* 2133706
* Changes in Underground Food Storage Traditions: Exploring Food Life-History and Food Security in Beringian Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Go Iwahana, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 01/31/2025
* USD 599,008.00

This project addresses Indigenous food security in Alaska through the study of
subterranean food caches in three Alaska Native communities. Underground food
storage and preservation are critical to subsistence and food security for many
Alaska Native households. However, permafrost thaw and subsidence are causing
many caches to collapse or flood. Employing community-based participatory
research, the PI team will document current and past use of food caches
ethnographically and identify emerging food storage and preservation challenges.
The condition and integrity of existing caches will be assessed using
environmental science methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mixed-methods project
employs both ethnographic methods and environmental science data collection and
analysis. Members of the research team will conduct participant observation and
oral history interviews in three Alaska Native villages with traditions of
underground storage. With community assistance, caches will be identified and
documented. The condition of select caches will be monitored to detect
subsidence and to measure temperature, humidity, and rate of permafrost thaw.
Bio- and geochemical analyses will enable researchers to characterize permafrost
composition and hydrology. The project team will work with community partners to
interpret project findings and develop outreach materials such as booklets,
posters, and classroom curricula. Results will also be disseminated via
conference presentations and peer-reviewed articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.