* 2133244
* Pacific Interdisciplinary Hub on Optimal Transport
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Yanqin Fan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 04/30/2025
* USD 222,000.00

This project concerns collaborative research in the mathematics of optimal
transport (OT). Originally posed as a question about the most efficient way to
move a set of objects from one location to another, this area achieved modern
significance in connection with optimally "transporting" goods and services from
producers to consumers. The subject has subsequently developed rapidly and found
connections to and applications in a host of scientific areas, from physics to
artificial intelligence. This project involves collaborative work among
researchers in the sciences, engineering, economics, and business who have
interest in the role of optimal transport in their respective fields. The group
aims to answer fundamental questions that have immediate application. The
group's strategy is to (1) quickly exchange mathematical knowledge to solve
applied problems, (2) formulate new mathematical questions inspired directly by
applications, and (3) train a new generation of researchers who both understand
the powerful mathematics of optimal transport and are experienced in its
practical applications. Student trainees are expected to be strong candidates in
emerging job markets in both academia and industry that value mathematicians
with experience in application areas.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Although OT is a
major area in modern mathematics, its potential is still not widely realized.
This research group aims to answer fundamental open questions in the mathematics
of OT as well as to explore areas of application, including constructing
improved metrics of economic equality, entropic regularization of OT and
applications to data science, the geometry of Wasserstein space and Wasserstein
gradient flows with applications to sampling and analysis of large and/or deep
neural networks, and similar questions at the intersection of multiple areas of
science and engineering. The project includes multi-disciplinary training of
students in theory, application, and computation, as well as development of a
sequence of "OT+X" online courses, where the subject "X" changes each offering
and will incorporate economics, machine learning, cell biology, and gradient
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.