* 2133032
* RI: Small: Learning to See Through Atmospheric Turbulence
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Stanley Chan, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 148,330.00

For a variety of long-range imaging systems in autonomous vehicles,
surveillance, and defense, restoring images that are distorted by atmospheric
turbulence is inevitable. However, unlike the better-known image restoration
problems such as denoising and deblurring, recovering turbulence distorted
images is considerably more difficult because of the physics involved. On one
hand, the image formation process due to a turbulent medium is described by a
sequence of wave equations of diffraction and phase distortion. The lack of a
simple forward model makes the inverse problem difficult to formulate and solve.
On the other hand, while deep learning algorithms have produced promising
results in many disciplines, the disparity between these generic models and the
specific turbulence physics makes the resulting methods lack generalizability,
explainability, and robustness. The goal of this proposal is to bridge the gap
between turbulence physics and deep learning algorithms. The approach is to
ground the algorithmic designs on physics by developing new forward models,
reconstruction algorithms, training schemes that improve consistency, and
benchmark evaluation. By improving the image restoration capability, the project
will enable a wide range of imaging applications and software products that, in
turn, improve object detection, biometric analysis, and navigation. For mission-
critical applications such as defense, the integration of physics and algorithms
will provide more consistent and trustworthy information for decision-making.
The project also trains next-generation imaging scientists that will provide the
necessary workforce to the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the
goal of the project, four objectives will be pursued. (1) To develop a new
forward model that has low complexity, adheres to physics, and is differentiable
in the sense of backpropagation. The new model will fill the critical need for a
viable turbulence simulator that can generate data at a large scale for training
and testing. (2) To develop a new image restoration algorithm by integrating the
forward model, lucky imaging, and end-to-end neural networks. Specifically, a
new strategy for feature matching in the presence of turbulence and noise will
be developed, and inverse optimization will be formulated via the concept of
unrolled neural networks. It is anticipated that the new techniques will enable
the imaging of small and moving objects. (3) To develop a new training scheme
that improves the consistency of the algorithm from one turbulence condition to
another, by optimally allocating the training samples according to the
turbulence strengths. (4) To establish a benchmark evaluation system by building
controllable experimental setups and collecting real data. On the education
front, the project aims to promote the exchange of knowledge across physics and
deep learning by developing tutorials in major computer vision and optics
conferences; disseminating educational materials to the general public through
classes and books; delivering codes and datasets to support reproducible
research. The project will promote STEM education by offering image processing
and machine learning to high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.