* 2133170
* Collaborative Research: Optimized Testing Strategies for Fighting Pandemics:  Fundamental Limits and Efficient Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Jing Yang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2025
* USD 274,774.00

Large-scale high-throughput prevalence and diagnostic testing is essential for
the containment and mitigation of pandemics. The testing bottleneck in the
COVID-19 pandemic has led to a resurgence of interest in group testing, where
several people's biological samples are mixed together and examined in a single
test. When the rate of infection in the population is low, this method can
significantly reduce the total number of tests per subject and increase the
throughput of the existing testing infrastructure. However, traditional group
testing has the following limitations: First, efficient group testing based
methods for the estimation of prevalence have been largely overlooked in the
literature. Second, traditional group testing usually assumes that the testing
results are qualitative (positive versus negative), not quantitative (providing
viral load information). Third, the theoretical study of group testing rarely
takes practical constraints, such as the sensitivity of the pooled tests and the
dilution effect, into consideration, which hinders the applicability of the
testing schemes in practice. The goal of this project is to overcome these
limitations of traditional group testing and design advanced pooled testing
strategies for efficient prevalence tracking and accurate infection diagnosis.
It will develop optimized pooled testing strategies with strong theoretical
performance guarantees yet feasible and cost-effective in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is organized in three
research thrusts as follows. Thrust 1 aims to design effective sampling and
testing algorithms to estimate the prevalence in communities and track its
evolution, under scarce testing resource constraints. Thrust 2 focuses on the
design of optimized pooling and decoding algorithms for compressed sensing based
(COVID-19) virus diagnostic testing. Thrust 3 validates the accuracy and
efficiency of the proposed pooled testing through experiments on anonymized
COVID-19 samples. This project bridges group testing and online learning, the
two largely disconnected areas, with the objective to effectively allocate
limited testing resources for efficient prevalence tracking. Such integration
leads to novel sampling strategies, broadens the paradigm of group testing, and
advances the state of the art of online learning. Moreover, the proposed
compressed sensing based diagnostic testing leverages quantitative measurements
provided by advanced testing technologies, which can significantly increase test
throughput, reduce the number of needed tests, decrease the consumption of
scarce reagents, and provide results robust against observation noises and
outliers. The rich compressed sensing theory provides possible approaches to the
rigorous mathematical certification of the correctness of the decoded results.
Besides, the clinical constraints on pooled testing also lead to novel problem
formulation and theoretical characterization, enriching the study of compressed
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.