* 2133769
* URoL:EN: Learning the Rules of Neuronal Learning
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Timothy Horiuchi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,949,109.00

This project will explore the rules of life of neuronal networks in an
engineered microenvironment. The networks of neurons in biological brains
routinely solve challenging problems in pattern recognition and classification
more efficiently and with better performance than man-made computers. This has
inspired algorithms and engineering models of computing behind the sophisticated
voice recognition and computer vision available today, yet there has been
limited progress towards understanding the physical mechanisms within a living
neuron and its neighbors underlying its remarkable capabilities. This project
brings together recent technological advances in patterning, recording,
stimulation, and genetic manipulation of neurons to study how to nurture a
healthy culture of neurons while continuously observing and stimulating them at
a scale fine enough to uncover how the individual parts of a single neuron
contribute to the overall learning and computation of the network. The goal is a
proof-of-concept demonstration of a programmable computation by neurons in a
dish. If successful, this will have significant implications for both the
scientific understanding of natural neuronal computation and would introduce a
completely new set of engineering tools for interacting with living neurons and
exploring what is computationally possible. New understanding from the neuronal
rules of life may impact artificial intelligence, robotics, and neural
prosthesis. This project will seek to engage the public with new insights and
results while providing the software and datasets as a scientific resource to
allow other investigators to verify and extend the results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neuronal computation is distributed and dynamic in nature.
This project will investigate the rules of life of neuronal networks at an
unprecedented spatial and temporal scale within an engineered microenvironment
by extending existing technologies to demonstrate trainable spatiotemporal
pattern recognition by small networks of cultured neurons. To accomplish this, a
multidisciplinary team of engineers and biologists will adapt emerging
techniques for culturing neurons in patterned microenvironments and for
recording/stimulating neurons using high density microelectrode arrays and
optogenetics. The primary scientific hypothesis is that a single neuron, when
presented with a spatiotemporal pattern of input spikes distributed on its
dendritic tree, can be trained to respond highly selectively to one pattern out
of many distractor stimuli. This research will be organized along five distinct
thrusts: 1) development of a stable, non-bursting, neuron/glia co-culture that
receives persistent background stimulation to avoid sensory deprivation, 2)
identification and localization of network synaptic connectivity between cells
and the modification of synaptic strength based on spike-timing-dependent
plasticity, 3) characterization of computational primitives observed in the
dendritic tree, 4) development of training protocols for single-neuron,
selective learning of spatiotemporal patterns in simulation, and 5) training of
a live, cultured neuron to selectively respond to a target spatiotemporal
pattern. The experiments will make use of high-density microelectrode arrays and
a high-resolution fluorescence microscope with the capability to project
patterned light for optogenetic stimulation of cells. This research will
establish fundamental and practical understanding of how the neurons
individually and collectively respond to their dynamic environment, develop
predictive models of the response, and develop control laws to tune the network
for specific spatiotemporal pattern recognition tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.