* 2133355
* Collaborative Research: CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Sharing Farm Intelligence via Edge Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Nadia Shakoor, Donald Danforth Plant Science Center
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2025
* USD 152,393.00

In the era of data sharing, it is still challenging, insecure, and time-
consuming for scientists to share lessons learned from agricultural data
collection and data processing. The focus of this project is to mitigate such
challenges by intersecting expertise in plant science, secure networked systems,
software engineering, and geospatial science. The proposed cyber-physical system
will be evaluated in the laboratory and deployed on real crop farms in Missouri,
Illinois, and Tennessee. All results will be shared with international
organizations whose goal is to increase food security and improve human health
and nutrition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed system will securely
orchestrate data gathered using sensors, such as hyperspectral and thermal
cameras to collect imagery on soybean, sorghum, and other crops. Preprocessed
plant datasets will be then offered to scientists and farmers in different
formats via a web-based system, ready to be processed by deep learning
algorithms or consumed by thin clients. Data collected from different crop farms
will be used to train distributed deep learning systems, using novel
architectures that optimize privacy and training time. Such machine learning
systems will be used to predict plant stress and detect pathogens. Finally, the
cyber-physical system will integrate novel data processing software with
existing NSF-funded hardware platforms, introducing novel algorithmic
contributions in edge computing and giving feedback to farmers, closing the
loop. The results of this project will impact research on high-value crops with
significant levels of automation, such as those in protected agriculture and
fish crop hydroponics systems in desert farming. Planned outreach activities
will impact solutions for smallholder farmers that collaborators at the
International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas (ICARDA)
support. Although this work will focus on enabling data science for farming
applications, the work will also inform management of other IoT applications,
e.g., smart and connected healthcare or other cyber-human
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.