* 2133309
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A:  CiBiC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Eli Kaufman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,197,612.00

CiBiC (Civic Bicycle Commuting) addresses the spatial mismatch gap by increasing
the number of people who are willing to bike to work, using a community-driven
group bicycling system. We propose that biking will increase transportation
satisfaction, lower transportation costs, and increase flexibility to respond to
employment and housing opportunities, while our unique technosocial,
cyberphysical approach will enhance recruitment and retention, foster community
engagement, and inform future plans for physical bicycling infrastructure. The
research is situated in Los Angeles, California, within a pilot study area whose
residents are predominantly lower income people of color. It brings together
community organizations that support them with bicycling advocates to help
design and execute the approach in partnership with university and industry
collaborators, a model that will improve engagement within the project and
applicability beyond it. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CiBiC will design and deploy a
cloud-supported mobile app that engages communities in organizing demand-aware
bike "flows", or group commuting corridors. It aims to generate emergent bike-
to-work communities of practice that commute together, pair less skilled riders
with more experienced ones, and can incorporate eBikes to enhance inclusion.
Flows are planned around enjoyment and "bikability" as well as efficiency and
connectivity to public transportation. Riders will use the CiBiC app to join
these flows in small groups to increase safety and facilitate adoption.
Participating bicycle commuters are further invited to co-create the system
itself through a participatory data-driven public art component that provides
visualization of flows and the activity of pods and riders within them. This
promotes participation of community members that will influence both this
project and future system designs. The participatory public artwork will be
displayed in public spaces, such as transit hubs and community centers,
providing entry points for engagement and stimulating collective reflection,
evaluation, and co-design. CiBiC combines the day-to-day support of a smartphone
app with novel, data-driven create expression to enhance feelings of collective
identity, inclusion and ownership and sustain its ridership. Its route planning
emphasizes a broader range of metrics than trip efficiency, providing additional
degrees of freedom for route planning that could have lasting impact on mapping
and navigation tools. With its exploration of potential machine learning support
for emergence and tuning of new flows in new locations based on local
transportation demand, CiBiC aims to maximize future scalability,
transferability, and impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.