* 2133585
* I-Corps:  Telehealth nasoendoscope for remote diagnosis and therapy of ear, nose, and throat disorders
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2022
* Lambertus Hesselink, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a lower-cost, improved performance nasoendoscope (nasal
endoscope) system for diagnosis of ear, nose and throat conditions. There are
three main types of endoscopes: rigid optical, fiberscope, and video-endoscope.
Those which are cost effective for widespread use tend to lack adequate
performance specifications and features. Presently, nasoendoscopes are often too
cumbersome during the procedure and the documentation of results is time-
consuming. Additionally, current nasoendoscopes are difficult and costly to
disinfect. The proposed devise is user-friendly device and can help qualified
medical personnel conduct diagnostic examinations of the nasal cavity and reach
high-quality diagnoses more quickly. This proposed project explores
implementation and commercialization opportunities in Otolaryngology markets as
well as Sleep Medicine, Speech and Language Pathology, and veterinary markets.
The innovation can have significant impact on patient care and safety, as well
as reductions in long-term care costs and medical
waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a nasoendoscope
utilizing Universal Serial Bus (USB) to power and stream video. The device is
used by qualified medical personnel to visualize areas within the nasal cavity
for diagnosis, tracking, and therapeutic biofeedback purposes. The novel
nasoendoscope system includes software that allows the user to power the device,
view, and share the video through a single cable, greatly simplifying the
procedure and subsequent documentation. The design allows for real-time sharing
of the procedure and seamless integration into a clinic's workflow. Previous
progress on this project has focused on the theoretical development and
experimental verification of the electrical design. This effort will be used to
refine understanding of product-market fit and will further inform the
development path and specification focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.