* 2133174
* Kinetic and scale-up studies on modular ethene production through high pressure autothermal operation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Vemuri Balakotaiah, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Ethylene is one of the largest volume commodity chemicals manufactured in the
United States, and its production through steam cracking of hydrocarbons
accounts for up to 1% of total U.S. energy consumption. Alternative, energy
efficient methods for ethylene production would have a major impact on the
energy and carbon footprint of the chemical process industry. In this project,
the investigators will develop novel reactor configurations for ethylene
production that efficiently use the evolved heat of reaction by directing it
towards increasing the temperature of ethane and oxygen feeds that enter at room
temperature. Reactor design strategies to be explored not only shrink the energy
demand and greenhouse gas emissions associated with ethylene production, but
also facilitate process modularization, making it possible to bring the process
to the feedstock and renewable energy sources. In addition to advancing U.S.
energy security through CO2-free manufacturing technologies, the project will
provide the investigators with the opportunity to engage students
underrepresented in STEM fields from the Houston area through participation in
the University of Houston Energy Day and Chevron Girls Engineering the Future
Day, and by developing and piloting gaming modules that can be readily
integrated into 8th grade chemistry classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this proposal is to address fundamental catalyst design,
reaction kinetics, and reactor scale-up challenges in the development of
CO2-free processes for ethylene production by oxidative dehydrogenation of
ethane (ODHE), where autothermal operation is key to energy efficient reactor
operation. While catalyst design for and kinetics studies of ODHE are common in
the open literature, the question as to what is the most suitable reactor design
for such a process has not been clearly addressed thus far -- answering this
question is the focus and primary Intellectual Merit of the proposed work. The
research plan combines catalyst synthesis and characterization, kinetic studies,
and reactor modeling and design to overcome the fundamental challenges of high-
pressure autothermal ODHE operation. The concepts explored in this project are
applicable to a variety of exothermic reactions of industrial relevance and
potentially lay the foundation for a more reaction engineering-grounded approach
to improving the efficiency, sustainability, intensification, and modularization
of energy intensive chemical manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.