* 2133897
* Collaborative Research: Studies of ULF Waves and Support for the Magnetic Induction Coil Array (MICA)
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2026
* Marc Lessard, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,620,181.00

The Magnetic Induction Coil Array (MICA) is an NSF supported array of induction
coil magnetometers that measure ultra-low frequency (ULF) waves. MICA will
increase our understanding of space weather, in particular with regards to
exchange of energy in the radiation belts that leads to electrons precipitating
into the ionosphere. The project will include maintenance of existing
magnetometers and the addition of a new system in Greenland. The data will be
made public to the scientific community through the NSF SuperMAG database.
Additionally, early career scientists will be supported including graduate and
undergraduate students. The data will be incorporated into undergraduate
projects supported by the NJIT REU program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
provides support for (1) the operation and upgrades of ULF induction coil
magnetometer systems, including the acquisition and processing of ULF data, (2)
the provision of these data to the scientific community, and (3) specific
scientific studies using these data. Since induction coil magnetometers measure
dB/dt, they have intrinsically better signal-to-noise ratios near 1 Hz than
fluxgate magnetometers and so are able to observe even relatively weak waves
near these frequencies. The science topics that will be addressed are generally
focused on electromagnetic ion cyclotron (EMIC) waves, known to drive radiation
belt particle precipitation, and Pi1B waves, associated with substorm onsets.
The work will target understanding of 1) interhemispheric observations of EMIC
waves, 2) substorm injections and IPDP waves, 3) investigations of the source of
Pi1B pulsations, and 4) EMIC wave occurrences and precipitation on global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.