* 2133475
* NSF-AoF: FET: Small: Ubiquitous in-sensor computing for adaptive intelligent systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Qiangfei Xia, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 531,998.00

Miniaturized sensor systems with built-in memory and computing functionalities
are the cornerstones of artificial intelligence at the edge. However, in
currently deployed systems, sensing and computing occur in separate physical
locations, imposing massive data shuttling between the sensor module and the
cloud-computing platform. This is unsustainable in terms of energy efficiency,
latency, and capacity to process sensor data, and hence has a negative
environmental impact with billions of sensors connected in the era of the
Internet of Things (IoT). The proposed project intends to go beyond state-of-
the-art by system-level integration of sensing, memory, and computing
functionalities into one chip, allowing for ubiquitous applications at low
energy budget and low latency. Furthermore, building such systems on flexible
substrates will enable affordable and biodegradable smart-wearables electronics
capable of monitoring human health continuously and adaptively. The proposed
educational and outreach activities will promote STEM careers, encourage
diversity in engineering education and research, and significantly impact
securing the future prosperity of the U.S. and the European collaborative
partner (Finland). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims at
delivering intelligent and energy-efficient wearable electronics that will
become ubiquitous in the era of IoT. The specific objectives towards this goal
are as follows: 1) to design and fabricate emerging materials and devices for
flexible sensors; 2) to integrate ferroelectric sensors and memristor crossbar
arrays into a flexible near-sensor computing system with embedded security
functionality; and 3) to demonstrate an in-sensor computing platform where
emerging devices will be used as both sensing and non-volatile memory elements
for in-pixel intelligent processing of images. The proposed research will enable
the next-generation smart and flexible wearable electronics to process the
acquired information onsite. By integrating the sensor module with the computing
engine, the emerging hardware technologies will substantially improve power
efficiency and computing throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.