* 2133337
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: User-Centered Mobility Solutions (UCMS): A New Vision to Connect Jobs and the Labor Force
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jie Yu, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF CIVIC grant will test whether new user-centered transportation service
models can overcome institutional, multi-jurisdictional coordination barriers
and solve persistent spatial mismatches that can deter marginalized population
groups from accessing jobs. The case study area is the Milwaukee region, which
lacks cross-jurisdictional transportation services that efficiently connect
workers living in marginalized inner-city neighborhoods with available jobs in
suburban counties. Focusing on two groups of core users—labor force participants
and employers—this study will implement and evaluate two pilot service models
designed to meet the needs of these respective user groups. Specifically, the
research will examine whether the new service models driven by user needs can
overcome institutional barriers and gain broad support to solve the regional
spatial mismatch problem, investigate how the service models can narrow the gap
between advancements in mobility technologies and technology adoption among
marginalized communities, and compare how effectively the labor force-centered
and employer-centered service models can achieve other economic, environmental,
and social goals. The research activities will be carried out by the University
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee and the Southeastern Wisconsin Regional Planning
Commission in conjunction with workforce development organizations, business
organizations, transit agencies, and local governments. This partnership will
facilitate an exchange of research findings and civic dialogues, foster
technology-community connections, and create new opportunities for technical and
scientific discovery. Research activities will enrich student research
experiences and community-based learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both the labor
force-centered and employer-centered service models will use on-demand
microtransit to serve marginalized populations by connecting the low-income
Milwaukee residents with employment centers in a neighboring suburban county.
However, the two models will differ in terms of the service area and travel
cost, reflecting core users’ respective tradeoffs between their desired level of
transportation services and their willingness to pay. The research will answer
two questions: 1) How well does the user-centered approach overcome multi-
jurisdictional coordination barriers and solve regional-level spatial mismatch?
2) To what degree do the labor force-centered and employer-centered mobility
services achieve a diverse set of goals? A mixed-method analysis framework will
be applied that includes interviews, surveys, data fusion, big data analysis,
spatial statistics, and economic analysis to qualitatively and quantitatively
evaluate the two service models. Measurable outcomes include service efficiency,
financial feasibility, environmental sustainability, economic benefits, equity
implications, and participant experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF,
Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.