* 2133516
* NSF Engineering Research Center for Smart Streetscapes (CS3)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Mubarak Shah, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2027
* USD 3,500,000.00

More than 80% of Americans and over half the world’s population live in urban
areas. High-density cities are transforming how people live, work, travel, and
manage urban infrastructure. With the nation’s urban areas facing emerging
challenges threatening livability, safety, and inclusion, it is the streetscape
–neighborhood streets, sidewalks, and public spaces– that marks the nexus of
public and commercial activities, where rich, spatially and temporarily dense
data can be harnessed for the public good. The NSF Engineering Research Center
for Smart Streetscapes (CS3), led by Columbia University, together with Florida
Atlantic University, Rutgers University, University of Central Florida, and
Lehman College, will develop a rich ecosystem of streetscape applications built
upon real-time, hyper-local intelligence to advance livable, safe, and inclusive
communities. CS3 will adopt a fundamentally new approach to engineering
research, leveraging a diverse cohort of non-academic stakeholders –industry
partners, community organizations, municipalities, and K-12 schools– as
collaborative co-producers of knowledge and auditors of technology research and
development, built on a culture of inclusion that bridges the “digital divide”
that starkly demarcates stakeholdership. With an extensive network of partners,
CS3 will explore five application themes: road safety and traffic efficiency,
public safety, assistive technologies for people with disabilities, the future
of outdoor work, and hyper-local sensing and modeling. CS3’s engineering process
will begin with the study of community-specific application requirements,
constraints, and sensitivities. The resulting community-inspired applications
will be piloted within three distinct urban testbeds –in New York City (NY),
West Palm Beach (FL), and New Brunswick (NJ)– leveraging prior federal and
municipal investments. Outcomes from these pilots will catalyze a novel
innovation ecosystem, drawing upon CS3’s broad network of aspiring
entrepreneurs, emerging start-ups, and established companies. Realizing and
sustaining this vision requires a next-generation workforce that cross-cuts
engineering, data science, social science, and policy; CS3 will leverage shared,
day-to-day streetscape experiences to attract students from diverse disciplines
and backgrounds to engage in the emerging discipline of smart cities. Built on
the four closely integrated foundational elements of NSF’s ERC program
–Research, Engineering Workforce Development, Diversity and Culture of
Inclusion, and Innovation Ecosystem– CS3’s work has the potential to redefine
America’s streetscapes by applying a digital layer over physical urban
infrastructure, ensuring that America’s cities meet the needs of local
communities and that the technologies being adopted take into account critical
questions regarding safety, equity, privacy, and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Engineering Research Center for Smart
Streetscapes (CS3) will advance livable, safe, and inclusive communities through
real-time, hyper-local streetscape applications built on advancements in edge-
cloud technology, wireless-optical engineering, visual analytics, computer
security, and social science. CS3 will unite diverse research communities
through a convergent research model that delivers innovations across five
engineering and scientific areas: (1) Wi-Edge – the integration of high-speed
wireless-optical networking, high-performance edge-cloud computing, and
software-defined radios and networking; (2) Situational Awareness – fine-scale,
real-time observation, modeling, and forecasting of human behavior over variable
time horizons at streetscape scales; (3) Security, Privacy &amp; Fairness –
addressing socio-technical barriers of privacy and security within locally
intelligent streetscapes, yielding a software pipeline for streetscape
applications that gives community-configurable guarantees of privacy, fairness,
and transparency; (4) Public Interest Technology – understanding how CS3
technologies, applications, and security/privacy policies impact the social
landscape and promote regional economic development; and (5) Streetscape
Applications – incorporating the distinct ways in which individual communities
read, interpret, and respond to local intelligence within the design process in
order to optimize community-specific benefits. CS3 will advance fundamental
knowledge in civil and urban systems engineering, electrical and network
engineering, visual analytics and sensor fusion, computer privacy and security,
and public trust and technology – catalyzing and coalescing the emerging
discipline of smart cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.