* 2133314
* I-Corps:  Lateral flow home-use diagnostic for detection of COVID-19
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,05/31/2023
* MARIA MIGUEZ, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rapid test for diagnosis and surveillance of SARS-CoV-2. Given
the closing of many testing sites, this rapid test can benefit the public health
system. Other testing methods are often expensive, time-consuming, and/or can
lead to inaccurate results. The tests developed here may enable substantial cost
savings in testing and encourage home self-testing with greater convenience and
speed. The tests also have the potential to identify SARS-CoV-2 infection
earlier and may be more accurate than other available tests, allowing
individuals to receive medical care sooner while also minimizing
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a diagnosis
process for detection of COVID-19. The proposed technology can be readily
modified into either a point-of-care, rapid home diagnostic test or a
surveillance testing system. Typical COVID-19 surveillance tests function via
either the IgM or IgG antibodies, however these antibodies are often produced
late and fade quickly. The proposed diagnostic pipeline developed relies on the
use of a different antibody. This custom monoclonal antibody test may improve
the overall accuracy of the testing and make the tests more accurate early in
the infection period where IgM and IgG based tests can be less accurate. Testing
accuracy is improved by using multiple antigens; The use of only one or two
antigens has been associated with high rates of false test results with the new
variants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.