* 2133091
* NRI: Decision-making Foundations for Human-supervised Legged Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Satyandra Gupta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2025
* USD 676,010.00

Mobile robots are emerging as a powerful tool in many applications that require
highly repetitive, tedious work or pose a threat to human health. Wheeled robots
are adequate for many applications in structured environments such as hospitals,
warehouses, and grocery stores. However, many other applications require robots
to traverse challenging terrain. Legged robots will be more suitable for
applications such as disinfection of cluttered spaces, pesticide spray, and
inspection of construction sites. They can navigate around and over obstacles,
climb stairs and slopes, or traverse muddy terrains to perform functional tasks.
In many critical missions, human-robot teaming is emerging as an attractive
option. Robots can keep humans away from physical dangers, and humans can make
high-level decisions to ensure robots are taking the right actions based on the
mission's needs. Therefore, this research project will study decision-making
foundations that will enable a team of legged robots to work safely and
effectively with human supervisors on real-world applications. The project will
also integrate research results into robotics and control courses. Outreach
activities will educate and inform K-12 students about career opportunities in
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legged robots navigating challenging terrains
while performing critical tasks are expected to encounter many challenges.
Terrain maps are not likely to be completely known in advance. Moreover, there
might be moving obstacles in the work environment. Robots will have to update
maps and navigate around moving obstacles as a part of the task execution. On-
board sensors are likely to experience occlusion and produce a significant
amount of uncertainty. Therefore, robots will need to account for the
uncertainty in risk assessment. Safety is also a crucial consideration. Legged
robots will need to ensure that they can walk safely. However, efficiency in
execution will be an essential consideration for deploying legged robots in
real-world applications. To achieve task execution efficiency, robots will need
to carry out functional tasks while moving. This project proposes to develop (1)
methodologies for human-supervised robot team mission modeling and task
assignment by considering risk and mission execution efficiency, (2) develop
algorithms for risk-aware deliberative motion planning by considering future
contingency situations and actions needed to resolve them, and (3) multi-
objective safety-critical controllers for mitigating risk, ensuring stability
and safety for both locomotion and task execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.