* 2133352
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Artificial-Intelligence-Based Decision Support for Equitable and Resilient Food Distribution during Pandemics and Extreme Weather Events
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,199,994.00

Food insecurity is the lack of consistent and reliable access to nutritious
food. In the Houston (Texas) area, over 14% of Harris County households
experienced food insecurity before the emergence of COVID-19. It is unclear how
the nutritional needs of Houston’s vulnerable populations will be served when
the next devastating weather event strikes the region, given that the city is
already experiencing multiple disasters, including COVID-19, economic
disruptions, and systemic food insecurity. The Houston Food Bank (HFB)
collaborates with over 1,500 partners to address the needs of families
experiencing food insecurity. The COVID-19 pandemic has stretched funding and
personnel significantly while driving substantial increases in demand. HFB has
adapted to past natural disasters, such as hurricanes and floods, in an ad hoc
manner and seeks to build disaster resilience by incorporating strategies beyond
current practices. The urgent needs are to identify food-insecure communities,
understand their nutritional needs during disasters, and provide nutritious and
culturally appropriate food in a manner that preserves privacy and dignity. Left
unaddressed, these issues may create failures in HFB’s ability to distribute
food effectively, equitably, and efficiently.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through a
community-driven approach, this project brings together civic collaborators with
university researchers to align HFB’s food distribution strategy to match food
insecurity during multiple disaster profiles. Collaborators that have driven
this approach include food pantries associated with HFB, local government, state
government, other food banks, Foodbank Associations, workforce development and
education, housing, health organizations, United Way, and YMCA. Leveraging
lessons learned from six workshops conducted with HFB and its partners during
our Stage 1 planning grant, we will jointly undertake a research-centered,
socio-technical approach to develop and evaluate decision-making tools that
incorporate equity indices for selecting food distribution hubs to improve the
resilience of the food distribution network. Our project has the following
objectives: (1) develop indicators of individual and community equity for food
distribution during pandemics and extreme weather events; (2) design a network
organizational resilience index for food bank networks and interventions to
improve network resilience; (3) develop and validate a predictive tool for
infrastructure vulnerability, and (4) develop and validate a decision-making
tool for determining the locations of food distribution hubs and their food
allocation. Our team is focused on turning research into action. The decision-
making tools produced will be disseminated to other disaster-vulnerable food
banks throughout the United States, supporting transferable applications of AI-
based techniques for food distribution optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is part of the CIVIC Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of
NSF, Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland
Security Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.