* 2133751
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Recycling of Material Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Radu Iovita, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2024
* USD 24,789.00

Human reuse of space and material culture is a widely documented behavior
throughout history, but researchers are only beginning to understand how
recycling influenced human behavioral evolution. Recycling can take place either
within an individual lifetime or at much larger time scales. Archaeology is
therefore well positioned to examine the effects of recycling because the
material culture record results from multiple activities and occupations over
extended periods of time. It has been shown that recycling repeatedly rewrites
archaeological patterns through history, yet researchers have limited models for
studying its effects on the archaeological record. This project will investigate
early examples of recycling, specifically that of stone tools. Models of
previously unexplored factors that impact the frequency of recycling in
archaeological deposits, allowing archaeologists to better understand why this
behavior happens in certain locations will be developed. These will be employed
to evaluate the temporal and spatial distributions of occupations in artifact
deposits exposed on open land surfaces. Such sites constitute a major untapped
source of information about the prehistory in a region, which has been a nexus
of human movement and interaction. This project will also promote open science
through sharing of computer code and archaeological data to facilitate
reproducibility and accessibility. Furthermore, this project will foster
international collaboration to make the archaeology more accessible so it can be
better incorporated into the story of human history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
currently argued that stone tool recycling occurred because of limited access to
raw material sources. However, there are ethnographic and archaeological
examples of recycling occurring in places with locally available stone
resources. This project tests an updated model of recycling that is patterned by
exposure of artifacts, selection behaviors, and mobility patterns. The
investigators create agent-based computer simulations to identify artifact
distributions that result from this proposed model. These patterns will then be
compared to archaeological data from a Paleolithic surface site complex. It will
be determined if concentrations of recycled objects overlap with proxies for
exposure, selection, and mobility as patterned in the simulation. The models
developed will help archaeologists identify parameters that make recycling more
or less likely within a landscape, allowing for better understanding the history
of human land use. This project represents an important step to explore the
range of conditions that may promote recycling of stone tools in order to fully
understand how this behavior functioned in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.