* 2133544
* Assessing Institutional Assets, Vulnerabilities, and Synergies and using a STEM Mentoring Ecosystem Framework: A Multi-institution, Interdisciplinary Workshop
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Becky Packard, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 12/31/2023
* USD 98,020.00

Many colleges and universities aspire to diversify their STEM student bodies and
create more inclusive and equitable learning environments for the students. At
the same time, many struggle with limited resources and less-than-optimal
infrastructure. Using a system that integrates all components of an
institutional STEM mentoring ecosystem can have greater potential for making
substantive and lasting changes across a range of demographics. This project
builds upon a recently-developed STEM-Mentoring Ecosystems (STEM-ME) framework
that facilitates self-assessment of institutional strengths, vulnerabilities,
synergies and disconnects related to mentoring. Given that many mentoring
programs targeted at students, staff, or faculty are siloed in nature, an
ecosystems approach will facilitate a more sustainable and effective
infrastructure. The STEM-ME framework will facilitate the leveraging of
resources, building of synergies and integration of best practices across a
diverse and at times isolated set of institutional efforts. This project will
convene workshops comprised of teams from multiple institutions who will engage
in learning about and applying the STEM-ME framework to improve their local
mentoring ecosystems. Based on discussions, each campus team will revise the
STEM-ME materials to make them applicable to their local situations. Outcomes of
the workshop will include new insights for campuses, new resource materials, and
new knowledge about common assets and vulnerabilities across a range of
institutional types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is abundant extant research on
barriers and outcomes of STEM mentoring at the individual relationship level,
but less is known at the institutional and cross-institutional levels. A recent
report on “The Science of Effective Mentoring in STEMM” (2019) by the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine has brought increased attention
to improving mentoring environments to retain STEM talent from all segments of
the population. This proposal will pilot a study that uses a STEM-Mentoring
Ecosystems (STEM-ME) framework to effect changes in institutional practice
towards a more inclusive and equitable environment. Sessions will be convened to
provide teams from several campuses opportunities to learn about and craft their
institution-specific blueprint of the STEM-ME framework. The goals of this
workshop are: (1) to improve the STEM mentoring ecosystems particularly for
minoritized students across campus types; (2) to develop mechanisms (including a
white paper and self-guided module) that helps campuses to assess their own
campus infrastructure, identify connections/synergies, and strengthen their
infrastructure for high-quality, inclusive STEM mentoring; (3) to assist
participating campuses, and their leaders, begin this process and contribute to
this process in a meaningful way; and, (4) to reflect back to stakeholders of
STEM mentoring ecosystems where there are common vulnerabilities and areas of
strength. The collaborative workshop will consist of two required sessions and
an optional session. The first session will involve an introduction of the STEM-
ME framework and mapping worksheet and multi-institutional team introductions.
The second session involves sharing of campus-specific mentoring ecosystem maps
and discussions of commonalities and differences between campuses. Finally, the
optional third session will allow each team to have a one-on-one consulting
session with one of the facilitators. The broader impacts of the proposal
include the creation of tools (e.g. STEM-ME mapping worksheet, white paper,
institutional action plans) that will help campuses enhance their STEM mentoring
infrastructure. Multiple graduate and undergraduate students will gain research
training on organizational change in STEM. Undergraduate and graduate students
from racially minoritized backgrounds on multiple campuses will benefit from
improved STEM mentoring infrastructure. This award is supported by the Divisions
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB), Integrative Organismal Systems
(IOS). Environmental Biology (DEB), and Biological Infrastructure (DBI) within
the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO) and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities within the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.