* 2133342
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: Piloting On-Demand Multimodal Transit in Atlanta
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Christopher Le Dantec, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,199,999.00

This NSF CIVIC grant will pilot an On-Demand Multimodal Public Transit System
(ODMTS) in Atlanta to improve accessibility to jobs, health care, and decent
groceries. ODMTSs are a new generation of public transit systems that combine
on-demand shuttles to serve the first/last miles, with high-frequency rail
and/or bus routes to transport commuters on dense and congested corridors. They
have the potential to improve mobility for all population segments, and are
convenient, economically sustainable, and environmental friendly. The pilot will
demonstrate these potential benefits in the field and, in particular, for
communities that have been significantly disadvantaged in the past. It will
first focus on the West Side of the city and the Belvedere Park area, two
communities that are poorly served by transit and home to a low-income
population. The pilot brings together a multi-disciplinary team composed of
MARTA, the eighth largest transit agency in the country, the Atlanta Bicycle
Coalition, a transit advocacy group, and researchers at Georgia
Teach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transition from the ODMTS concept to a field
pilot raises significant intellectual challenges, including (1) the accurate
modeling of transit adoption; (2) the concept of reservations and its
integration with real-time requests; (3) service synchronization; and (4) the
accurate modeling of bus transfers and stops. In addition, the transition from
the ODMTS concept to a field pilot raises significant community challenges. The
service should be accessible to all population segments and bridge the digital
divide that exists for multiple population segments. This requires (1) flexible
payment options; (2) flexible communication methods; and (3) multi-language
mobile applications. To evaluate success, the project will provide a
counterfactual study comparing the performance of the existing system and the
proposed pilot, based on the following metrics: (1) transit ridership, (2) wait
and in-vehicle travel time, (3) accessibility, and (4) satisfaction. These
metrics quantify accessibility, performance, and appeal of the ODMTS, and
provide invaluable information for future transit systems. A key contribution of
the grant will also be a blueprint for public transit systems across the US. In
particular, the project will deliver mobility applications and high-performance
servers that will be shared with the community to ease replicability and
technology transfer. Moreover, it will collect invaluable information to
calibrate mode choice and transit adoption models. Moreover, through the Georgia
Smart Program, the pilot team include students from Morehouse college, a
historically black university; they will participate in all aspects of the
pilot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of the CIVIC Innovation
Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, Department of Energy Vehicle
Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology
Directorate and Federal Emergency Management Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.