* 2133308
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Rural Resiliency Hubs: An Integrated, Community-Centered Approach to Addressing the Resiliency Divide through Rural Public Libraries
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Marcia Mardis, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2024
* USD 734,128.00

The increasing frequency of catastrophic natural disasters, together with the
“resilience divide”—the uneven impact of disasters on vulnerable
populations—calls for development of disaster Resiliency Hubs. Public libraries,
often called the “crown jewels” of rural infrastructure, provide a range of
informational and social services that make them ideal facilities to serve as
rural Resiliency Hubs. In this project, an interdisciplinary team of researchers
will collaborate with diverse community partners in Calhoun County, Florida, a
region that continues to be devastated by 2018’s Hurricane Michael, to establish
a transferable community-based assessment and design process that leverages the
assets of a given area while also identifies the gaps in resiliency-related
needs to transform rural libraries into Resiliency Hubs. The expanded
capabilities may include, for example, mapping technologies to inform disaster
planning including the siting of shelters, aid distribution, and other
resources; community behavioral health interventions to address post-disaster
trauma; and joint efforts by libraries, schools, churches, and other key local
institutions to increase awareness about home-level disaster
preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a collaborative strategy that unites
community members, librarians, and researchers, the project team will co-design
resiliency hubs sited in public libraries and develop solutions to the cascading
impacts of natural disasters. The co-design process will include an in-depth
qualitative study of the complex interactions among libraries, residents, local
government, and other agencies. Multi-network resiliency measures and
multivariate prioritized risk maps will assess community resiliency to guide
preparedness and response, including how libraries can further support
vulnerable communities. The research team will quantitatively assess the
generalizability of lessons learned and develop multi-community transfer
learning algorithms to achieve transferrable and scalable solutions for the
entire region. The research design brings state-of-the-art optimization and data
analytics approaches to bear while being driven by a range of rich qualitative
and community data sources that will lead to implementable actions. Knowledge
gained from this project will improve our understanding of emergency response
operations and contribute to the development of new disaster-related policies
and plans for public libraries throughout the United States. The Florida
Institute of Government will collaborate with the research team and civic
stakeholders to disseminate research findings and recommendations to all 67
Florida counties and other localities. This project is part of the CIVIC
Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, the Department of Energy's
Vehicle Technology Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's Science and
Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.