* 2133279
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Helping Rural Counties to Enhance Flooding and Coastal Disaster Resilience and Adaptation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2024
* Timothy Havens, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,199,877.00

Flooding is a leading cause of natural disasters in the US, with congressional
budget office estimates of $54 billion in loss each year. Although both urban
and rural areas are highly vulnerable to flood hazards, most natural disaster
resilience studies have focused on urban areas, often overlooking rural
communities. One such area that has been overlooked are the many rural
communities bordering the Great Lakes. These communities face unprecedented
challenges due to rising water levels, particularly since 2012, which have
resulted in significant coastal flooding in the communities. Flood hazard
assessments are a critical tool used to support communities in determining how
to mitigate flooding; however, data gaps in current flood hazard modeling tools
render them inaccurate for rural communities. The project brings together
community partners—including a regional planning agency, county officials, and
local officials from the Keweenaw Bay Indian community—with a university team to
understand the data gaps in addressing flooding and coastal disaster in two
rural counties in Northern Michigan. The project will use various strategies,
including sensors and crowdsourced information, to fill critical information
gaps required to improve flood hazard modeling in rural communities bordering
the Great Lakes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) commonly recommend counties
to use a freely available tool, called HAZUS, to develop hazard mitigation plans
and enhance community resilience and adaptation. However, for rural communities,
the use of standard datasets within HAZUS often has serious deficiencies, unless
augmented with additional data and analyses. The proposed project's vision is to
develop methods that use remote sensing data resources and citizen engagement
(crowdsourcing) to address current data gaps for improved flood hazard modeling
and visualization that is transferable to other rural communities. The results
of the project will expand the traditional frontiers of preparedness and
resilience to natural disasters by drawing on the expertise and backgrounds of
investigators working at the interface of geological engineering, civil
engineering, computer science, marine engineering, urban planning, river and
floodplain hydraulics, social science, and remote sensing. This project is part
of the Civic Innovation Challenge, a collaboration between NSF, the Department
of Energy's Vehicle Technology Office, and the Department of Homeland Security's
Science and Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.