* 2133028
* NRI: Co-Robots to Enhance Motivation and Self-efficacy in Formal STEM Education
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Mo Rastgaar, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 12/31/2024
* USD 746,412.00

Rehabilitation and assistive robots are becoming more prevalent as the
population is aging. Healthcare technologies are rapidly evolving and becoming
increasingly high-tech and reliant on sensors for biological data collection and
human-robot interactions to augment human capabilities. Not only is the field
changing, but the demand for a highly skilled workforce is growing rapidly.
Through meaningful collaboration among researchers, application developers, and
students and teachers as users, this project will provide teacher professional
growth opportunities that enhance formal STEM education. It will increase
attention to robotics in schools to attract and sustain students' interest and
help them better understand and prepare for STEM career pathways. This project
will directly engage at least 20 unique teachers from the States of Indiana and
Georgia and over 1500 public-school students from diverse backgrounds during the
three-year project lifespan. It will broaden the participation of
underrepresented students, including females and ethnic/racial minorities, by
employing high-interest fields such as assistive and rehabilitation robotics,
meaningful learning contexts such as improving human life, and hands-on learning
facilitated with human-interactive robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
presents Neu-pulator, Neurally Controlled Manipulator, an innovative,
collaborative robot to integrate the engineering design process in STEM
education. Neu-pulator is easy and inexpensive for students to design, build,
and test with readily available lightweight and durable components. Its
interdisciplinary modular nature accommodates various hands-on experiential
learning activities to teach core science and engineering concepts. In
particular, Neu-pulator blends mechatronics, computer programming, human-machine
interface, and biomechanics. This work aims to lower barriers to entry and
position students to think about co-robotics as assistive technology. The
central focus of this research effort is to identify the potential impacts of
positioning the student as a co-roboticist in the context of design thinking.
The design-based research phase will allow the researchers to pilot learning
experiences early in the project, refine the pedagogical approaches based on
iterative feedback. The quasi-experimental design phase will explore the
measurable impacts in a controlled experiment with rigorous evaluation metrics
and appropriate statistical analysis in preparation for potential scale-up
through the international teacher association. This project will deliberately
engage teachers and public-school students in diverse environments. The research
is established in an internationally implemented 9th-grade course—appropriate
for the levels of student development and career decision making—offered through
the International Technology and Engineering Educators Association STEM Center,
which reaches up to 60,000 students annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is funded by the National Robotics Initiative 3.0: Innovations in Integration of
Robotics (NRI-3.0) program, and the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.