* 2133778
* I-Corps: Digital twin technology via synthetic data generation to predict outcomes of clinical trials
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a platform technology that is applicable to fields where
experimental data collection is expensive or infeasible. A first application
will be in the domain of clinical trials, where there is a growing trend towards
precision medicine, yet experimentation with randomized control trials is often
extremely costly and time consuming. This is particularly true for mid-sized
pharmaceutical companies with more limited resources. The digital twin
technology provides companies with synthetic data to help optimize trial design
and control risks in how to allocate limited financial and personnel resources.
The technology may also have far-reaching applications in potential application
areas of e-commerce and precision agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project develops a new causal inference technology to accurately predict
outcomes of clinical trials on a patient-by-patient basis. This technology
builds a digital twin of each patient using historical clinical data across
different patients, treatments, and diseases. A novel benefit of this approach
is that despite very scarce data on patients that go through the full clinical
trial, the technology can accurately simulate the outcomes of the entire patient
population. Additionally, this approach offers interpretability of how such
digital twins are created, a critical feature in medical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.