* 2133411
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of a Virtual Kidney during the Onset and Progression of Diabetic Kidney Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2021,05/31/2024
* Ashlee Ford Versypt, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 393,301.00

Diabetic kidney disease (DKD) is a serious complication of both type 1 and type
2 diabetes and is the leading cause of kidney failure. Yet, it is still not
clear how the many underlying chemical, physical, and biological processes
interact to damage the kidneys during diabetes. It is challenging to monitor the
damage to the kidneys inside a patient. The regions of the kidney that are
damaged are very small and are deep within the body. It takes a long time for
irreversible damage to accumulate to the point where non-invasive urine samples
contain detectable quantities of proteins that leaked through the kidneys. This
Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will connect several
processes that have been shown individually to contribute to injury in kidneys
due to diabetes into a sophisticated computer simulation. This computational
tool will aid in understanding how the processes interact and how diabetic
kidney damage begins and changes over time. In the long-term, results from this
project will help to predict the impacts of many competing factors on kidney
health during diabetes management. The computer simulation produced in the
project can also be used to test and optimize treatments to slow the progression
of DKD. The project also will involve a set of educational activities related to
the scientific work. Several undergraduate and graduate students including women
and underrepresented minorities will work with the PI to conduct the research
and educational activities. Educational modules related to the research will be
delivered to a variety of groups including K-12 students, college students, and
grandparents. Physical models of kidney tissues will be 3D-printed and shared
with students and educators. The activities will expose many students and
members of the public to biomedical engineering and computational science
through engaging scientific demonstrations and interactive
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's long-term career
goal is to develop multiscale computational models to enhance understanding of
the mechanisms governing tissue remodeling and damage as a result of diseases
and infections and to simulate the treatment of those conditions to improve
human health. Toward this goal, this project will develop a novel computational
approach for studying diabetic kidney disease (DKD) through a virtual kidney
that can be used like a powerful, non-invasive microscope to look into the body
to detect and monitor damage to the glomeruli (where most damage occurs) during
the onset and progression of diabetic complications in the kidney. The virtual
kidney platform will use multiscale computational modeling to connect effects at
different length scales from smaller to larger: inside cells, between adjacent
cells, across a single glomerulus, and among collections of glomeruli
interacting with other tissues in a kidney. A hybrid computational approach will
take advantage of the benefits of stochastic differential equations to describe
chemical species that react and interact in large quantities and of agent-based
models to describe cells and chemical species that interact in small quantities
or in qualitative up- or down-regulation fashions. The Research Plan is
organized under two aims. The FIRST AIM is to formulate cellular level
mathematical models of biochemical cell signaling networks responsible for
damage in each of the three main glomerular zones: a) podocytes, b) mesangial
cells and mesangial matrix and c) endothelial cells and the glomerular basement
membrane. Computational tools will be developed for importing biochemical
networks, conducting uncertainty and sensitivity analyses, and validating model
results for the three zones. To assess validity, computational models will be
compared to experimental evidence gleaned from the literature. The SECOND AIM is
to build a virtual kidney computational model focusing on crosstalk, structural,
and hemodynamic effects on the primary tissue compartments within multiple
nephrons. Steps include: a) constructing a hybrid computational model for tissue
level simulation of glomerular cells that combines information from reactions in
single cells, connects multiple interacting cells and transports glucose and
other molecules through the mesangium and the glomerular filtration barrier; b)
connecting the glomerular models to a tubule and vessel centric-model for blood
flow and filtration regulation and c) validating the virtual kidney model and
simulating responses to stimuli. A user-friendly interface will be created for
specifying model input and stimuli, running the simulations, and visualizing
results. Simulations of the virtual kidney model will be rigorously compared to
pharmacological, physiological, and histological data, primarily from humans.
After model validation to a subset of the data cases, in silico experiments will
be conducted to predict the magnitudes and rates of change for glomerular injury
outcomes including proteinuria and glomerular filtration rate (GFR) under DKD
pathophysiological conditions. The metric for success will be the accurate
simulation of the classic trajectory of onset and progression of DKD subject to
clinically relevant input and stimuli. Computational tools and code developed
will be distributed openly via GitHub repositories, which may be of broad
interest to the systems biology research community using SBML and/or
CompuCell3D. In summary, the project addresses the critical need to compile the
multiple mechanistic processes that contribute to DKD onset and progression into
a user-friendly systematic framework capable of taking the interconnected
chemical, physical, and biological factors into account in a coupled fashion and
in the appropriate magnitudes and sequences to make testable
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.