* 2133470
* I-Corps: A flexible learning and assessment tool based on a skill mastery approach
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Mariana Silva, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will serve the
national interest by improving the ability of universities to train a globally
competitive STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) workforce.
The core technology in this project provides students with the opportunity to
practice questions in a personalized environment until mastery is achieved. The
technology also makes it easy for instructors to incorporate frequent and second
chance testing while scaling to support more students. These pedagogical
strategies have been shown to reduce the failure rates in STEM classes and could
disproportionately benefit women, minorities, first-generation students, and
students of low socio-economic status. Helping these students can improve
retention efforts, in general, and for diverse students, in particular. The
commercial potential of this project includes capturing a significant fraction
of the rapidly-growing university education technology market with potential
markets worldwide as well as in non-university education
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to develop a Software as
a Service (SaaS) online platform for creating and delivering learning
experiences and assessments for students, with a focus on university-level STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) courses. The platform allows
instructors to easily combine adaptive, rule-based and artificial intelligence
(AI) algorithms to generate and grade different randomized versions of
activities and assessments. It includes novel AI auto-grading algorithms for
complex question types including symbolic mathematics, interactive student
drawing, live coding, and natural language input. The core algorithms advance
the state of the art in three key ways: (1) The use of AI auto-grading can
entirely eliminate the use of human graders in university courses, dramatically
reducing staffing levels and costs, and enabling expansion to larger and more
diverse student populations; (2) The platform deters cheating with a set of
novel algorithms; and (3) The platform uses sophisticated grading algorithms
that incentivize mastery learning and that lead to substantial improvements in
learning outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.