* 2133256
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track B: Inclusive Insurance: Improving the Post-Flood Financial Resiliency of Low- and Moderate-Income Households
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Carolyn Kousky, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 978,068.00

Flooding is the costliest natural disaster and climate change is projected to
escalate flood risk in many places. Prior research has found that low- and
moderate-income (LMI) households suffer disproportionately and recover less
quickly than more privileged residents. Financial resilience—the ability to
recover from an economic shock—underpins other aspects of recovery and is a
necessary condition for broader disaster resilience. Despite this, it is an
under-researched aspect of climate adaptation and investigation of actionable
solutions is scarce. The proposed project will fill this
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s overarching goal is to increase the
financial resilience of LMI households in New York City to escalating flood risk
through the use of inclusive insurance. Inclusive insurance refers to any
program that makes coverage available to those previously locked out of the
insurance market. Our project will establish NYC as one of the first communities
in the U.S. to harness these approaches. This project is a joint effort between
the Wharton Risk Center at the University of Pennsylvania, the New York City
Mayor’s Office of Resiliency, and the Center for New York City Neighborhoods
(CNYCN). It also involves a research partnership with the Urban Institute,
research and development work with Global Parametrics, technical assistance from
Guy Carpenter, and support from the NYC Office of Management and Budget.
&lt;br/&gt;The project has four interrelated objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1.
Developing and deploying innovative, inclusive insurance pilots. The key pilot
will be the purchase, by CNYCN, of a parametric flood insurance policy designed
to rapidly provide emergency cash grants to LMI households post-flood. In
addition, R&amp;D will be undertaken on parametric flood policies that community
development finance institutions can provide to protect LMI
borrowers.&lt;br/&gt;2. Creating a community of practice that harnesses risk
transfer for social recovery goals. This community will be developed through a
workshop and new information sharing platforms. &lt;br/&gt;3. Increasing the
literacy and capacity of all partners. This includes training housing advisors
on flood risk and insurance, providing pre-disaster consultations to fifty NYC
households on risk reduction and insurance, and expanding the information
available on FloodHelpNY.org, the local flood risk awareness
platform.&lt;br/&gt;4. Linking research to actionable change. Three research
projects will be undertaken, including a survey to quantify the length of delays
in various sources of disaster recovery and the costs from these delays; a
replicability and generalizability analysis of the project’s pilots; and a
typology of the community-level benefits of widespread insurance
purchase&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CIVIC Innovation Challenge is a joint program
with Department of Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland
Security Science and Technology Directorate, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, and the NSF&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.