* 2133631
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Variability within Lithic Production Sequences
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Judith Melton, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2023
* USD 17,772.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much of archaeological research
seeks to understand the origins and diffusion of human culture. Without the
option of observing living populations, archaeologists must rely solely on the
objects produced by prehistoric peoples (i.e. the material culture record) when
reconstructing the evolutionary history of prehistoric cultures. Distinguishing
“related” or “unrelated” cultural groups in prehistory has to date relied
largely on similarities among stone tool assemblages. But, how much variation
one can expect within a single assemblage remains unknown. Only after
quantifying the amount of variation one can expect within a single occupation
can one begin to distinguish populations which fall outside of the expected
amount for a shared cultural group. This project helps to fill this void by
developing a new analytical approach to stone tool technology, advancing the
field of stone tool analysis and researchers’ abilities to extract human
behavioral practices in prehistory. A key component is the digitization of
unique stone tool collections which will not only ensure their longevity but
will ensure their accessibility to researchers and the public without typical
constraints such as travel and finances. In addition to the digital heritage
preservation impact, this project provides an example to the public of a young
female scholar working at a rare intersection of multiple fields. Materials
produced will be incorporated into K-12 education modules to inspire students
from a range of socioeconomic backgrounds in science, evolution, and
archaeology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the degree to which
stone tool production varies within a single population and between two
different populations. This project will focus on very specific types of stone
tool artifacts because these have the greatest potential for storing and thus
yielding human actions at the individual level. These objects are referred to as
refits in the archaeological community, meaning all of the material which was
produced during the production of stone tools (i.e. flintknapping) by a
prehistoric person are preserved in the archaeological record and eventually
pieced back together. These “refits” therefore display the actions taken by an
individual while they were working towards a goal. It is the very sequence of
actions recorded in these refits coupled with variables which have been
demonstrated to be meaningful proxies for cultural relatedness which are
analyzed. Because of the sequential nature of the data, time-series statistical
analyses is performed in collaboration with mathematician colleagues to quantify
the amount of variability present within a single population and among
populations. From this, a quantitative standard by which archaeologists can
evaluate cultural continuity versus independent convergence in stone tool
technological behavior can be produced. The results from this project will
contribute to the field of archaeology by advancing analytical techniques for
stone tool technology, demonstrating the utility of collaborations with
mathematicians, and providing a quantitative standard by which other teams may
test hypotheses concerning convergence vs. cultural continuity in
prehistory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.