* 2133600
* Increasing STEM Persistence by Supporting Apprentice Research Experiences (AREs) as a Model for Institutional Change in Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Stephanie Rollins, Wake Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,399,976.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by iteratively assessing and
improving the STEM Academic Research and Training (START) program, an
Apprenticeship Research Experience (ARE) at Wake Technical Community College.
The project will contribute to understanding the effects of AREs - especially
uncommon and understudied at 2-year colleges - on community college students’
persistence in college and in STEM careers. This project will develop a
sustainable model for co-curricular apprenticeship-style mentored undergraduate
research programs and help build the case for state and donor funding for
undergraduate research experiences and internships at community colleges across
North Carolina. The project will enhance a current program, recruit students
from populations underrepresented in STEM, and further develop relationships
with numerous research partners. By supporting students with paid internships,
the project will increase access to STEM careers for low-income students.
Training modules for mentors and students will also be developed. The project
offers a distinct opportunity to recruit underrepresented minorities and first-
generation college students into STEM research and prepare them for successful
academic and professional careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to
develop a sustainable and scalable undergraduate research and internship program
model for 2- and 4-year colleges to partner in undergraduate research. Such
partnerships are expected to foster student success in transfer and persistence
in bachelor’s degree programs in STEM. Funds will support approximately 50
student interns each semester resulting in 400 paid internships over the course
of the project. This project will develop a Community of Inquiry (CoI)
framework-based model for strengthening undergraduate research experiences in
the community college context. The project will utilize a randomized controlled
trial that meets the "What Works Clearinghouse" standards, and includes research
questions on the impact of participation in START undergraduate research on
student outcomes, e.g. retention and persistence in college and in STEM fields,
academic confidence, student identity and awareness, and scientific literacy and
research skills. Furthermore, the research questions examine the impact of START
on the college, e.g. the impact on the diversity of student participation in
STEM fields, the skills and comfort of mentors in engaging in mentoring
activities, and the institution’s support for mentors and research. The external
evaluator and project faculty will prepare manuscripts of findings for
publication and disseminate them via national conferences, reaching audiences of
both practitioners and researchers. Academic partners include North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University, the University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, and North Carolina State University. By creating undergraduate
research and internship opportunities for community college students the project
is a model to build the STEM pipeline. Funding for this project comes from the
Advanced Technological Education program through the program description on
Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year
Institutions of Higher Education (PD 21-7980) which promotes innovative and
evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education in the community
college sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.