* 2133653
* Facilitating Remote Electrical and Computer Engineering Teaching: Seizing the Moment with Project RECET
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Daniel Stancil, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department Heads Association
* Standard Grant
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,925.00

The overall goal of Project RECET (Remote Electrical and Computer Engineering
Teaching) is to help provide quality ECE education when fully online, and
explore issues associated with blended online and in-person instruction for the
future. Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, online and online compatible techniques
for teaching Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) were not widely deployed
across US ECE Departments. As ECE educators and students became more experienced
with remote education during 2020 and 2021, they learned that the choice between
face-to-face and online instruction is not an either-or proposition. Most
instructors and institutions have come to realize that what COVID required them
to do should become at least part of the new normal to realize the best possible
learning environment for their students. They have also learned the value of
actively sharing course content with other institutions and industry. Project
RECET will help disseminate materials, strategies, and best practices that will
have a significant impact on the ECE Community across all levels of education
and be an engine for both short- and long-term change in the ECE education
enterprise. Online infrastructure, workshops, tutorials, and other support
activities will be managed by the ECE Department Heads Association (ECEDHA), a
neutral non-profit organization whose members include most US ECE departments.
ECEDHA also maintains close working relationships with industry leaders. The
scope of the initial RECET roll out will be limited to introductory analog and
digital circuits courses, but a key goal of the project is to prepare to scale
up to a comprehensive activity that supports the complete breadth of the ECE
curriculum and can be adopted by other engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team hypothesizes that there is a large
and growing cohort of ECE instructors and practicing engineers who see the value
of freely sharing online relevant course content they have developed with all
ECE programs. The team also hypothesizes that a significant number of
institutions will adopt fully online ECE instruction--including labs--if
contributed course content is well organized, supported by an independent
neutral organization that is not solely affiliated with any one university or
company, content is tagged through a joint academy-industry process, content is
minimally branded, and adequate training and support infrastructure is provided.
This collective approach can begin a fundamental cultural shift in which ECE
programs more fully utilize the evidence-based research from the engineering
education community and industry is more directly engaged in ECE student
learning. The results from this study will help prepare ECE departments
nationally to deploy remote learning experiences that will improve student
understanding and better prepare them for success in industry. There are two
principal outcomes expected of a successful effort. One is the product (an
online content collection), and the other is the process by which the product
will have been created, maintained, socialized, and owned. If the effort is
successful, the content collection will be compatible with, and invite
participation by, all ECE departments across the diverse US ECE ecosystem and
will identify a roadmap for translating the same successes to other engineering
disciplines. The process will also nurture a trans-institutional culture in
which US ECE faculty members work as members of a national community beyond
their local department. The impact of engineering education research on ECE
education will also be increased. A final potential broader impact is that a
successful project will identify a roadmap for translating the same successes to
other engineering disciplines, beyond ECE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.