* 2133810
* Process diagnostics and event-driven control for safety-critical chemical processes and plants
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Benjamin Wilhite, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 10/31/2024
* USD 403,940.00

When automatic control systems are used to protect safety-critical manufacturing
processes and chemical plants, they must cope with major challenges under
abnormal situations to avoid product and equipment damage, avert financial loss,
and most importantly, prevent life-threatening situations. Whether the abnormal
condition is due to sensor measurement errors, actuator failure (e.g., a stuck
control valve), or leakage, fouling, or other equipment malfunction, it is
critical that the abnormal event be detected, diagnosed, and that proper control
action be taken before the situation escalates into a safety threat. The
circumstances become even more challenging when humans (process operators and
engineers) are called to take action, situations in which a clear indication of
what happened is vital so that appropriate operator intervention can be made.
This research effort intends to address these needs and will advance and
transform industrial practice for chemical and other manufacturing process
safety. The research team of this project will develop diagnostic algorithms
that can quickly detect and identify the root cause of an abnormal situation in
a chemical process or entire plant and will formulate automatic control
algorithms that apply the necessary corrective action to prevent a potential
disaster. The research team also will test their theories on process stability
and the control system software they develop on a laboratory scale reactor
system that (safely) can emulate an industrial reactor. The development of such
diagnostic and control algorithms will be accomplished through fundamental
advancements in the field of systems science, particularly in data-driven
modeling and feedback control methods. This project will support graduate and
undergraduate education, including students from underrepresented groups, and
will generate important safety related content for chemical process design and
process control courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Control of safety critical
manufacturing processes in the face of potential abnormal events requires the
automated detection that an unusual event has taken place, unambiguous
identification of which sensor, actuator, or process equipment component has
failed, and reconfiguration of the control system to respond to the failure to
maintain process stability and safety. To satisfy these requirements, the
specific research objectives of the project are to: (a) develop algorithms for
chemical process and plant diagnostics, based on either a first-principles model
or data-driven statistical model; (b) perform experimental testing of the
diagnostic algorithms in an industrially relevant but lab-scale chemical
reactor, where a highly exothermic and potentially explosive reaction takes
place (but in a safe manner); and (c) develop event-driven control algorithms
based on the diagnosis of the abnormal event from alarm data, as well as dynamic
analysis of its effect on the ability to enforce safety constraints. To meet
objectives (a) and (c), system-theoretical tools will be employed, advancing
methods and results in nonlinear functional observers, statistical inference,
and constrained nonlinear control. Meeting objective (b) will involve modeling,
simulation, and diagnostic algorithm development for chemical reactors, as well
as experimental implementation and testing. The innovative features of the
project consist of: (i) advances in the theory and algorithms for process and
plant diagnostics, based on either first-principles models or statistical
models, along with an experimental study that will serve as a paradigm for
future fault diagnosis applications in real chemical processes; and (ii)
advances in dynamic analysis and model-based fault-tolerant control in the face
of possible abnormal events that can pose safety threats. The results of the
proposed work will be broadly disseminated to researchers in academia and
industry by presentations at domestic and international meetings, in scholarly
refereed journal publications, and through a dedicated web site for the project.
The PI also will make freely available all case studies and implementations of
the proposed work, and will create a web tool for easy
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.