* 2133084
* NRI: Integrated Soft Wearable Robotics Technology to Assist Arm Movement of Infants with Physical Impairments
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,499,996.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI-3.0) project advances soft robotics
technology for a new generation of wearable upper extremity (UE) devices for
infants with movement impairments. The overarching goal is to infer the infant's
intent, evaluate the need for assistance, and when appropriate collaboratively
aid the performance of explorative reaching actions. Current pediatric wearable
assistive technology lacks the necessary functionality and accessibility to be
efficient and adaptive to the user. The project addresses this gap through the
discovery and creation of appropriate sensing and control hardware and
algorithms for effective infant-robot physical interactions. The project brings
together experts from Engineering, Computer Science, Chemistry, and
Rehabilitation and poses cross-disciplinary research questions in soft robot
design, dynamics and control, computer vision, and embedded systems. The rich
set of engaging problems will provide abundant research opportunities for a
diverse cohort of undergraduate students. The project integrates existing
efforts in K-12 outreach events hosted at the University of California,
Riverside (UCR) -- a Hispanic Serving Institution -- to broaden participation of
under-represented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
real-time, sensor-based closed-loop control for soft wearable robotics targeted
to serve as upper extremity (UE) assistive devices. The project advances
fundamental engineering knowledge in three ways. 1) Visual sensing for
biomechanical applications via lensless cameras, that can take arbitrary shapes
and have an ultra-thin form factor that allows seamless integration with soft
materials and surfaces. The project develops a new class of visual object
recognition and tracking algorithms for use of lensless camera systems in UE
assistive devices. 2) Soft fluidic logic circuits to reduce the amount of rigid
electronic components required to control and operate pneumatically actuated
soft robots. This technique has been shown to be valuable in assistive
technology applications where physical interaction with humans is better
achieved if the size and weight of the device components remain low. 3) Shared
human-robot admittance control, that uses data in real-time to estimate dynamic
models for the device and its interaction with the human. The goal is to provide
as-needed assistance by autonomously switching between two operating modes:
either yielding to the userâ€™s intention, or applying assistive forces to help
the user's arm reach the desired object. Overall, this research will create new
forms of embodied intelligence to advance the capacity of wearable assistive
soft robots to perceive and act in collaboration with a human
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.