* 2133718
* Polarization Caloritronics: a pathway to electrically-controlled heat switches
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Joseph Heremans, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2024
* USD 380,844.00

Most human energy consumption goes to create heat, for example, to generate
electricity in power plants or to power of cars and planes with fuel combustion.
Heat switches are important devices that control electricity flow based on
temperature. They enable important applications such as magnetic and electric
greenhouse-gas-free cooling technologies, solar-thermal power generators, and
automotive exhaust waste heat recovery systems. Most heat switches are either
mechanical switches that wear out and cannot support millions of cycles, or they
are based on phase transitions, which work only at one fixed temperature.
Ferroelectric materials have potential to overcome these limitations. This
project will develop the fundamental knowledge needed to design heat switches
from bulk ferroelectric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heat is carried by
vibrations of the atoms, called “phonons” in electrically insulating solid.
Magnets, such as iron, are solids in which each atom carries its own little
magnet, called a “magnetic moment”, and when all the atomic magnetic moments
align, the solid gains a net magnetization. In ferroelectric solids, atoms have
local atomic dipole moments where one side of the atom is more positively
charged and the opposite side is more negative. These atomic dipole moments
align in ferroelectric materials just like the atomic magnetic moments align in
magnets, giving a net polarization. In magnets, heat can be carried by thermal
fluctuations (somewhat like Brownian motion) of the atomic magnetic moments,
called “magnons”. The proposal investigates the nature of the thermal
fluctuations of the dipole moments in ferroelectrics, the analogs of magnons.
These are tentatively labeled “ferrons” and have not been studied explicitly
before. Preliminary results suggest that ferrons are phonons that involve the
vibrations of the atoms that carry dipole moments and, like most phonons, they
carry heat. Theoretically, an applied voltage should influence their heat-
carrying capability; preliminary experiments confirm this. The detailed theory
of the influence of an external electric field on the thermal conductivity of
ferrons will be developed and tested experimentally in this project. The goal is
to provide design rules to develop new materials from the ground up in which the
thermal conductivity is affected greatly by applied voltage, making them
suitable for heat switches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.