* 2133568
* ECO-CBET: Foliar applied plant-activated nitrogen delivery agents for sustainable crop production.
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2025
* Gregory Lowry, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 10/31/2025
* USD 1,313,277.00

Agriculture is critical to the economy, health, and national security of the
United States (U.S.). Nitrogen fertilizers are widely utilized in agriculture to
ensure an abundant and nutritious food supply for consumers and adequate
financial returns for farmers. However, current soil nitrogen (N) fertilizer
delivery routes and practices are not efficient with crops using less than 50%
of the applied fertilizer loads. This inefficient usage of N fertilizers
continues to cause pervasive and vexing environmental problems in the U.S. and
worldwide ranging from groundwater contamination, harmful algal blooms,
eutrophication to the emission of gaseous N2O pollutants that negatively impact
water and air quality. The overall goal of this project is to develop a foliar-
based fertilizer delivery process that could efficiently deliver N and other
nutrients to crops by applying the to the leaves directly rather than to the
soil. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigators of this project propose
to encapsulate N fertilizers into functionalized nanoparticle carriers that
deliver the nitrogen directly into the plant. These carriers will be designed to
be sprayed onto the plant leaves. Special targeting ligands will be attached
onto the surfaces of the N nanoparticle carriers and help guide them to the
locations in the plants where they are needed. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the development of new fundamental
knowledge that could be leveraged to guide the design and deployment of more
efficient and sustainble N fertilizer delivery processes. Further benefits to
society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of five PhD students, one postdoctoral scholar, and ~18 undergraduate
REU students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil-based nitrogen fertilization of cropland
has created severe imbalances in the nitrogen (N) cycle with unsustainable
environmental consequences. Managing the N cycle is a perennial engineering
grand challenge that can only be met by a radical transformation in the way that
N fertlizers are applied to crops. The overall goal of this project is to
transform the delivery of N and other nutrients to crops by enabling foliar-
based application with highly efficient targeted and plant-activated N
utilization. Specific objectives of the project are to 1) Develop biocompatible
carrier particles (N-carriers) for efficient N delivery that are derived from
agricultural byproducts or earth-abundant minerals; 2) Graft plant-
biorecognition molecules onto the N-carriers to enable the targeting of plant
chloroplasts to increase N assimilation efficiency; 3) Develop molecular- and
multi-scale transport models to predict N-carrier translocation and distribution
through the leaf surface, and interactions with internal cell surfaces; and 4)
Quantify the life cycle, environmental benefits, and risks of N-carriers
relative to soil-applied N fertilizers. To achieve these objectives, the
Principal Investigators of this project propose to converge and integrate ideas
and tools from various fields/disciplines including nanotechnology, interfacial
engineering, particulate and multi-phase transport, plant bioengineering,
environmental engineering, and environmental sustainability. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the development of more efficient and sustainable N fertilizer delivery
processes that could advance the goals of an efficient and sustainable
management of the N cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.