* 2133384
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: Connecting Underrepresented Youths with Employment Opportunities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jomella Watson-Thompson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,199,999.00

Youth participation in out-of-school-time (OST) opportunities has been shown to
improve access to internships, develop workforce readiness, and cultivate
occupational identities. However, in sprawling low-density metro areas like
Kansas City, a substantial physical disconnect and spatial mismatch between
residential areas, jobs, and OST opportunities combines with a lack of reliable
transportation services to significantly impact youth from low-income homes and
schools, who are disproportionately Black and Latinx. This project’s goal is to
increase OST-activity participation and address marginalized-youth employment
disparities by providing tools to discover, access, and participate in OST
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops, pilots, and
evaluates an Optimized Unified Transportation (OUT) framework designed to
increase awareness of OST opportunities; decrease access disparity through
innovative and efficient shared-mobility services, policies, and governance; and
incentivize energy-efficient travel choices. Key knowledge advances include: (i)
innovative analysis of student mobility needs and preferences together with
incentives that encourage participation and energy-efficient travel behaviors,
(ii) first-of-their-kind travel-demand models that consider transportation
equity and social-determinant outcomes, (iii) development and testing of a
community-driven framework that includes shared mobility, business models,
policies, and governance, and (iv) development and real-world pilot testing of a
mobile-application-based technology that incorporates the framework. The
project’s Collaborative Engagement Stakeholder Group (CESG), comprising
community stakeholders, community members, researchers, and civic organizations
from the Kansas City metro area, engaged students (ages 13-18), parents,
mobility providers, school and city officials, and employers to identify
acceptable shared-mobility solutions, policies, and governance. This project
will develop novel models to understand the impacts of these solutions and
incentive strategies on students’ travel choices. The resulting solutions and
models will be used to develop metrics that specifically measure accessibility
and equity. These metrics will be integrated into the OUT framework, which will
then be optimized through simulation to achieve societal benefits and increase
system efficiency. Optimized approaches will then be piloted in the mobile
application and evaluated. Our innovative modeling approaches, governance, and
policies will be transferable and scalable for use with other communities and
population groups (e.g., adult workers). The project will train youth,
undergraduate students, and graduate students, and the pilot will involve
underrepresented youth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.