* 2133225
* Simultaneous high-density mapping of synaptic neurochemical transmissions and action potential in a large neural network
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Brian Kim, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The excitation of neurons results in action potentials, which propagates through
the neuronal body and axons toward synapses. The electrical potential recordings
using a large microelectrode array from neuronal cultures has been widely used
to monitor neural spike activities and cellular activities. However, this
approach does not monitor neurochemical release, and therefore only contains
indirect information regarding synaptic neurotransmission. The neural spike
activities and the neurotransmitter secretions are related; however, one cannot
be used to predict the other because of the complex vesicle trafficking and
exocytosis processes. Because many neurodegenerative disorders, including
Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease, interfere and modulate synaptic
functions prior to neuronal loss, ideally, the new technology should be able to
monitor the dynamics of both neural spike activities and neurochemical release
from synapses. The central objective of this project is to serve this unmet
need. The educational objective of this project is to lead an exciting role in
closing the knowledge and interest gaps in science and engineering via a
multidimensional approach. The education program is expected to (i) increase
public scientific literacy, (ii) engage underrepresented student groups in STEM,
and (iii) provide a highly demanded curriculum to prepare students in the
emerging field of neural engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a novel neurochemical-electrophysiology sensor technology
that can simultaneously monitor neurochemical and neural spike activities. The
neurochemical-electrophysiology sensor will enable the comprehensive
investigation of synaptic function from action potential (AP) propagating
through the axon to rapidly evoking neurochemical events at the synapses which
cause the extracellular release of neurotransmitters. The new neurochemical-
electrophysiology technology will provide label-free, multisite, and long-term
monitoring of neuronal synaptic transmission activities, hence, enabling the
characterization of synaptic function in physiological conditions and
neurodegenerative disorders. The project's Research Plan is organized under
three aims: (1) Develop high-density neurochemical-electrophysiology amplifiers
with fast-scan cyclic voltammogram (FSCV) capability; (2) Develop on-chip 16,384
microelectrode array and investigate switch-matrix connectivity; and (3) Apply
the neurochemical-electrophysiology technology to monitor synaptic transmission
from a large neural network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.