* 2133870
* Detection of airborne endotoxins and toxins from cyanobacterial harmful algal blooms and the effect of atmospheric oxidants on their longevity and potency
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Josephine Aller, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 329,999.00

Algae and cyanobacteria naturally inhabit lakes and other aquatic environments.
Some of these species can grow out of control forming dense cell concentrations
or harmful algal blooms (HABs). HABs are caused by excess inputs of nutrients
and warmer temperatures, and they are increasingly common in waterbodies
throughout the U.S. and globally. Some cyanobacteria produce toxins
(‘cyanotoxins’) that can harm people and animals, with associated economic costs
due to impacts on drinking water supplies and recreational activities. Humans
are exposed to these toxins through skin contact, drinking water, and eating
contaminated shellfish. Less well understood is the potential inhalation of
airborne cyanotoxins, which likely results from wind blowing over water surfaces
that cause bubbles to burst and spread particles into the air. The goal of this
research is to understand the link between cyanotoxin production during HABs to
their presence and lifetime in the air. This goal will be achieved by monitoring
cyanotoxins in small lakes in eastern Long Island, New York, which are known to
have HABs during summer months. At the same time, air samples will be collected
onto filters and examined for the presence of cyanotoxins. The research will
compare these field results over multiple HAB events to assess relationships.
Successful completion of this research will help close this important knowledge
gap and help assess the potential impacts on human and ecosystem health. These
results will be shared with local and state governmental agencies to provide
information for citizens to stay healthy. Additional benefits to society result
from dissemination of data that can be used to develop public policy for the
management of water resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increase in frequency,
severity, and geographical extent of HABs in aquatic ecosystems has resulted in
an increased likelihood of cyanotoxin exposure in areas that experience
recurrent blooms. HABs caused by Microcystis aeruginosa represent a clear
example of the synergistic impact of eutrophication and warming. Excess
nutrients promote increases in biomass and enhanced production of microcystins,
a process that is enhanced at warmer temperatures. During a bloom, spray aerosol
produced via wind blowing over the water and bubble bursting processes can
incorporate intact cells, microcystins, and cell fragments that exist in
respirable size fractions PM-10 and PM-2.5. This project is based on evidence
that spray aerosol can promote acute respiratory distress great distances from
source blooms. The overall goal of this project is to elucidate connections
between cyanotoxin production in aquatic systems and airborne transport of
cyanotoxins. This will be achieved through field collection of aerosolized
particles using a high-volume air sampler/impaction system that allows real-time
spatiotemporal collection of aerosol microcystins and endotoxins. The longevity
and potency of airborne toxins will be examined considering changes in
photochemical reactivity and meteorological conditions. Laboratory experiments
that mimic atmospheric oxidation processes will assess the chemical stability of
the airborne toxins relative to their residence time in the atmosphere. The
interdisciplinary research team combines necessary expertise in HAB ecology,
microbiology, environmental organic chemistry, environmental engineering, and
atmospheric aerosol science to achieve the project objectives. Successful
completion of this research will provide critical public health information for
proactive responses to potential events at time scales relevant to the HAB
management community and other relevant stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.