* 2133498
* Experimental Study of Clinopyroxene Growth and Sector Zoning
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2021,02/28/2023
* Benoit Welsch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 02/28/2023
* USD 264,817.00

Clinopyroxene is a major rock-forming mineral on Earth and other rocky planets,
and one of the first solids crystallized by high temperature magmas and lavas.
In theory, the chemical composition and the crystal shape of clinopyroxene can
be used to extract information about the liquid from which the mineral formed
(e.g., temperature, pressure, composition). When studying rock samples, the
accuracy of such markers is critical in deciphering the dynamics of a large
number of volcanic and magmatic systems, both on Earth and other planetary
bodies. However, the crystallization processes of clinopyroxene are complex and
still poorly understood, which hampers its potential as a tracer of magmas. The
proposed work aims to refine the crystallization processes of clinopyroxene
using a combination of laboratory experiments and advanced analytical methods.
These results will complete previous datasets, provide new insights on the
mineral at the microscopic scale, and pave the way for new research avenues. The
tasks will nurture a collaboration between three academic institutes with
premier experimental petrology laboratories (Brown University, the University of
Hawaii, and the Universite de Lorraine), support the professional development of
two early-career researchers, and provide a research opportunity for three
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clinopyroxene is one of the most
complex igneous minerals in terms of its variability in texture and chemical
zoning. Even today, its intricate complexity stands as a significant roadblock
to reconstructing the history of clinopyroxene-bearing magmas. The rationale for
this project stems from former characterizations of natural samples bearing
complex sector zoning, and previous experiments on clinopyroxene + melt systems.
This new work will exploit a trio of experimental apparatuses to address a broad
range of crystallization conditions: heating stage microscope, 1-atm gas mixing
furnace, and piston cylinder. The investigations will focus on major- and trace-
element composition (in fine-scale detail to capture intricate zoning), growth
features (habits, melt and solid inclusions, crystal defects) and the
crystallization kinetics of clinopyroxene during the cooling of synthetic and
natural melts. The experimental products will be analyzed using optical,
electron probe, and transmission electron microscopies, and laser ablation
inductively coupled mass spectrometry. The overarching goals are: to document
the textural variation of clinopyroxene at various pressure, temperature, and
cooling conditions; to establish the conditions (cooling rate, undercooling,
melt composition) at which sector zoning occurs; and to examine major- and
trace-element partitioning between clinopyroxene and melt, and between sectors
in clinopyroxene. These goals are intended to advance the practical application
of clinopyroxene thermobarometry, by establishing which sectors and elements
faithfully record magmatic pressure-temperature
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.