* 2133549
* Collaborative Research: ECO-CBET: Putting entropy to work: Leveraging the role of water organization in peptide binding events to selectively recover rare earths
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2025
* Christine Duval, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2025
* USD 640,848.00

Rare-earth elements are critical components in wind turbines, electric vehicles,
and smart phones. The United States imports 100% of its rare earth elements from
China, where they are mined and purified through time- and energy-intensive
processes. The United States has great potential to recycle rare earth elements
from waste streams such as coal industry waters, electronic wastes, and
fertilizer mining wastes. This project, a collaboration between Case Western
Reserve University, Clemson University, and Pennsylvania State University-
University Park, will recover valuable rare earth elements (La, Ce, Nd, Pr) from
phosphogypsum—a fertilizer mining waste mixed with radioactive impaired water.
Currently, phosphogypsum is piped to open ditches or ponds and stored
indefinitely as “stacks”. Today, an estimated more than 200 million tons of rare
earth elements are trapped in unprocessed phosphogypsum waste in Florida alone.
This source of rare earth elements is presently untapped due to challenges
associated with radioactive species and the difficulty of separating the
individual elements. Further, stack failures post a threat to the environment as
phosphogypsum sites have caused over 200 million gallons of contaminated water
to be released to Florida aquifers and surface waters since 1994. Thus, the
vision for this project is to discover new separation mechanisms, materials, and
processes to recover valuable resources (rare earth elements, fertilizers, clean
water) from waste streams of the fertilizer industry, paving the way for a
sustainable domestic supply of rare earth elements and a sustainable agriculture
sector. Doing so will enable the recycling of an otherwise unusable waste stream
and treat impaired waters that threaten local water supplies. Simultaneously,
the next generation of engineers will be trained to tackle complex environmental
engineering problems at the forefront of the food-energy-water nexus.
Educational outreach programs will target the general public using the social
media app TikTok and engage local high school students in research experiences
and mentoring programs. In addition, interactive activities for K-12 outreach
events focused on sustainability and water treatment will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional membrane separation mechanisms rely
on differences in size and charge which are insufficient to purify individual
rare earth elements due to their similar radii and identical formal charge. This
project pursues a multistage separation process in which rare earth elements are
1) extracted from phosphogypsum by chemical digestion, 2) separated from anions
and concentrated by electrodialysis, and 3) selectively separated using peptide-
functionalized membranes. A key technical goal of this research is to discover
the mechanisms that underpin peptide-ion selectivity and leverage those
mechanisms to design a new class of highly selective membranes. The
thermodynamics of peptide-ion complexation will be studied using X-ray
absorption spectroscopy, biomolecular characterization techniques, and
multiscale modeling. Machine learning will be employed to predict new peptide
structures based on thermodynamic descriptors. Newly discovered peptides will be
incorporated into electrospun membranes using “click” chemistry. Techno-economic
analysis and life cycle assessment will be performed to quantify the
environmental and financial impacts the proposed design and inform iterations of
this design. Knowledge generated from this research will broadly enable
currently challenging selective separations across the fields of membranes and
sorbent materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.