* 2133561
* Collaborative Research: Advancing the Extended Specimen Network: Curating and Digitizing the Sherwin Carlquist Collection
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2026
* Mare Nazaire, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 05/31/2026
* USD 482,583.00

Among the notable “shoulders of giants” on which present-day botanists stand are
those of Dr. Sherwin Carlquist (1930–2021). Carlquist leaves behind a rich
legacy and significant collections resulting from over 30 years of important
botanical research. Over the course of his distinguished career, Carlquist
published prolifically, with over 300 research papers covering such topics as
plant anatomy and systematics, evolutionary and ecological theory, flower
development, morphology, island biogeography, and taxonomy. As a researcher,
Carlquist considered the biological elements within an environment as comprising
a dynamic network. This network informed his method for collecting specimens and
the rich array of materials and records he generated through that practice. The
Carlquist Collection, housed at the California Botanic Garden Herbarium (RSA)
and the Botanical Research Institute of Texas Library (BRIT), collectively
contains 191,789 objects, including herbarium specimens, wood specimens, plant
material preserved in spirits, wood anatomy microscope slides, field photograph
transparency slides, black and white photographs, and field collection
notebooks. A significant portion of the Carlquist Collection has never been
curated or digitized, making much of the collection inaccessible. Further, some
of the collection materials have faced varying degrees of deterioration owing to
inadequate housing in non-archival materials. In a collaborative effort between
RSA and BRIT, this project aims to curate and digitize these important
collections and their associated data to provide long-term preservation and to
create an Extended Specimen Network (ESN), wherein Carlquist’s specimens, field
photographs, and collection notebooks will be linked to form an aggregated
collection, thus creating limitless additional preparations and digital
resources. The project will facilitate immediate application to a suite of
research areas, including systematic, wood anatomy, ecology, biogeography,
island biology, phenology, plant conservation, history of science, plant
humanities, and archival theory and practices. The Carlquist Collection will be
publicly available via online data portals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Held at the
Herbarium at California Botanic Garden (RSA) and the Library at the Botanical
Research Institute of Texas (BRIT), the Sherwin Carlquist Collection encompasses
more than 30 years of botanical field research comprising 30,770 biological
collections and 161,019 archival objects. This project aims to (1) curate the
Carlquist Collection for long-term preservation; (2) digitize and mobilize data
for all collections materials held at both institutions; (3) link transcribed
collection information, images, and metadata across all biological collections
and archival objects; and (4) publish and make publicly available as an
aggregated collection through online data portals, including iDigBio and GBIF.
This project represents a unique collaborative and interdisciplinary opportunity
between natural history collections and archives to create one of the first
Extended Specimen Networks (ESN) for a renowned American botanist and serves
more broadly to establish a new paradigm for how natural history collections and
archives communities envision, implement, and utilize ESN’s within and among
their collections. Integral to the project are the activities that involve
participation from students at different levels in their academic career. The
project will provide education, training, and capacity building for underserved
youth and emerging professionals in a field that will greatly benefit from their
participation. A workshop and symposium on ESN development are planned for the
Society for the Preservation of Natural History Collections annual conference to
provide training and resources to the collections community. Paired exhibits for
the public and hosted at each institution will highlight the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.