* 2133964
* Collaborative Research: HCC: Small: Science communication in the ecosystem of digital media platforms
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Daniel Romero, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2025
* USD 78,553.00

This research will investigate open questions about how scientific advances
spread in the ecosystem of digital media platforms. Science communication has
undergone dramatic changes over the past decades. Online platforms such as
social media sites, electronic news outlets, blogs, and wikis are now used by
most scholars and the public for sharing scientific findings. A better
understanding of the online circulation of scientific advances is imperative
because these new channels of connecting with the public have brought novel
challenges in dealing with the uncontrolled distortion of information.
Additionally, it remains difficult to identify reliable knowledge, given the
increase of sensationalist presentations of scientific results. This work will
merge ideas, approaches, and technologies from information science,
communication, and journalism to address numerous issues of significant social
and economic impact: (1) contributing to the improvement of public serving
science journalism; (2) providing practical and actionable early predictions of
science dissemination from collective cues on social media; (3) enriching the
online experience of people around the globe with a better understanding and
tracking of real-world message distortion campaigns; (4) informing key current
crises related to misinformation; and, (5) guiding science policy with novel
knowledge about science communication in the ecosystem of digital media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While most research on information diffusion has
focused on individual platforms, this project will develop a critical multi-
platform analysis framework for science communication. A primary goal is to
discover fundamental knowledge about: (1) typical trajectories in the cross-
platform dissemination of scientific articles, (2) how these trajectories
connect to the impact of the work, its novelty, as well as the reactions from
scholars and the public, (3) predictions of eventual reactions from early
coverage patterns; and, (4) effects of clickbait and information distortion on
dissemination. This project will illuminate how scientific findings are shared,
discussed, and distorted online and provide empirical evidence of how early
signals deduced from social media cues can be harnessed computationally to
predict the coverage of scientific articles. The design of an interactive tool
will demonstrate how traces of collective reactions can be compellingly and
usefully presented to science journalists in real reporting scenarios. The work
will be fueled by and will further existing theoretical and empirical research
on the use of new media in science dissemination, assess intentional and
unintentional information distortion online, harness collective cues from Web-
based platforms for early prediction, and design information interfaces for
journalists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.