* 2133202
* I-Corps: Robotic Optic Technologies for Adaptive, Dynamic Lighting Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Martin Bechthold, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an additive manufacturing-based robotic lighting technology for
use in smart homes and buildings, smart lighting, Internet of Things, and
building technologies. Currently, consumers are required to buy many lights,
each placed in a single location, that do one thing. This circumstance drives up
the buying, design, installation, and energy costs for lighting devices. The
proposed technology is designed to offer consumers the opportunity to replace
multiple devices that perform one task with one device that rapidly performs
many tasks through the use of a mobile application. Indoor and outdoor adaptive
lighting systems using the proposed technology may support automated systems for
lighting control. The benefits of multi-purpose lighting systems also include
safety, energy-savings and advanced ergonomic behavior to end-users. This
project may advance current technologies for smart lighting and the development
of more efficient, compact and adaptive lighting systems, ultimately saving
space and energy, as well as reducing lighting design, manufacturing,
installation and operations costs for spaces situated in contemporary urban
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an automated, adaptive optic technology that allows for dynamic redirection
and distribution of artificial lighting in interior and exterior spaces. The
proposed technology is a 3D printing technology for producing optic filters that
exhibit adaptive lighting behavior when integrated with light emitting diode
(LED) technology, data sensing, and robotic motion control algorithms. The
proposed design combines research in materials science/engineering, robotics,
and the Internet of Things (IoT). Integrated lighting devices using the advanced
optic behavior have demonstrated the ability to dynamically and efficiently
control lighting properties such as direction, ambiance, and movement, functions
which are not currently possible using existing smart lighting
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.