* 2133484
* CIF: Small: New Directions in Clustering: Interactive Algorithms and Statistical Models
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Arya Mazumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 489,206.00

Clustering, or partitioning data-points based on pairwise similarities, is one
of the most important problems of unsupervised learning and data mining.
Algorithms for clustering often suffer from low accuracy and high time
complexity due to processing massive amounts of data that are noisy, and for
lack of a benchmark to validate the clustering output. This project studies new
directions for clustering algorithms and their fundamental limits by
incorporating several new technical tools from information theory. Scalable
algorithms for clustering with theoretical guarantees and practical validation
should have high impact in all areas of data science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to make use of interactive algorithms that adaptively gather
labeled data to improve accuracy of clustering and related machine learning
problems. In recent years, wide-spread use of crowdsourcing has facilitated the
development of such algorithms. The algorithms that will be developed, as well
as the lower bounding methods, extend to a large class of machine learning
problems, and help understand trade-off between information theoretic optimality
and computational efficiency. A generalized setup taking into account erroneous
interactions, use of similarity measures, overlapping clusters and parallel
interactions in design of algorithms is being pursued. Connections of this setup
with well-known random graph community models such as the stochastic block model
will also be explored in this project. New statistical models, such as the
geometric block model, will be studied as an alternative to the popular
stochastic block model. Algorithms for community recovery for the geometric
block model and&lt;br/&gt;information theoretic lower bounds will be developed.
This project will also develop statistical models that faithfully capture the
properties of real networks to provide a benchmark for testing clustering
algorithms. These include statistical models for community detection and
interactive clustering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.