* 2133739
* Experimental and Computational Models of Bacteria Transport and Adhesion in the Microvasculature
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Danesh Tafti, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 493,499.00

Bacteria transport in the human circulatory system has important implications in
bacteria-mediated cancer therapy and blood-borne bacterial infection. Bacteria
in the bloodstream enter into the surrounding tissue through microvasculature or
capillary walls. The motion of bacteria in capillaries is influenced by their
own self-propulsion, capillary size, the presence of red blood cells in the
capillary, and the pressure difference between the capillary and the surrounding
tissue. Bacteria also adhere to the capillary wall through various physical and
chemical mechanisms. All these factors influence the penetration of bacteria
from the bloodstream into the surrounding tissue through the capillary wall.
Study of bacteria transport in the human body is very challenging; therefore,
this research proposes laboratory experiments and computer modeling of bacteria
transport and adhesion in capillaries under physiologically relevant conditions.
The methods developed in this research can also be applied to other pathogens
such as viruses and fungi, as well as drug delivery agents. The proposed
research can significantly impact human health by contributing to the discovery
of new drug targets in cancer and infectious diseases in the long term. The
proposed research elements will also be integrated into interdisciplinary
educational and outreach experiences for K-12, community college, undergraduate,
and graduate students to enhance recruitment and retention of the
socioeconomically disadvantaged and ethnically underrepresented groups in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to systematically investigate the role of the capillary
structure and flow parameters, bacterial motility and adhesive interactions, and
transcapillary pressure gradient on the intracapillary transport, margination,
and adhesion of bacteria in normal and leaky tumor microvasculature. This goal
will be achieved through the following specific aims: (1) Development of
physiologically relevant microfluidic and computational models of capillary
flow; (2) Investigation of the role of bacteria motility and flagella- and
type-1 pili-mediated adhesive interactions with the endothelium in bacteria
margination and adhesion to the endothelium; (3) Determination of the role of
transcapillary pressure gradient on bacteria transport in normal and leaky tumor
microvasculature. The proposed work is transformative as it will create new
knowledge about the role of capillary hemodynamics, bacterial motility, and
bacteria-host cell interactions in the transport and dissemination of bacteria
by establishing a new suite of computational and experimental platforms in Fluid
Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.