* 2133302
* SCC-CIVIC-FA Track A: Co-Creating a Community Hub for Smart Mobility: A University-Government-Nonprofit Partnership
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Kenneth Fleischmann, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 985,401.00

This NSF CIVIC grant will provide a sustainable, scalable, and transferable
proof of concept for addressing the spatial mismatch between housing
affordability and jobs in US cities by co-creating a Community Hub for Smart
Mobility (CHSM) in vulnerable neighborhoods with civic partners. The spatial
mismatch between housing affordability and jobs causes commuter traffic
congestion resulting in an annual $29 billion loss to the U.S. economy alone.
Rather than a one-size-fits-all solution, this grant will provide a sustainable,
scalable, and transferrable method for local communities to co-create solutions
that meet their needs and align with their values. CHSMs will be community-level
hubs where residents can access multiple modes of transport such as shared
(e-)bikes, e-scooters, ride hailing, electric vehicle charging stations, and
public transit. It will provide more mobility options to residents, increase
their access to jobs, ameliorate existing transit deserts, and improve the
efficiency of the overall transportation system. The CHSM concept will likely
benefit all kinds of communities, with the greatest benefits going to those who
are most underserved by the current transportation system and most under-
resourced due to the job/housing mismatch. The results and findings from this
project will provide new insights into how to improve residents’ mobility in
vulnerable neighborhoods and alleviate the job/housing mismatch
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop,
implement, and evaluate a Community Hub for Smart Mobility (CHSM) to solve the
job/housing mismatch in US cities. The research team will focus on Georgian
Acres, a historically under-resourced neighborhood in northeast Austin, Texas
and work with multiple civic partners to address the unique transportation needs
of the neighborhood. The project will be carried out through the following five
thrusts: 1. Co-Designing the GA-CHSM with the Georgian Acres (GA) Neighborhood,
2. Co-Developing the GA-CHSM, 3. Co-Operating the CHSM with Civic Partners, 4.
Evaluating the GA-CHSM’s Impacts, and 5. Scaling and transferring the CHSM
concept through the City of Austin’s Project Connect. Both quantitative (e.g.,
GIS analysis, transportation modeling, machine learning) and qualitative (e.g.,
interviews, surveys, focus groups) research methods will be used in this project
to evaluate the success of the CHSM. These findings will contribute to the
literatures on transportation planning, community planning, and participatory
design and will serve as a model for tackling the job/housing mismatch through
community-based mobility solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is part of
the CIVIC Innovation Challenge which is a collaboration of NSF, Department of
Energy Vehicle Technology Office, Department of Homeland Security Science and
Technology Directorate and Federal Emergency Management
Agency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.