* 2133816
* RAPID: REU Site: A Virtual Research Experience in Macromolecular Structure and Function
* BIO,DBI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Constance Jeffery, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2022
* USD 57,970.00

The COVID pandemic has caused closures of REU Sites in summer 2020. The
situation continues this summer 2021 with some REU programs already posting
cancellations. This RAPID proposal will mitigate the inadequate number of
available opportunities for students. The University of Illinois at Chicago
(UIC), located in Chicago, Illinois, will support the training of seven students
for eight weeks during the summer of 2021. Research will be conducted online
with faculty located in Chicago, Evanston (IL), and Dallas (TX). The students,
who are from groups under-represented in science or from schools with limited
research opportunities, will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. This program
provides vital training, mentoring, and professional skills development to
enable and encourage talented students to continue in degrees and careers in
science, which is vital for the future of US science and the economy. Students
will participate in full-time mentored research projects using state-of-the-art
computer-based methods to advance our understanding of the structure and
function of DNA, proteins and other macromolecules. Assessment of the program
will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after
the program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The
scientific theme of the program is Macromolecular Structure and Function.
Faculty mentors come from UIC Departments of Biology, Physics, and
Bioengineering, the University of Chicago Biological Sciences Collegiate
Division, the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center Green Center for
Systems Biology, and the Northwestern University Molecular Biosciences
Department. The computer-based projects include elucidating protein functional
sites, conformational changes involved in aggregation, cellular targeting
signals, and mechanisms of nutrient uptake. Program components include
professional skills training in ethical issues, responsible conduct of research,
diversity and inclusion, science careers, and oral and written scientific
communication. Participants will present their accomplishments at a Research
Symposium. More information is available by visiting
/bios.uic.edu/profiles/jeffery-constance-j/, or by contacting the PI (Prof.
Jeffery, cjeffery@uic.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.