* 2133494
* LTREB: Long-Term Consequences of Asymmetric Warming at the Tundra-Taiga Interface
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Patrick Sullivan, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 12/31/2026
* USD 599,939.00

The location of the Arctic treeline (the northernmost extent of trees) has
important implications for carbon cycling, land surface energy exchange,
wildlife habitat, and the availability of subsistence resources to Arctic human
communities. The prevailing theory of treeline formation states that growth of
treeline trees is strictly limited by cold growing-season air temperature. While
this perspective is superficially supported by global-scale correlations between
summer air temperature and treeline elevation, it is not supported by the
observation that only about 50% of global treelines have advanced in response to
anthropogenic climate warming. There is increasing evidence that other factors
can determine treeline position, particularly in the Arctic. This project tests
the hypothesis that warming winters with deepening snowpacks increase the growth
and reproduction of treeline trees, thereby fueling treeline advance into Arctic
tundra. Results are improving predictions of where and under what circumstances
future treeline advance can be expected. The project provides education and
training opportunities for graduate students and native residents of northwest
Alaska.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is warming much faster than the rest of
the globe and the warming is seasonally asymmetrical, with modest warming during
the summer months and extreme warming during the winter months. In many regions
of the Arctic, extreme winter warming is coupled with increasing snowfall. The
combination of extreme winter warming and deeper, insulating winter snowpacks
will lead to rapid winter soil warming, with wide-ranging consequences for
ecosystem function. Warmer winter soils are generally associated with greater
overwinter microbial activity, enhanced breakdown of soil organic matter, and a
flush of nutrients that may be available for uptake by trees following snowmelt.
This project leverages long-term observations of winter snowpack and
corresponding tree growth in the Alaskan Arctic. It also extends a snowfence
experiment, which builds deeper snowpacks around individual trees at three
contrasting treelines. Long-term measurements are essential to identify the
effects of seasonally asymmetric warming on treeline position in the Arctic,
because of high interannual variability in winter weather and time lags
associated with altered soil nutrient cycling, storage of resources in trees,
and the episodic nature of tree investment in
reproduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.