* 2134843
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Livelihoods and Sovereignty in Coastal Alaska Communities
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Carter Hunt, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 04/30/2024
* USD 63,276.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Residents in coastal communities
in Southeast Alaska routinely confront complex economic, political and
environmental changes. Many communities in the region are highly dependent upon
cruise ship tourism and income from visitors engaged in bear watching, sport
fishing and hunting. This ethnographic research 1) analyzes how various
dimensions of sovereignty are shaping, and being shaped by, the growing economic
and political influence of the tourism sector; 2) determines how anthropogenic
environmental change influences these dynamics; and 3) explores how sustainable
development in Southeast Alaska could be reconceptualized to promote livelihood
security. Exploration of tourismâ€™s link to livelihood sovereignty is
particularly relevant within the context of expanding northern tourism and the
development of northern sea routes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research engages
residents in three Southeast Alaska communities with large tourism sectors. Data
collection methods include ethnographic participant observation of tourism
activities and community events; formal and informal interviews of residents;
and archival research. Thematic coding will be used to identify and understand
the dimensions of livelihood sovereignty and how tourism affects Alaska coastal
communities. A local advisory board and participatory workshops will ensure that
local community concerns are incorporated into research activities. Expected
outcomes of this research include community and conference presentations and
peer-reviewed journal articles. This work has the potential to inform tourism
policy and enhance public engagement in efforts to promote sustainable coastal
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.