* 2134725
* RCN: LEAPS: Leveraging, Enhancing and Developing Biology (LED-BIO) Scientific Societies Shedding Light on Persistent Cultural Challenges
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Donald Gillian-Daniel, American Society For Cell Biology
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 12/31/2024
* USD 701,434.00

Each field in the sciences has historically been represented by its own
scientific society, bringing together individual researchers for regular
meetings where they can network, share discoveries, and collaborate. While it is
rare for multiple distinct scientific societies to interact, they often perform
similar functions, such as promoting the professional development of their
members and promoting diversity among the next generation of researchers in
their respective fields. This project will establish a collaborative network of
experts to identify evidence-based inclusion strategies to accomplish the
following: (1) collect consistent demographic data of society memberships, (2)
better integrate scientists in transitional career stages into scientific
society activities, and (3) diversify the ranks of scientific society leaders.
By fulfilling these goals, this project aims to overcome persistent challenges
that frequently undermine diversity efforts within independent communities of
scientists and to broadly share this information for the benefit of all
scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific societies predominantly
approach diversity and inclusion efforts by supporting the professional
development of individual members who are from historically underrepresented
groups in STEM. Unfortunately, data is lacking to evaluate the efficacy of these
efforts, and additional approaches are likely to be required to address the
systemic inequities underpinning skewed demographics among STEM practitioners.
Fortunately, scientific societies that function as communities of practice
(CoPs) are uniquely positioned to lead cultural change and promote inclusive
environments to foster a diverse STEM workforce. This Research Coordination
Network (RCN) project will use virtual town halls and in-person think tanks to
expand and strengthen a cross-disciplinary network of CoPs. This network will
collaborate to identify evidence-based strategies to address three persistent
challenges that scientific societies face as identified by members of the
Alliance to Catalyze Change for Equity in STEM Success (ACCESS): (1) lack of
data to track scientific society membership demographic composition, (2) lack of
integration of scientists in transitional stages of their careers into
disciplinary CoPs, and (3) lack of diversity among highly visible thought
leaders, including speakers in scientific programs. This RCN is coordinated by
ACCESS and its member societies in the life sciences (the American Society for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the American Society for Cell Biology, the
American Society for Pharmaceutical and Experimental Therapeutics, the Endocrine
Society, and the Biophysical Society), the Quality Education for Minorities
Network, the Marine Biological Laboratories at Woods Hole, and the NSF INCLUDES
Aspire Alliance. The resulting strategies and standards will be reported and
disseminated through open access training materials and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.