* 2134136
* Symposium: Increasing Awareness of Plant Science Opportunities among Students from Underrepresented Groups
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Gustavo MacIntosh, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2024
* USD 53,487.00

A changing world presents challenges that will be addressed specifically by
plant scientists. To meet demands presented by climate change, a growing human
population and diminishing non-renewable resources, the U.S. will need a diverse
work force focused on increasing our plant specific knowledge base and its
applications through basic and applied research in plant sciences and related
fields. However, the number of Ph.D. degrees awarded in the plant sciences have
been stagnant for the last two decades and the field lacks participation from
members of marginalized groups. This problem is compounded by low awareness of
the plant sciences among students interested in pursuing advanced degrees. As a
first step in tackling this challenge, a series of plant science-focused
scientific sessions and career development workshops will be developed that
target members of underrepresented groups attending the annual meeting for the
Society for the Advancement of Chicano/Hispanic and Native Americans in Science
(SACNAS). These activities will highlight cutting edge plant science and present
students with an array of career opportunities to inform and recruit the next
generation of plant scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plant Sciences represent a
large sector of the public and private research portfolios and is an area that
is expected to grow and provide important career opportunities in the next
decades. The goal of this project is to increase the visibility of the plant
sciences at SACNAS, a professional society that serves groups underrepresented
in STEM fields, by creating a new community space for plant scientists of
diverse backgrounds where they can be supported and mentored to achieve success
in their careers. It is the hope that these efforts will also increase
participation of industry and diverse groups from plant science related
professional societies such as the American Society of Plant Biologists (ASPB)
and the Botanical Society of America (BSA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.