* 2134998
* Collaborative Research: RECODE: Directed Differentiation of Human Liver Organoids via Computational Analysis and Engineering of Gene Regulatory Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Ziv Bar-Joseph, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2025
* USD 435,120.00

Organoids are group of cells produced from stem cells that mimic closely
structure and functions of human organs. Organoids can be used for modeling the
development of human diseases and for testing newly produced medicines. However,
there is a need for generation of human organoids with better function and less
variability. This project aims to use genetic based analysis and engineering to
control stem cell differentiation towards human liver cells and improve the
final manufacturing outcome of liver organoids. As part of the activities in
this project, graduate and undergraduate students will be trained and short
educational video clips will be made for online education and public
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project will address biotechnology
challenges of in vitro liver organoid engineering such as maturity, vascular
formation, and reproducibility. To this end, synthetic biology, stem cell
engineering, and systems biology will be integrated to develop a platform for
autonomous differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells to liver
organoids. Studies will be performed in two independent objectives to: 1)
develop synthetic gene circuits for multistep differentiation in liver organoids
and 2) identify lineage plasticity regulators during differentiation to control
final cell fates in engineered organoids. The understanding gained through this
work will address knowledge gaps applicable to cellular differentiation, human
liver maturation, and vascular formation. This project will also provide support
for the development of a strong STEM workforce through novel online education
and public outreach activities surrounding stem cell
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE award is co-funded by the Systems
and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.