* 2134950
* Collaborative Research: The stoichiometric trait distribution of the marine microbiome
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Edward Hall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 01/31/2025
* USD 539,985.00

The elemental ratios of carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus (C:N:P) have been
considered fixed proportions in marine environments but recent work has
demonstrated changes across latitudes. Such variation can have large
implications for marine biogeochemistry and atmospheric CO_2 levels. As such,
future variations in ocean community C:N:P could be a key feedback to global
change. The elemental composition of particulate organic matter (POM) represents
the aggregate value of diverse microorganisms as well as non-living particles.
However, we currently do not understand how individual cells and particles
contribute to observed variation in the C:N:P of POM. This project is
determining the biomass C:N:P of individual microbial cells grown under a range
of conditions and sampled from diverse ocean biomes. Because different
individuals are likely to have different fates (e.g., loss to sinking, lysis,
predation), understanding how the trait distribution of microbial biomass C:N:P
relates to cell size and trophic mode and how environmental conditions affect
each trait’s distribution offers new perspectives and insight into marine C, N,
and P cycles. This project supports two PhD students and multiple undergraduate
students. The PhD students are integrated into existing networks on microbiome
science at each institution with opportunities to collaborate across diverse
disciplines. Undergraduate students at both institutions are being recruited
through existing training programs that target underrepresented groups. In
addition, PI Hall is part of a collaborative of Ecologists and Poets at CSU,
that look at ways to translate ecological relationships to non-traditional media
to make it more accessible and impactful to the general public. This group is
exploring the nature of individuality within the marine microbiome by creating
trait distributions of written text and removing different modes of individuals
(e.g., words) to better understand and communicate how individuals from the
smallest organisms on the planet (marine microorganisms) can have large effects
on the surrounding ecosystem (i.e., the planet). Results from this project are
being incorporated into future projects of the working group at Colorado State
University including public presentations, art installations, and published
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to quantify the
relationship between environmental conditions and marine microbial C:N:P by
assessing the individuality in microbial elemental stoichiometry. To achieve
this the project uses energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to assess the
stoichiometric trait distribution of populations and communities under different
resource and temperature treatments and oceanographic field work across a broad
latitudinal gradient. The researchers hypothesize that the relationship between
the stoichiometry of particulate organic matter (POM) and environmental
conditions are masked by distinct responses of individual constituents of the
marine microbiome. They hypothesize that these distinct responses result in a
multi-modal distribution of particulate carbon (C), nitrogen (N), and phosphorus
(P) of the marine microbiome. The investigators are characterizing the
distribution of three stoichiometric traits (biomass C:N, C:P, and N:P) for 50
marine isolates (both autotrophs and heterotrophs) under different resource and
temperature environments. They are characterizing the same trait distribution
for marine communities sampled from different regions of the ocean for the same
resource and temperature environments as the population experiments. They are
participating on an ocean going cruise to characterize stoichiometric trait
distribution of the marine microbiome across natural gradients of resources and
temperature. Understanding how constituent members of microbial communities
alter their biomass in response to environmental change is providing a missing
link between the variation in the ocean’s environment and particulate C:N:P
ratios for diverse marine environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.