* 2134664
* FMRG: Eco: Future Eco Manufacturing of Recyclable Soft Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Yuan Yao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,998,710.00

This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) EcoManufacturing project will
enable eco manufacturing of recyclable soft electronics by seamlessly
integrating a select group of biodegradable/recyclable materials and sustainable
manufacturing processes, guided by economic and environmental life-cycle
assessment. The rapidly increasing number of electronic devices that have
decreasing lifetime in use pose three important challenges: (1) a huge amount of
waste from used electronics, (2) rapid consumption of scarce elements, and (3)
enormous energy consumption for manufacturing electronic devices. On the other
hand, soft electronics is an emerging field. Therefore, the team will develop
new classes of soft electronics that are created from renewable materials using
energy-efficient manufacturing processes, and that can either be degraded
naturally or repurposed into high-value products after their lifetime. The
project will bring together researchers in flexible/stretchable electronics,
polymer chemistry, chemical and materials engineering, manufacturing
engineering, sustainability, and science education. This interdisciplinary
convergence project will provide a compelling basis to train a diverse cohort of
future engineers and scientists. The education and workforce development efforts
will include curriculum innovation, teacher professional development, outreach,
and student internships, with a commitment to increasing the diversity in the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is structured in five thrust areas
addressing materials development, eco manufacturing, biodegradation/recycling,
environmental and economic life-cycle assessment, and education and workforce
development. More specifically, the project team will design reinforced
cellulose composite as the substrate, new conjugated polymer as the
semiconductor, composite with selected fillers as the dielectric, and silver
nanowire network as the conductor. The research will address the challenges of
developing high-performance materials that are renewable, biodegradable or
recyclable. It will result in a viable all-printing-based manufacturing
framework to enable the scalable fabrication of sustainable soft electronics.
The scalability will be demonstrated with a laboratory-scale roll-to-roll
system. The device components at their end of life will follow three routes â€“
biodegradation (back to nature), recycling (back to manufacturing), or upcycling
(converting to value-added new materials). The project will incorporate
biodegradation and material circularity into the life-cycle assessment framework
for soft electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing project is
jointly funded by the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI), Electrical, Communication, and Cyber Systems (ECCS), and
Engineering Education and Centers (EEC) in the Directorate of Engineering, and
by the Divisions of Chemistry (CHE) and Materials Research (DMR) in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences
(MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.