* 2134311
* Impacts of Mineralogy on Aggregate Crushing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 528,157.00

This project aims to unravel the impacts of mineralogy on aggregate crushing and
understand sequential fragmentation mechanisms in granular assemblies via multi-
scale experimental, numerical, and machine learning investigations. Particle
crushing occurs in railway ballast, granular fault gouge, high tailing dams, and
is also relevant to pile installation and offshore foundation design. Crushing
and grinding are essential in mining operations, as well as manufacturing
processes in the pharmaceutical, agricultural and food sectors. However, these
operations are still highly energy-inefficient. Through this research, the PIs
will gain a fundamental understanding of the effect of mineral heterogeneity on
particle breakage. Findings will contribute to optimizing particulate material
handling in mining operations, deep foundation design and pharmaceutical and
agricultural manufacturing techniques. Modeling the evolution of polymineralic
aggregate microstructure and mechanical behavior will also serve the deployment
of penetrometer devices for in-situ soil characterization and wheeled vehicles
for terrestrial and extraterrestrial exploration. Besides their research tasks,
the PIs will create multi-semester undergraduate research opportunities and
international research experiences for students, and integrate diversity, equity
and inclusion training into their scholarly activities in partnership with
Georgia Tech organizations. Both PIs are committed to enhance public awareness
on the critical role of geotechnical engineering in addressing energy and
sustainability challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most natural
geomaterials are polymineralic, and yet, there is no known experimental method
that can disentangle the effects of morphology and mineralogy on aggregate
crushing. The goal of the project is to unveil the yet-unknown mechanisms of dry
polymineralic grain crushing and to enable energy-efficient industrial
applications by optimizing dry aggregate breakage. Towards this goal, the PIs
will (1) Measure intra- and inter-mineral bonding properties in quartzitic and
granitic aggregates; (2) Conduct single-particle crushing tests on monomineralic
and polymineralic aggregates; (3) Model fragmentation processes during these
tests with the Distinct Element Method (DEM); (4) Image aggregate assemblies
during monotonic and cyclic loading by high-resolution X-ray computed
tomography; (5) Simulate sequential breakage and fabric evolution in
heterogeneous aggregate assemblies with the DEM; (6) Predict self-organization
and ultimate fabric by Machine Learning. Several fundamental questions will be
addressed, mainly: Can heterogeneous granular assemblies self-organize upon
cyclic loading and particle breakage? Do fragments evolve towards an asymptotic
size and/or shape upon sequential breakage? The synergistic deployment of
experimental, numerical, and artificial intelligence methods proposed in this
project has the potential to transform the current practice of geomaterial
characterization and behavior prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.