* 2134821
* Collaborative Research: RECODE: Directing and Controlling Cardiac Differentiation Through Cellular and Microenvironmental Manipulation and Application of Machine-Learning
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Komal Vig, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2025
* USD 95,340.00

US mortality rates from heart disease are increasing, driven particularly by the
increasing prevalence of patients with heart failure. Limited availability of
native human cardiac tissue impedes research, drug discovery, and clinical
cardiac regeneration efforts. Treatment with stem cell-derived cardiac tissues
has exceptionally high potential to achieve clinically meaningful outcomes.
However, the generation of a heterogeneous mixture of cell types is a critical
barrier to cell-based cardiac therapy. By employing developmental biology,
tissue engineering, and machine learning, this Reproducible Cells and Organoids
via Directed-Differentiation Encoding (RECODE)research builds the foundation for
overcoming this obstacle and develops methodologies and design approaches to
produce functional cell types needed in understanding and treating heart
disease. This project will support undergraduate students from Alabama State
University – a historically black university – to participate in summer research
experiences at Auburn University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant
advances in our understanding of human induced pluripotent stem cell and cardiac
development biology, our ability to generate specific cardiac cell subtypes from
pluripotent stem cells in sufficient quantities remains limited. Cardiac
differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells has been broken down
into a stepwise process from pluripotency to mesoderm to cardiac progenitors to
first and second heart fields. However, this progression occurs at differing
rates, require differing concentrations, durations, and timing of exposure to
key cell signaling molecules, and yield varying concentrations of
cardiomyocytes. Understanding the population dynamics and probabilities that a
given cell will move towards becoming one cell type versus another is necessary
for making predictions and directing decisions to achieve a desired final cell
type or a mixture of cell types. The goal of this RECODE project is to establish
a paired experimental process and guiding hybrid model utilizing real-time
measurements from differentiating cardiomyocytes to predict both the outcome of
ongoing cardiac differentiation and the process parameters that should be
adjusted to achieve the desired result. The project work will (1) marry
innovative machine learning tools and cardiac developmental stages to mine
single cell RNA sequencing data to identify key developmental decisions and
levers that control cell fate at these instances, (2) perform directed cardiac
differentiation in 3D to address complex autocrine, paracrine, cell-cell and
cell-matrix interactions that are absent in conventional 2D assays, (3) employ
cardiac cell subtype-specific fluorescent reporter to quantify differentiation
outcome in real-time, and (4) develop a process control analytical platform that
integrates differentiation outcome data with experimentally-defined input
parameters that can enable generation of specific composition of cardiac cell
subtypes on-demand using robustly validated and reproducible differentiation
design rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE award is co-funded by the
Mechanics and Engineering Materials Cluster in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation and the Engineering Biology and Health
Cluster in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.