* 2134446
* LTREB: Interactions Between Population and Ecosystem Dynamics, and the High-Amplitude Fluctuations of Midge Abundances in Lake Myvatn, Iceland
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Anthony Ives, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 01/31/2027
* USD 538,496.00

Ecosystems are complicated because they depend on large numbers of plants,
animals, and microbes that depend on each other as well as the environment in
which they live. This research focuses on an ecosystem, Lake Myvatn, that is
simple in terms of the species that exist there, and is naturally unstable. Of
the moderate number of herbivores in the lake, one has an outsized effect, a
species of midge -- a non-biting, mosquito-sized insect -- that in its juvenile
stage feeds at the bottom of the lake. In some years, the total weight of all
adult midges swarming out of the lake is equivalent to the weight of 100
humpback whales, while in other years the total weight is equivalent to a few
golden retrievers. These fluctuations in midge abundances are unpredictable,
with natural crashes occurring every 4 to 10 years. The crashes are not caused
by weather or anything outside the lake, and appear to be part of a natural
instability of the lake itself. Many components of the lake ecosystem changes
with midge fluctuations, from the breeding success of birds that depend on the
midges as food to the activity of microbes that perform essential chemistry for
the lake ecosystem. These processes occur in all ecosystems, but ecosystems that
show this type of instability are extremely rare. By understanding what makes
the Myvatn ecosystem naturally unstable, we can learn what makes other
ecosystems as stable as they are, thereby giving us insight into predicting and
managing other less-extreme ecosystems. The project will train graduate students
and undergraduate interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research involves both
long-term collection of biological and biogeochemical data from the Myvatn
ecosystem and targeted experiments to test specific hypotheses. The data
collection builds and expands on an existing long term database, with monitoring
of some variables starting in the 1970s (adult midges) and 1980s (zooplankton,
stickleback fish). The project has added weekly monitoring of many additional
variables, including midge larval density, benthic primary production, and
pelagic and benthic nutrients. The targeted experiments cover a wide range of
research questions including (i) the role that midges play as ecosystem
engineers, changing benthic conditions to increase primary production and
possibly change nutrient cycling, (ii) the fluctuations in benthic ecosystem
processes caused by spatiotemporal fluctuations in midge abundances and pelagic
cyanobacteria blooms, and (iii) changes in benthic and algal species composition
as both consequences and causes of midge population
fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.