* 2134564
* Controlled Fragmentation of Polyolefinic Materials triggered by Microwave Irradiation
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2025
* Olga Kuksenok, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 04/30/2025
* USD 450,657.00

This project seeks to develop a novel strategy to convert a large class of
conventional thermoplastics into materials suitable for further reuse,
recycling, and upcycling. The design of materials that retain properties of
conventional thermoplastics but are capable of end-of-life controlled
deconstruction into reusable polymer chain fragments will be targeted. The
polymer chain fragments produced by this thermal decomposition process will be
used to synthesize recyclable polyesters, which in turn are expected to
contribute to a circular economy, an economic system that reduces waste and
avoids excessive use of resources. Polymer synthesis, materials fabrication, and
multiscale modeling will be integrated in this project. The project is expected
to establish guidelines for efficient design of thermoplastic materials; the
ability to manufacture these materials could potentially open a novel direction
in large-scale applications of recyclable components employed in the household,
construction, automotive, and other sectors of the U.S. economy. The project
will offer ample research and educational opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and local high school students. Students working on this project
will gain knowledge of fundamental concepts and an understanding of current
challenges in materials science and sustainability. This multidisciplinary
project is expected to stimulate the undergraduate and K-12 students’ interest
and increase public awareness in STEM fields via gaining knowledge of the state-
of-the-art polymer recycling/upcycling technologies. A strong emphasis will be
placed on actively recruiting students with underrepresented backgrounds. Some
of the outcomes of the research and relevant educational materials will be made
available to the broad scientific community via a science and engineering
gateway, nanoHUB, which is a part of the Network for Computational
Nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research program is
to develop a manufacturing strategy that enables microwave-triggered chemical
upcycling of polyolefinic materials after their end-of-life. The design of
polyolefinic materials (POMs) with properties of conventional polyolefins but
capable of controlled deconstruction into macromolecular chain fragments with
well-defined molecular weight distribution will be targeted. Functionalized
nanosheets dispersed within the POMs will localize heating and trigger
fragmentation upon application of short microwave pulses. Macromolecular chain
fragments will be further used to synthesize recyclable semicrystalline
polyesters (RPEs). Furthermore, cyclic depolymerization and repolymerization of
these semicrystalline polyesters will be demonstrated. Experimental studies and
computational modeling will be iteratively integrated. A multiscale model
integrating coarse-grained (energy-conserving dissipative particle dynamics) and
continuum approaches will be developed. Model parameters will be based on the
experimental data, and model predictions will be validated with experiments.
Modeling predictions will be used to understand and optimize the fragmentation
process and RPE synthesis and depolymerization to achieve a targeted molecular
weight distribution of chain fragments and to optimize depolymerization and
repolymerization yield for the recyclable semicrystalline polyesters. The
designed polyolefinic microwave-triggered fragmentation functionality will be
built-in during fabrication without compromising the mechanical properties of
the materials. The proposed research directly addresses current challenges by
focusing on developing efficient chemical processes, improving environmental
sustainability, designing tailor-made materials, and developing computer
simulation approaches aiding composite material synthesis and processing. The
multiscale modeling framework developed herein will account for the reactions,
heat transfer, and diffusion of all the species including chain fragments,
macroradicals, and low molecular weight reagents. This model, in conjunction
with experimental validation, will allow one to gain a fundamental understanding
of the dynamic processes taking place during controlled fragmentation and
subsequent depolymerization/repolymerization cycles. The realization of the
proposed program is anticipated to have a transformative impact on development
of deconstructable-on-demand thermoplastics, with properties and processability
of currently employed materials. Polyolefinic materials produced from plastic
waste are envisioned to become an essential part of the circular economy.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in model and code
development and in materials synthesis, fabrication, and characterization.
Importantly, the students focusing on materials modeling and the students
conducting experiments will interact closely within this project, so that all
the students involved will gain a valuable collaborative experience and a
broader perspective on their projects. A strong emphasis will be placed on
supporting student diversity. Further, this project is expected to stimulate
undergraduate and K-12 students’ interest in STEM fields. Selected research
outcomes will be incorporated into courses taught by both PIs; related
educational materials will be made available via the nanoHUB
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Process
Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular Thermodynamics Program of ENG/CBET
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR),&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.