* 2134931
* EAGER: Synchronized Quantum Oscillation between Light and Atoms on a Resonator
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Sunil Bhave, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Laser trapping of atoms and cryogenic cooling techniques are employed in
developing quantum technologies such as quantum processors, quantum
communication devices and quantum sensors. When it comes to practical
applications, small form factor and scalable design of hardware components is
critical in large-scale integration and adoptability of the technology. For this
reason, quantum devices operating at room temperature can have transformational
impact in the future of quantum technologies. At a system level, the efficient
and deterministic distribution of quantum entanglement is key to developing a
future quantum network. A network of this kind has applications in networked
sensing for global parameter estimation, secure communication, and distributed
quantum computing. The probabilistic nature of entanglement creation in today’s
available devices and platforms has limited the size of networks to three nodes,
beyond which the exponential growth in entanglement time undermines the quantum
advantage. The strong atom-photon interaction pursued in this program can lead
to exponentially increased communication rate which together with the room-
temperature operation and lack of complexity in the system, will pave the way
for practical entanglement distribution between multiple nodes. The program will
train 2 capable graduate students towards PhDs with deep understanding and
expertise across different disciplines, adding to the Quantum
Workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quantum network project (2000) aimed to
deploy quantum optical technology to establish the first quantum key
distribution (QKD) network. Twenty years later, QKD is still the most practical
application of quantum optics in communication. The challenges preventing the
community from going beyond QKD are a) probabilistic light-atom interaction, b)
lack of scalability and multiplexing quantum communication devices, and c)
incompatibility and the need for heterogenous integration. The EAGER program
aims to develop a miniaturized room temperature light-atom interface that can
enable scalable quantum entanglement distribution. Unlike laser-cooled atomic
quantum systems and their need for precise control, alignment and challenges to
miniaturization, thermal atomic vapors have already wide-spread adoption in
systems such as chip-scale atomic clocks. By guiding atoms on a chip using MEMS
actuators towards photonic resonators, this project plans to realize strong and
coherent interaction between photons and room temperature atoms. The coherence
time on the order of photon lifetime in the cavity is sufficient to achieve
deterministic entanglement. To achieve this, we increase photon lifetime by
increasing the optical quality factor of microphotonic resonator and increasing
atom coherence time by selectively guiding atoms near the resonator mode. The
proposed platform is efficiently fiber-coupled and will be used to study non-
linear photon-atom and photon-photon interactions. This strong interaction
between light and atoms, enabled by MEMS, will be utilized deterministically
create photon pair generation for scalable entanglement distribution in an
optical network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.