* 2134916
* RECODE: Functional characterization of human skin organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Qing Nie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Do skin organoid cultures, essentially growing human skin in a dish, accurately
reflect how normal skin develops? This project aims to use cutting-edge
technologies in biology, engineering, and mathematics to define how human
epidermal stem cells differentiate at the single cell level. The major benefits
will reveal new insights into developmental biology, adult homeostasis, disease
modeling, and provide a platform for preclinical drug testing. New computational
tools for analyzing cells at the single cell level will be developed by
integrating dynamic modeling with the cell’s spatial position to reconstruct how
cells transition from one state to another, how they communicate, and how cells
interact at the single cell to tissue levels. The broader societal impacts
include developing an interdisciplinary training program to enhance research,
diversity, and outreach at the interface between mathematical, physical, and
biological sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in organoid biology
is defining stem cell states and their interactions that lead to differentiation
of the tissue. The goal of this RECODE project is to define human skin
equivalent organoids to address how to faithfully reproduce the differentiation
of human epidermal stem cells and generate fully functioning in vitro stratified
human skin. This project will integrate single cell RNA-sequencing with spatial
imaging data using new mathematical and computational tools applied to primary
human epithelial progenitors undergoing active differentiation on engineered
substrates in an in vitro organoid culture. Novel computational tools will be
developed to connect dynamic spatial models with novel data analytics and these
tools will reveal transition cell states, cell-cell communication, and cell-cell
spatial maps – three important but underexplored areas in cell fate analysis.
The new multiscale models will define when, where, and how human keratinocytes
acquire their fates and robustly differentiate to establish stratified
epidermis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE award is co-funded by the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the
Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.