* 2134480
* LEAPS: Enabling Scientific Societies to Support Inclusive, Diverse, Equitable &amp; Accepting (IDEA) Scientific Environments
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* DaJoie Baker, American Institute of Biological Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 07/31/2023
* USD 96,488.00

Scientific institutions increasingly recognize the need to remove barriers for
individuals historically underrepresented in science and to improve diversity,
equity, and inclusion (DEI). A wider breadth of scientific competencies,
achieved by improving DEI, is needed to address many critical scientific
concerns with global impacts. However, improving DEI requires a significant
cultural shift, and scientific societies provide a unique platform to lead these
cultural changes in the biological sciences. Scientific societies represent a
wide variety of individuals and institutions; they have access to multiple
fields of biology to impart resources and education; and they can enable
networking and idea sharing across many disciplines and organizations to empower
new approaches. The American Institute of Biological Sciences (AIBS) was founded
with the goal of unifying the individuals and organizations that collectively
represent the biological sciences, so that the community could address matters
that impact life on earth. AIBS brings together 115 member societies and
organizations that represent the full spectrum of the life sciences to address
matters of collective concern. It is critical that scientific societies create
inclusive, diverse, equitable and accepting (IDEA) scientific environments to
ensure that science is equipped to address 21st century grand challenges.
Creating IDEA scientific environments requires an iterative process of top-down
and bottom-up approaches that rely on sharing information and experiences,
analyzing personal assumptions and expectations, communicating with honesty and
openness, and committing to change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
engage and create a collaborative network of majority- and minority-serving
biological scientific societies to foster cultural change through two virtual
workshops. These workshops will engage scientific society leadership to
collaboratively understand the components of IDEA cultures, assess the current
culture in biology, identify barriers to enabling IDEA environments, create
action plans to overcome these barriers, and commit to long-term cultural
change. The first workshop will provide a forum for leaders of scientific
societies to engage in shared learning, discussion, and reflection on three
topics: (1) culture, (2) bias and stereotypes, and (3) equity. The workshop will
offer tools for participants to develop action plans to enable IDEA scientific
environments and to take the knowledge, resources, and tools they have gained
back to their organizations. A second workshop will occur 6 months later and
will be informed by a webinar and a participant survey to assess early
implementation of the action plans. The workshop will result in longer-term
steps to continue progress in creating IDEA scientific environments. Among the
intended project outcomes is a “tool kit,” a repository of tools, templates,
resources, and other information that will be available to scientific societies,
other institutions, and the public. This tool kit will be curated over time as a
place to share information and help cultivate the large-scale changes needed to
create IDEA scientific environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.