* 2134867
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Role of Boundary Spanners in Arctic Co-production of Knowledge Research
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Sarah Trainor, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 09/30/2023
* USD 61,916.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation research
investigates the roles of boundary spanners in Arctic co-production of knowledge
(CPK) projects. Boundary spanners are those who facilitate knowledge exchanges
and co-production between researchers and stakeholders. This research aims to
identify the characteristics of successful boundary spanners and document the
process of boundary spanning through collaborative work with fifteen research
partners. Partners are both Indigenous and non-Indigenous from across Alaska;
they will participate in a two-day workshop to develop a conceptual model of
boundary-spanning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This dissertation project employs a co-
production of knowledge framework, prioritizing research equity within an Alaska
Native context. Anticipated broader impacts include contributions to the social
science of boundary spanning and relational research methods. Research results
will be disseminated through completion of a doctoral dissertation, a co-
produced white paper and peer-reviewed articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.