* 2134891
* C: Quantum Networks to Connect Quantum Technology (QuanNeCQT)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Edo Waks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,000,000.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator program supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QuaNeCQT project (Quantum Networks to
Connect Quantum Technology) aims to create quantum interconnects that can
connect quantum&lt;br/&gt;computers that are physically located several
kilometers apart. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These interconnects enable users to
leverage the vast existing infrastructure that is our current Internet to
develop the next generation quantum internet. Our solution is composed of two
hardware modules, the quantum frequency conversion (qFC) module and the quantum
reconfigurable add-drop multiplexer (qROADM) module. The qFC converts photons
from a quantum computer to provisioned telecom wavelength channels while
preserving the entanglement with the internal quantum memory of the quantum
computer. The qROADM controls the flow of network traffic using an integrated
photonic circuit and performs entanglement swapping. Both modules fully
integrate quantum functionalities with all required classical communication
(fiber polarization stabilization, laser frequency locking, clock distribution
etc…). The qFC and qROADM modules provide a universal networking solution that
can be readily adapted to virtually any quantum computer architecture. The Phase
II program will focus on the specific use-case of ion trap quantum computers,
which are some of the most scalable quantum computers currently
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project will include
causing a significant increase in the user base for quantum computers by
providing secure access to end users as well as certification of the legitimacy
of the quantum computation. As quantum technology converges with the Internet, a
new technology sector would emerge bringing with it the potential for major
economic growth by producing rapid technological innovation and creating a large
number of new jobs for the future “quantum workforce,” just as the emergence of
the Internet did towards the late 20th century. The program will also entail an
outreach effort to develop educational modules for the general public and
industry that will educate them on the current state and future potential of
quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.