* 2134768
* LEAPS: A Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion Workshop at the Joint Aquatic Sciences Meeting
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2022
* Brian Bingham, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 08/31/2022
* USD 70,532.00

Scientific societies play an important role in engaging young scientists and
creating opportunities that lead to STEM careers. Because of this role, these
societies can help the nation increase the participation of students of color
and other underrepresented groups in science and science careers. At the same
time, scientific societies also present barriers to inclusion because their
leadership, policies and practices have solidified over decades without
consideration of the need to be inclusive and welcoming of underrepresented
groups. This project develops a process to begin to examine the practices,
procedures, and policies within scientific societies that may create an
atmosphere of non-inclusivity, non-engagement, and an unfriendly environment for
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An inclusivity, diversity,
equity, and access (IDEA) audit tool will be developed for the Consortium of
Aquatic Science Societies (CASS), an affiliation of nine scientific societies
(American Fisheries Society; Association for the Sciences of Limnology and
Oceanography; Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation; Freshwater Mollusk
Conservation Society; International Association for Great Lakes Research; North
American Lake Management Society; Phycological Society of America; Society for
Freshwater Science; and the Society of Wetland Scientists), the majority of whom
work in the biological sciences. The IDEA audit tool will be constructed to be
able to identify (1) policies and procedures that perpetuate status quo culture,
policies, and procedures (2) specific barriers to broadening participation to
diverse populations, specifically Black and Indigenous people of color,
communities from Tribal Colleges, and Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and (3) practices and programs that have been successful within
the CASS societies. Leaders from the CASS member societies will engage with
leaders from societies and organizations that advance the participation of
underrepresented students in STEM to develop the audit tool over the course of a
year and a series of facilitated meetings and workshops. This process will
include an in-person workshop meeting at the Joint Aquatic Sciences Meeting
(JASM), as well as a series of remote meetings both before and after the in-
person meeting. JASM2022 is expected to be the largest gathering of aquatic
scientists to date and thus an opportunity to engage diverse societies and their
leadership in collective planning. The development of the audit tool will be the
first step in creating cultural change, by helping CASS societies determine
where barriers to participation exist. The audit tool and a compilation of
current best practices for engaging members of underrepresented groups in
aquatic sciences will be disseminated widely on our websites, through the NSF
INCLUDES network, and conference presentations and publications. The IDEA audit
tool, as well as lessons learned from the development process, will be shared
with other societies wanting to broaden participation among their professional
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.