* 2134366
* GSA Penrose Conference: PRF2022 Progressive Failure of Brittle Rocks; Western North Carolina; June 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Martha Eppes, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 38,422.00

The 2022 Penrose Conference of the Geological Society of America on progressive
rock failure (PRF2022) will bring together approximately 75 international
scientists and engineers to facilitate a step-change in our understanding of
rock fracture in both built and natural environments. To fully understand rock
fracture is to understand elements of Earth that are critical for societal
health and safety including: natural hazards related to rockfalls and
landslides; degradation of rock-related infrastructure; rock weathering and
erosion; and even the size and distribution of sedimentary particles and the
internal structure – architecture - of Earth’s uppermost crust, which contribute
to Earth’s soils and hold its water and natural resources. Yet, traditionally
geoscientists studying natural rock fracture have largely overlooked the
knowledge and implications to be derived from rock physics and engineering
research, and vice versa. Therefore, a key goal of PRF2022 is to open doors to
new insights that may be gained by studying progressive rock failure in the
context of geotechnical engineering, surface processes, natural hazards and
stone heritage problems. This goal will be achieved by maximizing both
disciplinary diversity and participant diversity of the conference. To ensure
longevity and accessibility of conference’s outcomes, PRF2022 will also provide
a mentoring scheme for early career and student attendees and communicate the
conference ideas with the public and among scientists themselves.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a burgeoning recognition of 1) the central role
that fractures play in Critical Zone processes, landscape evolution, and
geotechnical problems; and 2) a ‘new’ realm of fracture mechanics that applies
to both engineered and natural surface processes but has been understudied in
those contexts - namely progressive rock failure (a.k.a. subcritical cracking,
environmental cracking and microcracking). In particular, the role of
progressive rock failure in natural rock fracture has been largely unrecognized
or misunderstood across a wide array of both surface process and engineering
applications, where it likely plays a dominant role. To best leverage recent,
rapidly evolving cross-discipline conceptualizations of rock fracture and its
relationship to erosion, hazards, preservation, climate, and chemical
weathering, this Penrose Conference will be held in Western North Carolina, USA
(June 2022). PRF2022 will: provide a platform to identify complementary
data/observations and modelling approaches; reveal key existing and needed
datasets; stimulate new multidisciplinary collaborations and scientific and
commercial funding opportunities; and build a framework for future evaluation of
PRF within both academic and applied Earth sciences
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.