* 2134203
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Rethinking Performance Variation for Emerging Applications - An Application-centric and Cross-layer Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Xubin He, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2024
* USD 309,796.00

High-performance computing (HPC) is moving rapidly to the unparalleled level of
exaflops in 2021, when the first exascale systems will be ready for science
production. Despite the peak performance obtained by simplistic benchmarks
during the maintenance window when no other users are allowed to access the
system, applications routinely suffer from performance variations as a result of
intra- or inter-application interference over storage and network. The
consequence is the low system utilization and prolonged time to insights for
applications. To address this challenge, this project aims to develop new
methods in memory and input/output (I/O) that can significantly reduce the
performance variation for large scientific applications. This project provides
integrated research and education activities to nurture next-generation computer
researchers and engineers in the area of HPC, particularly for those from under-
represented groups, to strengthen the U.S. competitiveness in computational
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address the
performance variation issue on HPC systems using a novel application-centric
approach across the system stack. To address increasing resource contention, a
selective hint-sharing scheme is designed to reduce the overall performance
variation, and a cluster-partition technique is developed to regulate the scale
of hint sharing. In addition, a feedback mechanism is incorporated to adjust the
hint traffic according to the degree of performance-variation reduction. Based
upon memory-access similarity, memory pages or work nodes sharing high
similarity are grouped together to optimize the memory-system performance.
Furthermore, a rule-based I/O re-routing scheme, where I/O traffic is re-routed
based upon not only the interference profile, but also the requirements of
downstream data analytics. In particular, an error-bounded coarsening technique
that reacts to performance variation by adjusting the fidelity of an HPC
application is explored. The integrated research activities in this project will
significantly improve the understanding and methods in managing performance
variations for large computational science and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.