* 2134231
* Collaborative Research: A Unifying Deep Learning Framework Using Cell Complex Neural Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 12/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Mustafa Hajij, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 04/30/2023
* USD 212,506.00

Deep learning has fostered the development of many new technologies, ranging
from automatic medical image analysis to document translation powered by
artificial intelligence. These societal transformations originated with rapid
advancements in the fields of computer vision and natural language processing,
that is, the processing of images and texts. Yet, a wide range of data is not
best represented by a grid of pixels or a sequence of words. For example,
(biomolecular) shapes or (social) networks are data types exhibiting local and
global geometric properties that might not be efficiently leveraged by existing
deep learning architectures. Hence, there is a need to rigorously understand and
expand the data types to which deep learning methods can be applied. This
research project considers the more abstract "cell complex" data type. The work
introduces and aims to quantify the potential of "cell complex networks" in deep
learning. Applications range from computational biology and medicine, social
science, and art, to a better understanding of deep learning itself. The project
will disseminate these ideas through publications and the release of open-source
software, demonstration material, and datasets. The results are expected to
enhance existing ties between deep learning and other fields that rely on
geometric, topological, and combinatorial objects. The needs of diverse machine
learning communities will be addressed by carefully choosing publication venues.
Research training will be provided to undergraduate and graduate students, where
the recruiting process will encourage applications from underrepresented groups.
Pair-programming sessions, together with occasional hackathons, will help train
the next generation of practitioners in topological and geometric deep learning,
complementing their theoretical training with pivotal software engineering
practices. This project will also facilitate outreach through public lectures
featuring speakers from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to develop a unifying mathematical framework where deep learning models and
protocols can be universally defined and executed over cell complex domains.
Such domains generalize discrete domains of practical importance such as graphs,
point clouds, meshes, and simplicial complexes. The project first unifies
existing deep learning computational blocks into the framework of cell complex
neural networks (CXNs). The investigators plan to rigorously construct the
necessary tools of neural network computational primitives over domains that
have geometric, topological, and combinatorial characteristics. They will
investigate important theoretical questions associated to these models, such as
generalizability and expressiveness in the light of metrics specifically defined
for CXNs. Second, the project will harness the power of deep learning in
answering questions that arise when studying data with such topological and
combinatorial structures. The project will provide benchmarks for graph, point
cloud, and mesh data types, leveraging both simulated and real datasets. The
investigators will develop an open-source Python package that gathers the
topological and combinatorial deep learning primitives with an interface
allowing study of their theoretical properties. Third, the project will apply
these tools to the understanding of deep learning itself. The work will leverage
CXNs to extract geometric and topological summaries of the sequence of weight
iterates generated during the training of a given network. The investigators
will connect these summaries to the generalizability of the deep learning
algorithm and architecture at hand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.