* 2134237
* Collaborative Research: Algebraic Framework of Compositional Functions for New Structure, Training, and Explainability of Deep Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Chunjiang Qian, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2024
* USD 622,955.00

Deep learning is a method of machine learning inspired by the human brain. Data
is fed to a multi-layered (deep) network of trainable 'neurons' and the network
is then trained to model complex relations and processes. Deep learning has had
impressive success in applications such as image recognition and natural
language processing. And yet, there are few theoretical guarantees to the
method, to provide assurances in regards to performance features such as error
and to explain its success. This is an impediment to broader application of deep
learning, as many potential applications require guarantees for safety,
reliability, and accuracy. This project pursues a solid mathematical foundation
for a better understanding of the explainability of deep learning, to enable
more efficient neural network design and training algorithms that benefit a wide
range of applications. The project also includes a significant educational
component that is designed to foster interdisciplinary education by engaging
undergraduate and graduate students from the investigators' departments (Applied
Mathematics, Electrical Engineering, Computer Science, Mathematics) in the
proposed multidisciplinary research. The project includes plans to promote
diversity, equity and inclusion in STEM education at the University of
California Santa Cruz and the University of Texas at San Antonio, which are both
Hispanic Serving Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
project is to develop a unified algebraic framework and approximation theory for
deep neural networks so that the framework is applicable to a wide spectrum of
problems including regression, solving differential equations, designing optimal
feedback control, and computer vision. The proposed research is motivated by the
fact that most complicated and high dimensional input-output relations in real-
world applications can be represented as compositions of simple low-dimensional
functions. Thus, compositional functions, including deep neural networks, serve
as a natural way to describe complex high dimensional functions. Representing
compositional functions as layered acyclic graphs, the project will explore the
compositional features of the problems to be solved by machine learning; study
the error propagation in layered acyclic graphs; and investigate the
interconnection between the compositional features and the fundamental issues of
machine learning, such as the error bounds in universal approximation, deep
neural network design and training, and validation and explainability. The
algebraic framework, approximation theory, and computational algorithms to be
developed in this research project should advance the design, training, and
mathematical foundations of deep learning. They seek also to be directly
applicable to a wide spectrum of applications including feedback control design
and computer vision, which are included in this project, as well as other
important machine learning applications, such as regression and data-driven
modeling of dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.