* 2134012
* Scaling Laws of Deep Learning
* MPS,DMS
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* Sham Kakade, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 11/30/2024
* USD 766,393.00

This project builds the mathematical and scientific foundations of deep learning
by characterizing the fundamental quantities and general laws that govern the
empirical phenomena observed by applied scientists and engineers. Deep learning
is a paradigm in machine learning and artificial intelligence where statistical
models are learned from data by designing networks of parameterized modules and
training them on big datasets using optimization algorithms. It has widespread
effects on science and society, from autonomous vehicles to online commerce and
social media. Scientific research increasingly relies on deep learning for data-
driven scientific discovery. This project brings together a multidisciplinary
team of statisticians, mathematicians, computer scientists, and electrical
engineers. Research outcomes affect many core academic disciplines and
intelligence augmentation technologies by providing scientific guidelines for
practical applications of deep learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
program addresses the concept of scaling laws. On the practical side, scaling
laws greatly simplify parameter setting for large experiments and model transfer
to new domains. On the theoretical side, scaling laws shed light on empirical
phenomena and unify them with mathematical concision. The team builds upon
recent advances in optimal transport, empirical processes, nonparametric
statistics, information theory, and complexity theory, and grounds its work in
empirical observations made in large experiments in natural language processing
and computer vision, among other applied domains. The research outcomes provide
practical guidelines for scientists and engineers who employ deep learning to
tackle challenging problems, and also constitute fundamental advances in the
core areas of mathematical, statistical, and computer
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.