* 2134076
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Data-driven Attack and Defense Modeling for Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Shaunak Bopardikar, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Modern cyber-physical systems (CPS) such as smart buildings or vaccine storage
systems involve several connected devices (phones, sensors, and controllers)
that perform multiple objectives including temperature or humidity control.
However, attacks such as Stuxnet, or the recent Colonial pipeline attack on
industrial CPS have exposed major vulnerabilities, demonstrating the inadequacy
of current security techniques to guarantee proper functioning of a CPS. An
effective response against smart attackers by pro-actively modeling and
responding to attacks on a complex CPS at an ongoing basis, especially with
limited data on vulnerabilities in the CPS will be developed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the concept of hybrid attack graphs to
capture discrete and domain-specific (physical) dynamics, a data-driven game-
theoretic methodology for securing the cyber and physical components of a CPS is
the focus of this project. Three closely integrated research thrusts will span
the extent of this project: (1) automated strategies to characterize attacker
intent using reinforcement learning (RL); (2) an integrated defense approach to
guide the security strategies of the CPS using a novel combination of game
theory, RL and Bayesian optimization; and (3) evaluation and validation via
realistic simulations with emulated data from sensors and actuators of
intelligent buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple applications including
securing critical infrastructure and supply chains with significant societal
impact on public safety will benefit from the project outcomes. Training
opportunities for one PhD student and multiple undergraduate students
participating in summer research programs, especially from underrepresented
groups will be created. Several K-12 outreach and teacher training activities,
including hands-on, interactive games and contests between a defender and
attacker will be designed to motivate K-12 students to pursue science and
engineering. The curriculum of the new graduate course on non-cooperative game
theory at MSU will be enriched with new data-driven methods for solving games.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A project website has been created
(https://github.com/sandeepbanik/Data-Driven-Resilient-Systems) to provide
access to all data from this project. Each publication, thesis, or report will
have associated with it a set of web pages for the data plots and tables
contained therein. In turn, each of these pages will point to files containing
the data itself, the metadata and, as relevant, all information needed to
regenerate the data. This site will remain active for at least 3 years beyond
the end of the award, or the last public release of data associated with the
award, whichever is later.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.