* 2134715
* FMRG: Eco: Sustainable Route to 3D Solid-State Sodium-ion Battery by Direct Ink Writing and Capillary Rise Infiltration
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Christopher Li, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,700,000.00

While lithium-ion batteries have become increasingly popular in applications
such as electric vehicles and grid energy storage, the roll-to-roll process used
to manufacture these batteries is significantly inefficient. Furthermore, the
recycling yield of materials used as electrodes in these batteries is very low.
In addition, there are substantial geopolitical risks associated with the supply
chains of critical elements such as the lithium and cobalt materials used in
lithium-ion batteries. This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG)
EcoManufacturing award will support fundamental research to eliminate these
drawbacks by enabling a cross-disciplinary team of researchers from academia, a
national laboratory and industry to investigate a novel Eco Manufacturing route
to lithium- and cobalt-free three-dimensional solid-state sodium-ion batteries
in which the solid electrolyte is made of polymer composites, and the electrodes
are solely made of Earth-abundant elements such as sodium, potassium, manganese
and nickel. The battery manufacturing concept only involves direct ink writing-
based 3D printing in combination with solid-state conversion and capillary rise
infiltration. These are sustainable processes that eliminate several
deficiencies encountered in the conventional roll-to-roll battery manufacturing
method. In addition to the research effort described above, the team plans to
train the battery workforce of the next generation by creating an innovative
hybrid online/in-person education and workforce development program called the
Northeast Battery Workforce Training Program (NBWTP). This workforce program
targets adult-learners, career-seekers without academic degrees in the field of
batteries, underrepresented minorities (URMs), and veterans returning to
civilian life, who will be trained to become “Battery Ready Vets.” Industrial
partners and the Kleinman Center for Energy Policy at Penn will contribute to
the development of this innovative workforce training program. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To eliminate the deficiencies encountered in the conventional roll-
to-roll battery manufacturing process, the team will develop a sustainable route
to three-dimensional solid-state sodium-ion batteries based on the following six
integrated thrusts: Thrust #1 (Scaffold thrust) will use direct ink writing to
print a three-dimensional porous metal scaffold with both microscale and
macroscale pores. Thrust #2 (Cathode thrust) will use solid-state conversion to
partially convert the microscale pore walls of the scaffold into a cathode,
resulting in a three-dimensional scaffold/cathode composite. Thrust #3 (Polymer
electrolyte thrust) will investigate two polymer-based solid-state electrolytes
infiltrated in the microscale pores of the scaffold/cathode composite using
capillary rise infiltration. Thrust #4 (Anode and full battery thrust) will use
capillary rise infiltration to impregnate the macroscale pores with a “self-
healing” sodium anode and make the full three-dimensional solid-state sodium-ion
battery. To eliminate sodium dendrite-induced short-circuiting and achieve
ultralong cycle life, the “self-healing” sodium anode will transform into a
liquid when the battery is operating at moderate temperatures. Thrust #5
(Recycling thrust) will use air-free electrolytic leaching to recycle used
batteries. Thrust #6 (Workforce thrust) will establish a self-sustained hybrid
online/in-person workforce development program to train future battery workers.
This workforce training includes a professional certificate program consisting
of online courses offered through Canvas Network in the form of Massive Open
Online Courses (MOOCs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award is
supported by the Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and co-funded by the Division of
Chemistry (CHE) in MPS, the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for Engineering (ENG), and the Division of
Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems (ECCS) in
ENG.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.