* 2134689
* FMSG: Cyber: Federated Deep Learning for Future Ubiquitous Distributed Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Nima Shamsaei, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2023
* USD 498,762.00

Distributed additive manufacturing has promising potential to connect and
coordinate individual manufacturers for efficient, on-demand production. It can
leverage the freeform fabrication of numerous additive manufacturers to form a
flexible and robust supply chain and achieve reconfigurable mass customization
in the future. However, product quality, consistency and privacy concerns among
those distributed manufacturers pose a grand challenge to fully unleashing the
potential of distributed additive manufacturing. This Future Manufacturing Seed
Grant (FMSG) CyberManufacturing project will support fundamental research to
provide needed knowledge for developing a unified algorithmic and training
framework. The new framework, named FEDMDL, will lay a solid foundation to
enable consistent and reliable production in a privacy-preserving, insight-
sharing manufacturing network. This will further promote the adoption of
additively manufactured parts in various industries, such as aerospace,
automobile, healthcare, and will boost the participation of small-and-medium-
sized manufacturers in the national supply chain. Therefore, results from this
research will benefit the competitive advantages of US manufacturing and
economy. This research provides manufacturing companies with the synergy of
novel machine learning and federated computing techniques. The multi-
disciplinary approach will help broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in research and positively impact engineering education. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The unified algorithmic and training framework, FEDMDL, will chart a
new theoretical path to enabling reliable production, consistent quality, and
privacy-preserving data sharing in distributed additive manufacturing. FEDMDL
will synthesize the fundamental physics of additive manufacturing processes into
deep learning algorithms and train the new models on a federated learning
cyberinfrastructure. In this seed grant, FEDMDL will be prototyped with fatigue
performance assessment of additively manufactured metals in a distributed
manufacturing network. The research team will: (1) conduct fatigue testing and
defect characterization to understand material-defect-geometry-loading-fatigue
relationships; (2) develop fracture-mechanics-centric deep learning models to
approximate multi-physics multiscale processes and predict the fatigue
performance of complex geometries under multiaxial loading; (3) design a cross-
silo, additive-manufacturing-aware federated learning cyberinfrastructure to
train the deep learning models with collective insights from the sparse, siloed
datasets across manufacturers; and (4) evaluate the framework by deploying it in
a real-world distributed additive manufacturing network. This work will result
in an experimentally validated, generalizable algorithmic and training framework
to catalyze research and applications in quality modeling, qualification, and
control for future distributed additive manufacturing with collective
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Civil. Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Division of
Electrical, Communications, and Cyber Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.