* 2134534
* FMSG: Cyber: Does Nature Invoke the Optimum? A Bioinspired Hierarchical Manufacturing Process
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 10/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Future of Manufacturing grant aims to support advances in the manufacturing
of innovative designs through biomimetic and bioinspired methodologies, setting
the framework for the national prosperity and progress. Natural organisms are
prominent paradigms of adaptive design. Through millions of years of
evolutionary experiences, they fabricate themselves in an adaptive environment,
in response to external stimuli. The versatility and complexity of nature’s
design arsenal entails hierarchical features, at length scales of micrometers to
nanometers. These intriguing designs involve perplexing structural features and
enhanced mechanical performance. What can we learn from natural designs? Even
more, can we do better by building on their success? From the perspective of the
mechanical behavior, there is little success in a systematic definition of the
design space using specific design parameters. Hence, even though these designs
are effective, there is no guarantee that they are also optimal. This award
supports the fundamental research required to unveil the modeling, optimization
and fabrication processes necessary to design optimal biomimetic/bioinspired
structures. The successful completion of this project will pave the way for the
utility of these structures in tissue engineering, advanced materials, and
augmented structures, becoming a catalyst for the U.S. economy and society.
Students and postdocs will be involved and trained. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in additive manufacturing have enabled the fabrication of complex
multifunctional structures. This progress has introduced the utility of
biomimetic and bioinspired designs in every aspect of society, spanning from
structural engineering to bioengineering. While modeling and experimental tools
exist to analyze the final creation of nature, they have still not been merged
in a strategic and coherent scheme to unravel the intermediate steps of the
design process and elucidate how each step can be exploited in the manufacturing
and design process of architected materials. The goal of this research is to
design and fabricate three dimensional (3D) bioinspired structures with
sophisticated multiscale hierarchical structure regarding their composition,
dimensions, and geometry. To predict the structural development based on the
external stimuli within a specific time frame, 3D growth continuum mechanics
modeling techniques will be developed. In addition, multiscale printing
techniques will be developed to fabricate both macroscale and micro/nanoscale
features imitating the hierarchical “fabrication” process of nature through
growth. Through stochastic optimization techniques augmented with advanced
machine learning algorithms, the design space and identification of optima will
be explored. Finally, using nature as reference, the optimum found by the
algorithm will be compared with the actual natural organism through advanced
characterization techniques, including in situ scanning electron microscopy
tests. The findings of this research will show how lessons from nature are not
merely imitated, but they can lead to novel approaches that will provide an
answer to the question: Does Nature Invoke the Optimum? Based on this work, it
will be possible to demonstrate a manufacturing strategy capable of producing
structures of high mechanical performance, exhibiting resilience and damage
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) within the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS), and by Industrial Innovation and Partnerships (IIP)
within the Directorate of Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.