* 2134408
* The Electrical Conductivity of Subducted Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2021,11/30/2024
* James Van Orman, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 11/30/2024
* USD 253,757.00

Subduction zones are regions where crust and lithosphere are recycled into the
Earth’s mantle. While oceanic crust dominates in subducting plates, continental
crust can also be subducted. It has been inferred that subducted continental
crust may explain the high electrical conductivity observed in some subduction
zones at depth greater than ~300 km. This high conductivity has previously been
attributed to the release of hydrous fluids. Here, the researchers investigate
an alternative possibility: that the high conductivity is due to the presence of
liebermannite. This mineral becomes stable at the extreme pressure prevailing in
deep subducted plates. It may account for a significant fraction of subducted
continental crust. Materials with similar structures often display superionic
conductivity. This type of conductivity - where charge carriers are ions and
vacancies in the solid - does not require the presence of fluids. Here, the team
carries out experiments at the extreme conditions prevailing in the mantle. They
use an apparatus capable of generating pressures in excess of 200,000 atm. They
quantify the effect of temperature, pressure, and mineral composition on
electrical conductivity. They gradually unveil whether liebermannite can explain
the high conductivities observed in subduction zones. Outcomes of this project
may find applications beyond Earth Sciences in Materials Science. The award
supports a principal investigator from a group underrepresented in science. It
involves high-school students notably from underrepresented groups. It also
promotes educational outreach toward the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here, the
team measures the electrical conductivity of (K,Na)AlSi3O8 libermannite. They
investigate the conductivity of the pure K-endmember, as well as that of K-Na
solid solutions. They use the impedance spectroscopy technique in a multi-anvil
high-pressure-temperature device. To complement the conductivity measurements,
they perform K self-diffusion and Na-K interdiffusion measurements at similar
conditions of pressure and temperature. This provides further insight on the
conduction mechanism inferred from the conductivity measurements. The results
provide the basis for calculating liebermannite conductivity as a function of
pressure, temperature, and composition over a wide range of mantle depths. The
study also improves estimates of the electrical conductivity of continental
crust. It establishes whether “dry” continental crust may explain regions of
high conductivity at depths greater than 300 km. The team also investigate the
crystal orientation dependence of the electrical conductivity in liebermannite.
The goal is to evaluate whether subducted continental crust may have significant
electrical anisotropy. The data are used, along with previously published data
on other minerals, to calculate the electrical conductivity of continental crust
in subduction zone. It provides an improved basis for the identification of
subducted continental crust by magnetotelluric
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.