* 2134823
* I-Corps:  Chemical processes for preparation of diagnostic agents for Positron Emission Tomography imaging
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Anita Bell, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to prepare a
new generation of diagnostic products for early detection of diseases and to
evaluate Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Imaging therapies. PET imaging uses
radiotracers (drugs and biomolecules labeled with safe radioactive materials) to
provide information about biological events on a cellular and molecular level.
Such tests are necessary for the early diagnosis of diseases such as breast
cancer as well as the evaluation of responses to immunotherapy. Currently, there
are few chemical processes to produce radiotracers on an industrial scale.
Typical processes use radioactive materials that are not produced by commercial
vendors (radiopharmacies) and this, in turn, makes the production of these
radiotracers expensive. Hence, the material is not widely accessible. This
project uses a new chemical process in which radioactive materials from
radiopharmacies are used. The chemical process is adaptable by commercial
radiopharmacies so they can make the radiotracers on-site to provide to end
users. Since these commercial radiopharmacies typically have established large
distribution channels, more patients, including those in under-resourced areas,
will be able to benefit from these cheaper and better diagnostic
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a novel
technology in the preparation of a new generation of radiotracers for use in
Positron Emission Tomography (PET). The innovation combines specific reagents,
reaction conditions, and chemical processes to allow the preparation of labeled
biomolecules. The technology uses salts that are directly produced in commercial
cyclotrons. The process developed here allows the radionuclide to be added to
the biomolecule of interest in the last step of the labeling process, retaining
the radioactivity of the product and significantly improving the radiochemical
yield. The technology allows the preparation of a wide variety of radiotracers
with applications in the detection of neurological disorders, cancer, drug
pharmacokinetics, metabolism, and target engagement, as well as in the
preparation of dual imaging agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.