* 2134701
* FMSG: Bio: End-to-End Continuous Manufacture of Cell Therapies Enabled by Robotics and Microfluidic Processing
* BIO,MCB
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2023
* Todd Sulchek, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 10/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project will seek to create a more continuous, integrated workflow for cell
therapy manufacturing based upon microfluidic technology and robotic cell
processing. The transition to a more continuous cell therapy manufacturing
workflow from the current batch processing can include a higher purity and yield
of potent cells, which has also benefited other conventional manufacturing
workstreams such as chemical manufacturing. With the cost of life-saving cell
therapies &gt;$100k per dose, innovating new integrated processes and
technologies for cell therapy products is essential to expand access and
increase the rate of innovation. There are several challenges to cell therapy
manufacturing that this study will address. First, cell therapy products are
currently produced using a “batch” manufacturing approach that consists of a
multi-step process. As a result, the process results in batch-to-batch
variation, an inability to use donor-specific variables in the manufacturing,
and difficulty in system control of critical quality attributes. Second, the
sensors that are used in cell therapy manufacturing that are related to cell
function (e.g., molecular) are not real-time and cannot be used in nimble
process control. Third, because autologous therapies are derived from a patient-
donor, there is substantial variability of the starting material—yet this
variability is not incorporated into the manufacturing process. The broader
impacts of the project include the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in microfluidic approaches to cell therapy manufacturing that may
increase the innovation rate and decrease the costs associated with clinical
cell manufacturing, while enabling small industry to innovate in the production
of therapeutic cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will harness fluid
dynamics at the microscale using integrated microfluidic transfection and
separation operations, as well as vision- and data analytics-enabled robotics to
help automate the cell culture process. As a testbed, the study will apply the
technologies to an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) derived retinal organoid
manufacturing process. The new technology and process control will be applied to
generate functional retinal cell grafts, i.e., 3D engineered retinal constructs
from iPSC-derived retinal organoids. The project can improve regenerative
strategies through greater integration of iPSC genetic engineering, robotics-
based culture, and new label-free cell selection methods to purify desired cell
types that are consistent with Good Manufacturing Practices production. The team
brings together three core expertises to accomplish the transformation: a
current Good Manufacturing Practices process for retinal organoid manufacturing
from human induced pluripotent stem cell culture; microfluidics-enabled cell
transfection, characterization, and separation unit operations; and a capability
for robotics-enabled cell processing and image analysis. The first objective is
to apply a cell microfluidic transfection platform that uses choreographed
mechanical deformations to convectively deliver large gene-editing CRISPR/Cas9
and DNA cargo to iPSCs. Moreover, because patient-derived specimens vary from
donor to donor, the study will also characterize the biomechanical properties of
donor cells to optimize the transfection. The second objective is to combine
automated cell culture systems and machine learning to develop a robotic
platform capable of performing high quality automated iPSC generation, CRISPR-
correction, and retinal differentiation. The third objective examines how
mixtures of retinal cells can better produce functional retinal grafts using a
label-free cell separation microfluidic technology. Together the intellectual
merits of this project will be to demonstrate an integrated approach to generate
3D engineered retinal constructs to address inherited blindness. This Future
Manufacturing award was supported by Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.