* 2134374
* FMSG: Cyber: Cybermanufacturing of Wide-Bandgap Semiconductor Devices Enabled by Simulation Augmented Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2023
* Yuhao Zhang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Semiconductor industry is one of the largest manufacturing industries with
annual revenue approaching $500 billion. Semiconductor devices are manufactured
on large-diameter wafers through multiple process steps. Yield is a key metric
determining the success in semiconductor manufacturing. The current practice of
yield management relies on minimizing the wafer material non-uniformity,
maximizing the process control in every step, and applying necessary process
adaptions to the entire wafer based on domain expertise. However, the
manufacturing yield of emerging semiconductor devices, e.g., wide-bandgap (WBG)
devices, is merely 50-80% in the foundry, due to less mature materials and
processes. While WBG devices are gaining quick adoption in applications like
electric vehicles, data centers, 5G communications, and power grids, the limited
yield of their manufacturing has become an increasingly serious concern. This
Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) CyberManufacturing project suggests the
self-predictive and self-adaptive cybermanufacturing of semiconductor devices
implemented through die- or device-based (instead of wafer-based) adaptions in
each process step guided by a physical simulation augmented machine learning
(ML) framework. In this semiconductor cybermanufacturing, which does not exist
today, device-to-device adaptions in geometrics and designs are applied in each
process step to intelligently compensate for the variability in inherent
material properties and historical process steps. This seed grant will use the
small-scale fabrication of WBG power diodes as a demonstration vehicle to
establish the knowledge base related to the integration of ML in adaptive
semiconductor manufacturing. The new manufacturing paradigm can potentially lead
to the formation of new industries at the intersection of ML and semiconductors.
This project also presents a unique venue to train future technicians with the
capabilities of tackling interdisciplinary problems in ML-guided semiconductor
manufacturing. This interdisciplinary project will be utilized to support
undergraduate research activities and outreach activities for K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objective of this seed grant is to identify and
address the fundamental knowledge gaps related to the semiconductor
cybermanufacturing, using the small-scale fabrication of vertical gallium
nitride power diodes as a demonstration vehicle, which is an emerging WBG device
for power applications in electric vehicles and power grids. The intellectual
merits of this project are rooted in the fundamentally new philosophy for
semiconductor device manufacturing, i.e., the die-to-die, device-to-device
adaptions produced by analytic and predictive ML models. To realize this new
manufacturing paradigm, this project will focus on tacking the following
problems: (a) New data frameworks will be explored for the development of ML
models applicable to physical electronic devices. Experimental device data,
which are expensive in terms of cost and time, will be augmented by physical
simulation data by 1,000-10,000 times using the Technology Computer-Aided Design
simulations. (b) Innovative ML models will be explored for the forward process
(predict device performance metrics from a given set of material/device
parameters) and inverse process (deduce future process parameters for the given
device characteristics, the measured historical process step parameters, and the
design objectives). (c) The proposed framework will be experimentally
demonstrated through pilot manufacturing on the test vehicle, and the final
yield enhancement will be characterized and evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Future Manufacturing project is jointly funded by the Divisions of ECCS and CMMI
in the Directorate of Engineering and the Division of CHE in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.