* 2134984
* Polymer Symposium Support for the 72nd Southeastern Regional Meeting of the American Chemical Society (SERMACS 2021)
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Richard Dluhy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 5,000.00

TECHNICAL AND NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award offers
partial support for the polymer symposium of the Southeastern Regional Meeting
of the American Chemical Society (SERMACS), which is scheduled for November 2021
in Birmingham, Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The following topics will be
included in the symposium: 1. New routes for the synthesis of stimuli-sensitive
polymers. 2. Assembly of amphiphilic polymers in solutions into nanoscale
structures. 3. Structural parameters controlling micelles vs. polymersome
assembly in solutions. 4. Kinetics and thermodynamics of polymer complexation in
solutions. 5. Interfacial stabilization of self-assembled structures. 6.
Templated assemblies: 2D coatings and 3D hollow capsules. 7. Free-standing and
free-floating films. 8. Structure-property-function relationships of polymer
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the symposium offers essential
opportunities for junior faculty members, students, and postdoctoral
researchers, including a significant number of women, to network with senior
researchers. The meeting talks will be publicized through the dedicated SERMAC
website. Students will be encouraged to present at a poster session, and there
will be activities and workshops for faculty candidates and for students to
explore career opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.