* 2134594
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: Solids and reactive transport processes in sewer systems of the future: modeling and experimental investigation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Polina Sela, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 12/31/2026
* USD 210,000.00

In the United States, there are approximately 16,000 sanitary sewer systems
serving more than 190 million people through over 740,000 miles of public
sewers. Sanitary sewers are underground pipes designed to deliver sewage water
from residential, commercial, and industrial buildings to the city sewage
treatment plants. This wastewater contains solid waste such as human excreta,
soiled water from sinks, showers, and toilets, and other waste. Sanitary sewers
are critical to the communities that they serve for managing and disposing of
wastewater in a safe manner. Two major problems affecting these sanitary sewer
systems are blockages and the formation of hydrogen sulfide, a highly toxic and
corrosive gas. Sewer blockages can result in overflow of untreated contaminated
wastewater into individual properties, local communities, and the environment.
Sewer blockages can also lead to bad smells and the release of harmful gases,
such as hydrogen sulfide, which is dangerous to human health. The goal of this
NSF-BSF project is to investigate the characteristics of the solid waste that
enters sewers, the factors that affect how it moves and accumulates, and the
formation of hydrogen sulfide and other harmful substances in sewer systems. To
advance this goal, the Principal Investigators (PIs) will use a combination of
laboratory and field experiments, as well as computer modeling, to predict how
solid waste and harmful substances travel in sewers. The PIs also propose to
develop software tools to help track and model these processes, considering
different sources of uncertainty. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the generation of new data and models to improve the
fundamental understanding of how solids move in sewers and identify
vulnerabilities and potential problems that may arise from future changes in
wastewater characteristics. Additional benefits to society will be achieved
through student education and training including the mentoring of one
undergraduate and one graduate student at the university of Texas, Austin and
one graduate student at the University of Illinois at
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sewer blockages and the formation of hydrogen
sulfide, a highly toxic and corrosive gas, are two critical issues that
compromise the integrity of sanitary sewers and have severe economic,
environmental, and public health impacts. The increased adoption of sustainable
water technologies is forecasted to significantly alter the quantity and quality
of the wastewater discharged into sewer systems, leading to unintended negative
implications. Water demand reductions are expected to increase the deposition of
solids and alter the solid-liquid biochemical processes within the sewer system,
exacerbating sewer blockages and hydrogen sulfide formation. The overarching
goal of this NSF-BSF project is to investigate the dynamic characteristics of
domestic solids discharged to sewers, the factors that affect the transport,
deposition, and accumulation of these solids, and the formation and
transformation of hydrogen sulfide and other key biochemical species in sewer
systems. The specific objectives of the research are to 1) conduct lab and field
experiments to characterize the physical aspects of gross solids transport,
deposition, and transformation in sewers; 2) develop open-source software tools
to model solid-liquid biochemical interactions, enable tracking the fate and
transport of key biochemical species in sewer systems, and quantify and
propagate different sources of uncertainty; and 3) create a computational
framework for identifying potential breakpoints due to future changes in the
characteristics of wastewater discharges under various decentralized water
technologies, population shifts, and changes in infiltration/inflow patterns due
to climate change. The successful completion of this project will bridge the
fundamental knowledge gaps in solids transport and solid-liquid biochemical
processes in sewer systems and will enable identifying vulnerabilities under
future uncertain long- and short-term shifts in wastewater
characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.