* 2134600
* Special Issue of Oceanography on "The Changing Arctic Ocean"
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2023
* Jennifer Ramarui, Oceanography Society
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 03/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The Oceanography Society proposes to publish a special issue of the open-access
journal Oceanography entitled “The Changing Arctic Ocean”. The special issue
will articulate in clear and compelling language the many ways the Arctic
Ocean’s environment and ecosystem are changing due to a warming climate. The
proposed special issue will broadly review significant scientific
accomplishments in Arctic Ocean research over the past decade and provide a look
at future research opportunities. The special issue is organized around changes
in: (1) sea ice dynamics, (2) physical oceanography from basin scale to the
microscale, (3) pan-Arctic and global linkages, and (4) marine ecosystem
processes, as well as (5) how these changes influence geopolitical issues, (6)
how these changes cause concern among Arctic Indigenous communities, and (7) how
these changes are being assessed through observing systems. Oceanography is an
open access journal that strives for clarity and simplicity in language through
rigorously peer-reviewed articles that include high-quality scientific graphics
and photos to bring topics alive for its readership. The proposed special issue
of Oceanography will highlight research addressing how the Arctic Ocean is
changing and how those changes are affecting humankind. It will provide a
coherent and readable compendium of results from scientific research that can be
used as a basis for undergraduate and graduate classroom instruction and
discussions, as well as to inform policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since 2000,
the Arctic atmosphere has warmed at more than twice the rate of the global
average. This warming has been accompanied by a reduction in Arctic sea-ice
extent, multi-year sea ice volume, the seasonal duration of ice cover over
portions of the basin and its adjacent shelf seas, as well as the Greenland Ice
Sheet. The oceanic response has included a general warming of the upper ocean
and changes in wave climatology, circulation, mixing, stratification, and
volumetric and property exchanges between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. The
physical changes are altering the marine ecosystem, the composition and
abundance of various biological communities, and biogeochemical cycling. These
changes are concerning to Indigenous coastal communities who foresee threats to
their culture through alterations in subsistence food resources, increased
coastal erosion rates, and increased safety hazards while hunting or fishing on
ice or open water. These communities are also concerned with new impacts arising
from a potential increase in marine industrial, tourist, and military
activities. Over the past decade, the Arctic science community has responded to
these changes and their associated threats to society through advancements in
the integration of models and observations, important additions to the Arctic
Observing Network systems, and most recently, through the yearlong expedition
into the Arctic ice pack under the auspices of the Multidisciplinary drifting
Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC)
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.