* 2134447
* FMSG: Cyber: Establishing a Cyber-Physical Framework and Pilot System of Wavelength Selective Photopolymerization based Rapid Continuous Multi-Material Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Xiayun Zhao, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Photopolymerization-based 3D printing is a method for rapid prototyping and
manufacturing. Complex 3D parts can be printed by exposing a photoreactive resin
to light in a spatially-selective manner. This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant
(FMSG) CyberManufacturing project will develop a concept of wavelength-selective
3D printing wherein both ultraviolet and visible wavelengths of light will be
used during polymerization to realize distinct material properties within a 3D
object. This award supports a systematic fundamental study to provide knowledge
and capabilities for the development of multi-material 3D printing based on
wavelength-selective photopolymerization. Numerous applications are envisaged
for this technology, ranging from flexible electronics, soft robotics,
architected materials, and biological tissues. This project promotes US
leadership in advanced manufacturing, promote scientific progress, and increase
national prosperity. It unites researchers with diverse expertise including 3D
printing, polymer chemistry, and sensors and robotics. The investigators will
conduct outreach at undergraduate and K-12 level on 3D printing technology to
attract diverse students towards STEM fields via collaborations with a local
public school and science museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3D printing technology
aims to address the pressing need for an advanced technology to fabricate multi-
material parts rapidly and continuously. This 3D printing method simplifies the
material switch-over method avoiding tedious steps of re-alignment and cleaning.
Specifically, at present, multi-material photopolymerization printing requires
"resin vat changes", which only permits material variation between layers, but
not within each layer. This research will fill the knowledge gap on fundamental
mechanisms of two-wavelength photopolymerization 3D printing including chemical
kinetics, phase transition, thermodynamics, and interfacial mechanics. This
project develops a multi-physics model and simulation method for elucidating the
two concurrent and different photopolymerization pathways to realize distinct
properties. An additional thrust is a highly instrumented platform for in-situ
monitoring of the new process, featuring a novel in-situ optical interferometry
that can provide otherwise unattainable real-time full-field insights of the
unique multi-curing process dynamics. Ultimately, the new process-structure-
property relations will be quantified by machine learning of the data from
theoretical model simulation, in-situ monitoring, and ex-situ characterization.
The research outcomes will facilitate the research on emerging multi-wavelength
photopolymerization printing, new photo chemistries and polymers, and novel
applications of multi-material 3D printing. This award is supported by the CMMI
Division in the ENG Directorate and the CHE Division in the MPS
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.