* 2134781
* STTR Phase I:  Real-Time Mineral Data Collection and Identification Module
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,03/31/2023
* Semih Aslan, STRATAJAM LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project improves mining and
geotechnical drilling activities by eliminating handling of bulky samples. Core
drilling consumes about 10,000 gallons of water per day, often in water-
deficient areas. The proposed new approach negates the need for water in the
drilling process, thereby mitigating the risk of pollution to public and
wildlife drinking water sources. Reducing the time required for a typical
drilling project from weeks to days reduces the carbon emission from the energy-
intensive drilling equipment required. This solution to problems associated with
acquiring subsurface data with traditional techniques has an addressable market
segment value of $21 billion. The new instrument to be developed will eliminate
the need for off-site lab services, core drilling, and site geologists,
resulting in lower industry life cycle costs and spurring critical exploration
activities for needed US strategic minerals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is based in the development of a novel
drilling module that will be able to acquire subsurface chemistry and
geotechnical properties of rocks and soils, to assess the type and value of
minerals present both quickly and accurately. The conventional way of evaluating
these materials is by core drilling, which presents various problems related to
cost, sample quality and logistics. This research uses a combination of optical
images, x-ray fluorescence, and gamma-ray density, as well as compressive
strength data from a newly curated database that will be developed from open-
source geospatial data, collections of geology and geotechnical reports, rock
core databases, implicit geology modeling principles, and machine learning
methods to characterize rock and soil samples. It aims to solve the technical
challenges that currently prevent such a tool from being available to the
industry today; these include mud smearing in the drill hole sidewalls, the high
pressure and heat of the target environment, and challenges in wireless data
transmission. The goal of this research is to create, validate and calibrate a
method for automating the characterization of an unknown rock or soil sample in
situ via a combination of hardware and software
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.