* 2134875
* 2021 NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) Grantees Conference; Virtual; December 7-8, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2021,05/31/2022
* Daniel Herr, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2022
* USD 44,424.00

This award provides support for the planning, organizing and managing of the
annual 2021 NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) Grantees Conference to
be held virtually on December 7 and 8, 2021. The NSE conference serves as a
program review and research networking meeting that highlights ongoing research
and educational activities in NSF’s nanotechnology science and engineering
programs. The main theme of this conference is ‘nanomanufacturing’, which is an
integral part of NSF’s Advanced Manufacturing program but also plays an
important role in other NSF nanotechnology-related research programs such as
ones that involve electronics, chemistry, physics, biology, environment, etc.
The conference provides attendees, particularly women and under-represented
minorities, with unique opportunities to network with and learn from other
researchers. The conference provides a forum for interdisciplinary
collaborations in diverse nanotechnology fields. It presents and discusses the
role nanomanufacturing plays in OSTP priority areas and grand challenges, e.g.,
quantum information science, advanced manufacturing, artificial intelligence,
advanced wireless, bioengineering. This award benefits the nation through the
education and training of a skilled and diverse manufacturing workforce, which
is better prepared to provide transformative solutions to the challenges in
their chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference discusses two general
topics in the context of nanomanufacturing: (1) Nanotechnology Foundations for
Emerging Science and Technology and (2) Nanomanufacturing for Tomorrow. Each
general topic is made up of several special topics. These are (a) Trends in
Basic Research in Nanomanufacturing; (b) Nanomanufacturing for Quantum Systems;
(c) Nanomanufacturing for Semiconductors and Advanced Wireless Systems; (d)
Nanomanufacturing for Sustainability, Climate Change and Renewable Energy; (e)
AI and Cyber Applications in Nanomanufacturing; (f) Bio-nanomanufacturing; (g)
Synthetic Biology; (h) Nanomanufacturing in SBIR/STTR; (i) Resources for
Nanomanufacturing, e.g., NNCI, NCN. Additional topics could involve a discussion
on nano centers and nanotechnology education, and poster presentations by NSF
principal investigators and other Federal Agencies. The conference discusses
past achievements and accomplishments in manufacturing at the nanoscale,
identify research gaps that are preventing novel ideas from moving forward, and
determine opportunities for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.