* 2134020
* SBIR Phase II:  Innovative Platform for Low Volume Blood Coagulation Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Damir Khismatullin, Levisonics Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 998,857.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the problem of blood clotting and
associated bleeding risks in neonatal and pediatric patients as well as
vulnerable adult patients. Existing systems put these patients at further risk
because they cannot operate with low volumes of blood, and because they are less
reliable owing to the requirement for test sample contact. Using only a single
drop of blood, the proposed non-contact technology platform enables safe and
reliable assessment of blood clotting for all patients and provides an
opportunity for development of newborn screening tests for coagulation
abnormalities. This technology can reduce side effects for neonatal and
pediatric patients by using 1/100th the sample volume required by technologies
developed for adult healthcare and improve diagnostic response time for critical
care providers by more than 3x. This technology could decrease the cost of blood
coagulation analysis by over 30%, thus allowing for patients in the United
States to save $1.1 billion annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project develops an innovative technology
for non-contact blood coagulation analysis that integrates photo-optical and
viscoelastic measurements in a single drop of blood. The basis of the technology
is to levitate a small sample in a host fluid (air) by the acoustic radiation
force and measure its physical properties under deformation during levitation.
Due to its non-contact feature and low sample volume requirement, this
technology can rapidly (&lt;10 minutes) and reliably assess bleeding/thrombotic
risks and is sensitive to temporal changes in shear viscosity and elasticity
during blood clotting and fibrinolysis. The goal of this project is to develop
and test a system for fast, reliable, and easy-to-use drop-of-blood coagulation
analysis under sterile conditions. This goal will be achieved by meeting four
objectives: 1) develop the module for automatic sample deployment from standard
blood collection tubes; 2) implement environmental control and sample
containment (“acoustic cartridge”); 3) assemble prototype devices and develop
the control software with improved workflow and a user-friendly interface; and
4) assess prototype reliability, standardize it for coagulation measurements,
and conduct initial clinical testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.