* 2134471
* FMRG: Eco: A Systems-Enabled Paradigm Shift for Modular Sustainable Chemical Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

Future manufacturing needs to be sustainable. This Future Manufacturing Research
Grant (FMRG) EcoManufacturing project aims to impact the way chemical
manufacturing of emerging technologies is developed and practiced. The vision of
the project is to move a predominant raw material base for chemical
manufacturing from non-renewable to renewable substrates. The goal of the
project is to develop a blueprint for sustainable chemical manufacturing in
emerging technologies by integrating computer science with mechanistic modeling
and experimental data within a unified systems approach that considers market
trends, accounts for process and product economics, and incorporates
environmental, market, and policy impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project will be pursued through three research thrusts. Thrust 1 centers on
the identification of pathways from renewable raw materials to a slate of
existing and new products using a machine-learning natural processing language
platform, integrated with artificial intelligence, multiscale modeling, and in-
silico guided experiments. This platform targets to enable assessment of
manufacturability combined with product discovery. Thrust 2 will develop an
integrated product and process synthesis optimization framework to incorporate
economic, environmental, and market impact of various process/product
alternatives, and optimize the product portfolio, process design, and
operations. Thrust 3 will identify consumer needs and market behavior in
introducing “green” products and integrate these features into supply chain
optimization. Central to the project approach is developing a modular-based
systems optimization framework to analyze a host of products and process
alternatives, integrating economics and environmental considerations, optimizing
the location and capacity of processing sites, and incorporating the effects of
parametric and environmental uncertainty. Education is integral to the project
and involves the training of (a) undergraduate and graduate students in
convergence research and sustainable manufacturing, (b) undergraduates in
interdisciplinary product development through Internet-of-Things design
projects, and (c) chemical operators on future manufacturing across the US, in
collaboration with RAPID/AIChE as a manufacturing partner.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET Environmental
Sustainability program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), the SBE Directorate, and the CBET, CMMI, EEC, and CHE
divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.