* 2134772
* FMRG: Bio: DNA &amp; RNA Condensate Droplets for Programmable Separation and Manufacture of Biomolecules
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Deborah Fygenson, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 11/30/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

The ability to spatially organize, separate, and sort is key to any advanced
manufacturing process. While these tasks have been mastered in top-down
industrial biochemical processes, it remains challenging to embed these
operations in biochemical reactors at the micro- and nano-scale. Microscopic
reactors are useful to extract, sort, separate, and organize components in low-
volume, low-cost reactions, and are particularly relevant for scarce, toxic, or
high-value ligands. This project will establish design tools and components to
build microscopic liquid reactors made with DNA and RNA, taking inspiration from
cellular condensation phenomena that compartmentalize small molecules, nucleic
acids, proteins, and entire reaction pathways. By developing a technological
blueprint to build DNA and RNA condensates, this research will promote the
adoption of this powerful approach in biotechnology, pharmaceutics, and chemical
engineering, and contribute to the generation of a new workforce. Toward this
goal, undergraduates will be involved in the research and the research will be
integrated in educational modules that will be tested at Pasadena City College,
UCLA, UCSB, and Caltech, and will be made available to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This approach takes advantage of the well-understood
thermodynamic and kinetic properties of nucleic acids to systematize the
innovative technology of biological condensates. The project aims to: (i)
develop DNA and RNA condensates into a future manufacturing technology; (ii)
engage undergraduates and develop and disseminate educational tools for
preparing a workforce to actively participate in this emerging technology; and
(iii) expand the capabilities for domestic manufacturing of high-value
biomolecules. Building on advances in DNA and RNA nanotechnology, the project
will contribute libraries of DNA and RNA monomers that condense into liquid
droplets that host specific molecules and pathways that are relevant for
separation and production. Experiments will be guided by predictive models for
design of customizable host condensates, and through a design-build-test
pipeline will demonstrate liquid separation of an expandable set of molecules,
cells, and pathways that are relevant for sensing, drug manufacturing, and
healthcare. The team of PIs includes leaders in the field of DNA self-assembling
systems (Rothemund), engineered DNA and RNA reaction networks (Franco),
biophysics of nucleic acid systems (Fygenson), and biochemistry education
(Blatti). Because nucleic acids are naturally present in living organisms, it
will be possible to seamlessly integrate the operation of the custom artificial
condensates with that of cells and tissues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the
Biological Sciences Directorate, the Division of Chemical, Biomedical,
Environmental and Transport Systems in the Engineering Directorate, the Division
of Undergraduate Education in the Education and Human Resources Directorate, and
the Division of Chemistry in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.