* 2134518
* FMSG: Bio-Manufacturing of Hybrid Tissue-Electronic and Photonic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2021,08/31/2024
* Robert Geer, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 526,400.00

The ability to integrate living tissues with electronic and photonic devices has
potential to impact many aspects of human health, including
neurological/neuromuscular disease and injury, such as spinal cord injury and
Alzheimer's disease and secretory pathologies, such as diabetes and glaucoma. To
date, bioelectronic devices have been employed in several arenas, most notably
cardiac pacemakers, cochlear implants, which have enabled tens of thousands of
profoundly deaf people to communicate in a hearing world, and deep brain
stimulation, which became widely used in the 1990â€™s to treat Parkinson disease
and essential tremor. Despite the success of these devices, the potential for
bioelectrical and biophotonic devices has scarcely been realized, limited in
part by challenges in interfacing devices with living tissues and the potential
tissue damage due to device insertion. This future manufacturing seed grant will
develop new manufacturing methods to create electronic and photonic devices that
are biocompatible (i.e., able to facilitate growth and function of healthy
biological tissues) and are bio-resilient (i.e., able to withstand the wet,
salty, proteinaceous chemical environment of biological systems). In addition,
it will address how to interface the living tissue with electronic and photonic
devices so that information (e.g., brain electrical signals, muscle stimulation,
neuronal responses) can be transferred between the electronic or photonic device
and the living system. This project will build on existing advanced technical
education programs in semiconductor technologies and biomedical advanced
technologies to identify the core competencies required for the field of
manufacturing and train a workforce at the community college, bachelors,
masters, and doctoral degree level, broadening participation through our
interactions with community college partners and engaging with industry to
ensure that the curriculum developed remains responsive to industry needs.
Finally, a detailed curriculum based upon core competencies identified by the
project team in conjunction with the Industrial Advisory Board will be developed
and piloted at key community colleges and in bachelors and masters level
programs at SUNY Polytechnic Institute and Albany College of Pharmacy and Health
Sciences. Feedback from trainees and the Industrial Advisory Board will be used
to refine the curriculum for wider deployment in the Future Manufacturing
Research Grant phase. This Future Manufacturing project is jointly funded by the
Divisions of ECCS and CBET in the Directorate of Engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the strengths of SUNY Polytechnic Institute,
AIM Photonics (a federally-funded American Institute for Manufacturing entity
located at SUNY Polytechnic Institute), the Northeast Advanced Technological
Education Center (an NSF-funded training program) and partners including Albany
College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences and the Neural Stem Cell Institute, this
future manufacturing seed grant will focus on design and manufacturing of
silicon-wafer electronic and photonic devices with two technical objectives: 1)
Design and manufacture of silicon-wafer electronic and photonic devices to
interface with biological materials and 2) Development of interfaces for
electrical and photonic interaction and measurement of 3D cultures. To identify
the barriers to addressing these challenges at the manufacturing scale, the
project will include preliminary research focused on two testbeds: 1)
Implementation of a pressure sensing device that can measure outflow from ocular
tissues to address development of glaucoma therapeutics; 2) Creation of
multielectrode arrays interfaced with three-dimensional cell cultures (e.g.,
neuronal organoids) for electrical stimulation and observation. A significant
focus in these testbed experiments will be on design for manufacturability, to
enable the transition from laboratory devices to manufactured devices. In
addition, a series of workshops with a wide range of academic and industrial
partners will be conducted to identify additional research and manufacturing
issues to be addressed in a subsequent Future Manufacturing Research
Grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing project is jointly funded
by the Divisions of ECCS and CBET in the Directorate of
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.