* 2134024
* FMSG: Eco: Multimaterial Manufacturing of Eco-Friendly and Biodegradable Paper-Based Flexible Hybrid Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Michael Hamilton, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,940.00

This Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) EcoManufacturing project supports
scientific and engineering research enabling the future manufacturing of eco-
friendly electronics and sensors printed on paper. Printing places desired
materials only where needed, eliminating hazardous waste generation and reducing
the pollution associated with traditional electronics manufacturing processes.
However, current printing technologies rely on wet processes such as screen or
inkjet printing that require extensive development of inks or solutions. These
are often impure and can be incompatible with biodegradable paper substrates.
The goal of this work is to design and demonstrate a transformative dry additive
nanomanufacturing approach that enables the printing of eco-friendly
papertronics. The unique ability to dry print multimaterial and multifunctional
structures directly on biodegradable paper-based substrates is an attractive
solution for future manufacturing of eco-friendly electronics and sensors. The
results of this project will also reduce “e-waste”. Electronics are generally
discarded after use, and the amount of waste materials, including plastic
substrates, is increasing dramatically. The use of biodegradable paper
substrates allows for reuse and recycling, from cradle to grave. This research
creates synergy amongst several disciplines, including nanomaterials research,
device engineering, and flexible electronics, and will contribute to the
development of a skilled, multidisciplinary manufacturing workforce. This work
will impact many markets, including consumer electronics, healthcare, defense,
automotive and aerospace, and will ultimately help the U.S. to retain its
leadership in manufacturing and further enhance its economic
prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to establish the theoretical
and experimental foundations underpinning future manufacturing of printed
electronics on biodegradable papers, overcoming the existing eco-friendly
challenges in fabricating multimaterial and multifunctional devices and sensors.
The fundamental science generated in this research significantly strengthens our
understanding of dry nanoparticle-based printing concepts for 2D and 3D advanced
materials and hybrid structures on biodegradable substrates with micro and
nanoscale resolutions. The research employs nonequilibrium laser ablation and
sintering processes for energy and time-resolved generation and crystallization
of various nanoparticle materials, including semiconductors, dielectrics,
conductors, as well as emerging multifunctional and quantum materials onto
biodegradable paper substrates. This enables a laser-based multimaterial and dry
printing approach to fabricate flexible hybrid biodegradable papertronics with a
broad spectrum of technologically important materials and designs. Specifically,
this research is designed to i) explore controlled, on-demand dry printing of
nanoparticles and their sintering mechanisms on biodegradable substrates, ii)
understand nanoparticle sintering mechanisms on paper substrates and unravel the
structural and morphological evolution of single and multimaterial patterns at
different energy and time scales both experimentally and computationally, and
iii) investigate the electrical and mechanical performance and reliability of
printed papertronics and sensors. The scientific discoveries and engineering
concepts developed in this research enable future manufacturing of multimaterial
and multifunctional electronics and sensors on biodegradable paper-based
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Materials Research (DMR), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.