* 2134583
* Building a Supervisor Professional Learning Model to Improve Internships in Information and Communication Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Josh Labrie, Northern Virginia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2025
* USD 995,575.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
preparing students for careers in information and communication technology
(ICT). The COVID-19 pandemic has increased reliance on computing infrastructure,
amplified the need for skilled workers to support this infrastructure, and has
disproportionately negatively impacted college students, especially those from
historically marginalized groups. This project addresses the need to prepare
students for ICT careers by developing (1) a Career and Leadership Readiness
Institute (CLRI) program, (2) an internship program for CLRI completers, and (3)
a professional learning (PL) program targeted at internship supervisors for
students in Northern Virginia Community Collegeâ€™s (NOVA) Information and
Engineering Technologies programs. The goals of the project are to (1) increase
access and improve internship outcomes and (2) develop a PL program to support
intern supervision. Over the four-year duration of this project, 150 students
will be provided with career and leadership preparation through the CLRI
program, 75 of the CLRI completers will enroll in an IT internship program, and
PL will be provided for 50 supervisors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a quasi-
experimental mixed methods research design, this project will advance our
understanding of how projects such as this one (a) improve outcomes (i.e.,
professional socialization, attitudes toward ICT disciplines, degree completion,
persistence in ICT careers) for CLRI completers placed in internships compared
to CLRI completers who are not placed in internships; and (b) improve
supervisors' coaching of interns (i.e., confidence for supervising, effective
coaching skills). The longitudinal and cross-sectional components of the
research design allow for comparison of outcomes and documentation of the
relative impacts of the CLRI, internship, and PL for students and supervisors,
which is absent in the existing research literature. Since supervision quality
and characteristics are critically important in determining student learning
experiences and outcomes in diverse fields, the model is expected to be valuable
across disciplines and for all workplace learning opportunities. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM
education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes
innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-
year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.