* 2134945
* The Rising Stars in Cell Biology Symposium
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Jian Liu, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 07/31/2022
* USD 10,892.00

This award provides support for a one-day meeting “The Rising Stars in Cell
Biology Symposium” to be held on April 29, 2022 at Johns Hopkins University. The
purpose of the meeting is to provide an opportunity to early career scientists
(undergraduate, post baccalaureate, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows)
from diverse backgrounds within the greater Baltimore area to present their
research and network with their peers. The format of the meeting will comprise
of one keynote talk, selected oral presentations, poster sessions, and career
development platforms. In the short-term, this meeting will provide an
opportunity to trainees to highlight their exceptional research, boost their
confidence, expose them to a wide array of leading-edge research within cell
biology, which may lead to increased recruitment of under-represented minority
(URM) students into graduate programs or postdoctoral positions across the
participating institutions. In the long-term, this meeting will attract URM
scholars to Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM),
specifically to life sciences and to generate a vibrant and supportive
environment that encourages retention of URM scientists in academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This meeting is motivated by the recognition of socio-
economic disparity and the need for opportunities truly available to URM
scholars. The award will defray the basic organizing expenses to reach a wide
group of trainees as well as institutions that predominantly serve URM scholars
in the greater Baltimore area. In particular, the award will provide support for
the meeting participants in the form of travel vouchers, working meals, poster
printing, and childcare assistance. Availability of opportunities provided by
the meeting will showcase the trainees’ work and form a peer network, which will
encourage URM scholars to continue their academic pursuit and help increase
diversity at higher ranks within academia. Additionally, with the participants
from diverse backgrounds but sharing the common interest in cell biology, this
meeting is expected to foster scientific collaborations at the forefront topics
and advance research forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.