* 2134494
* FMSG: Bio: Biophysical Modulation for Scalable Biomanufacturing of Stem Cell-Derived Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Keat Ong, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 12/31/2023
* USD 466,266.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) derived from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are
promising therapeutic agents for a range of clinical disorders owing to their
immunomodulatory and pro-regenerative functions. A major bottleneck in EV
biomanufacturing is scalability during development of a product to achieve
clinically relevant doses. Current practices rely on invasive manipulations of
cells and culture conditions, which can have deleterious implications on the
final product and can incur high cost and operate at small scales, making them
less viable for best-practice manufacturing. This project will improve EV
production through noninvasive mechanical stimulation of MSCs by delivering low
magnitude mechanical signals to MSCs cultured in two-dimensional and three-
dimensional systems. This project will identify cellular responses to
biophysical modulations and evaluate improvements to overall secretome, EV
production, and functionality. The project will not only add new fundamental
knowledge on mechanotransduction in MSCs behind EV release, but also provide
functional evidence for overcoming large-scale manufacturing challenges in EV
production. Students from underrepresented populations will engage in research;
this will help train and develop a strong and diverse future biomanufacturing
workforce, together having wide-reaching impacts on education, science and
engineering, and the U.S economy. This Future Manufacturing award is supported
by the following Division/Programs and Offices: ENG/CBET, MPS/CHE, MPS/DMR,
EHR/DUE, and OIA/EPSCoR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strategies to improve EV
production include hypoxic culture conditions, serum starvation, and
immortalization of MSCs – all of which have deleterious implications in cell
integrity and functionality and operate at small scales, thus necessitating
development of feasible methods to enhance manufacturing. This project is based
on the scientific premise that MSCs are mechanosensitive cells responding to
mechanical stimuli. The central hypothesis is that delivery of mechanical
cues/forces in the form of low-magnitude mechanical stimulation (LMMS) to MSCs
can affect (i) cell membrane integrin-cytoskeletal interactions that regulate
actin dynamics and vesicle transport, and (ii) alter intracellular calcium
levels leading to consequential release of EVs. The project harnesses the
mechanotransduction of external forces on actin via integrins/talin, and
subsequent influence on EV machinery towards the overall improvement in EV
secretion by MSCs. Based on preliminary evidence that mechanical signals
increase overall MSC secretome and EV concentration, this Future Manufacturing
project will investigate the mechanisms behind mechanically triggered EV
release, and will determine qualitative and functional improvements in EVs
secreted in response to mechanical stimulation. The project will establish a
minimally manipulative biophysical method to scale-up manufacturing of EVs from
MSCs through delivery of low magnitude mechanical vibrations. The three major
objectives are (1) To evaluate the effects of LMMS-based biophysical cell
modulation system on EV release and unravel underlying mechanotransduction
changes in MSCs in response to LMMS; (2) To assess functional potency of LMMS-
induced EVs for immunosuppression (in vitro) and tissue regeneration (in vivo)
in a critical-sized calvarial defect model; and (3) Leverage research outcomes
to support education and development of a skilled technical workforce in the
state of Arkansas by engaging undergraduate, graduate, and middle school
students in biomanufacturing education and research. The project will benefit
the field of life sciences, manufacturing and bioengineering education and
research, contributing to sustained U.S. competitiveness in EV biomanufacturing
for research and therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.