* 2134209
* Collaborative Research: Robust Deep Learning in Real Physical Space: Generalization, Scalability, and Credibility
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Guang Cheng, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The vulnerability of deep neural networks to small and imperceptible
perturbations is a major challenge in machine learning today. For a variety of
applications such as autonomous vehicles, security, and medical diagnosis, this
weakness has severely limited the deployment of machine learning systems at
scale. Existing theoretical studies, while laying a good foundation based on
advanced statistical analyses, require various idealistic assumptions that are
difficult to be validated in real physical environments. Understanding the
robustness of deep learning algorithms and its interactions with the real
physical environment is therefore a critical step towards a better understanding
of explainability, generalization, and trustworthiness. This project aims to
close the gap by developing new theories and computer vision systems that can be
realistically validated. The outcomes of the research will create new
technologies that can be translated into more secure and reliable commercial
products, hence strengthening the global competitiveness of the United States;
new trustworthy AI systems that can be deployed for surveillance and defense
products to improve the national security of the United States; expand the next-
generation workforce capacity by developing a complete training pipeline from
K-12 outreach to undergraduate research, graduate mentoring, industry
partnership, online learning modules, and curriculum development; broaden
participation in STEM by leveraging the accessibility and intrigue of the
foundational research concepts to conduct educational outreach that targets
female participants from elementary up through graduate school; and promote the
exchanges of ideas across disciplines in statistics, theoretical computer
science, and image processing.Â &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robust machine learning in
real physical space requires co-modeling the deep neural networks and the
environment in which the neural networks are operating. Research efforts
focusing on one specific domain but not interacting with the other domain will
unlikely solve the problem. The combination of skills in electrical engineering,
statistics, and computer science possessed by the Purdue-UCSD team offers a
unique opportunity to address the problem. The technical approach the team will
take is to reformulate the robust adversarial learning problem by incorporating
the environmental factors. Four specific research objectives will be pursued:
(1) Parametrizing the physical environment via a hierarchy of deterministic and
generative approaches, so that the set of all possible distortions can be
constrained. (2) Analyzing the generalization bounds of neural networks in the
presence of the environmental factors and analyzing the credibility of such a
system by studying the robustness and uncertainty quantification. (3) Developing
computationally efficient algorithms to seek the equilibrium points of a
proposed minimax optimization. (4) Building a computational photography testbed
to implement the concepts and validate the theoretical results. On the
educational front, the project provides a suite of outreach activities to K-12
to improve their interest in STEM, and research opportunities to
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.