* 2134505
* EAGER-New Search Technique for keV Sterile Neutrinos
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Frank Avignone, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 06/30/2024
* USD 108,448.00

The nature of dark matter is one of the most important questions in physics
today, and the massive sterile neutrino is an excellent candidate. Earlier
searches have produced excellent sensitivities for masses between 20 and 300
MeV/c^2; however, the mass range between a few keV/c^2 and one MeV/c^2 is of
great interest as candidates for both cold and warm dark matter. A few searches
have been made in this mass range; however, the branching ratio sensitivities
have only been between 10^-3 and 10^-4, while the mass range below 200 keV/c^2
is almost unexplored. The experiment being planned here is designed to test the
effectiveness of the experimental technique to explore this entire region with
branching ratio sensitivities on the order of 10^-6. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI is collaborating with the University’s College of Engineering in detector
development. The ideal detector geometry at the focus of the Gerholm
spectrometer is conical. The available conical detectors are plastic
scintillators coupled to avalanche photodiodes. The team will explore the
development of a conical solid-state detector with fast response. The PI’s
Engineering colleagues have already produced excellent planar silicon carbide
(SiC) detectors for x-rays. Together they want to develop techniques to deposit
the active detector material on a conical sub-straight to create a high-
resolution electron detector with the ideal geometry for the spectrometer. There
are many other potential applications for particle detectors deposited on curved
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If this pilot program is successful in
demonstrating that radioactive sources with very small beta-decay branches can
be measured with this spectrometer, this technique could be applied in a larger
second-generation experiment to reach branching ratios of ~10^-8. The funds
awarded will be used to demonstrate the efficacy of a newly developed technique
in beta spectroscopy to search for sterile neutrinos with a recently
reconfigured high-transmission Gerholm beta spectrometer. The funds will also
provide for a data acquisition system, radioactive sources, machine shop
services and graduate student support to perform a pilot
search.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.