* 2134367
* FMSG: Cyber: Resilient and Reliable Cyber-Physical-Human-Machine Teams: Toward Future of Cybermanufacturing
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Liang Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,950.00

Industry 4.0 aims at converting traditional operator-controlled systems into
smart cyber-physical systems (CPS). The chief technology officer of the Digital
Manufacturing and Design Innovation Institute stated that “manufacturing
generates more data than any other sector of the economy”. The competitive edge
provided by the big data are widely acknowledged. However, achieving these
benefits requires the ability to understand, model and analytically process
information in a way that is conducive to informed decision-making in
manufacturing. Advances in robotic automation has led to robots working
alongside humans in manufacturing/assembly/repair facilities. Today, lack of
safety assurance precludes human-robot symbiosis. Moreover, there is also a lack
of high-fidelity modeling techniques that can effectively utilize the vast
amount of data available from the sensors in manufacturing facilities. This
Future Manufacturing Seed Grant (FMSG) CyberManufacturing project aims to create
new science and develop new talent for the advancement of resilient and reliable
human-CPS systems by developing resilient and safe coordination for human-
machine teaming, and by developing reliable and robust methods for part flow
models in manufacturing systems in the presence of external disturbances. We
refer to these systems as cyber-physical human machine teams (CPHMT). The
overarching goal of this project is to develop an integrated theory for safe and
efficient operations of manufacturing systems with cyber-physical human machine
teams (CPHMT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the main difficulties in deploying
CPHMT is how to achieve resiliency of the human-machine teams and incorporate
that information in the system level optimization for decision-making on the
factory floor. Therefore, the overall goal of this project is to develop safety
methods for resilient coordination of CPHMT, utilize predictive modeling to
estimate safety index that can be used in construction of high-fidelity
mathematical models of manufacturing parts flow. Specifically, the project 1)
develops resilient and safe coordination algorithms for human-machine teaming
using scalable and computationally efficient computational modeling of
psychological processes such as determining human intentions, 2) develops
effective, reliable, and easy-to-implement approach to construct high-fidelity
mathematical models of manufacturing parts flow, which is necessary to perform
any rigorous, quantitative analysis and optimization. 3) Application: Validate
the theoretical results in lab bench-based testbed and implement them through
industrial case studies. The approach to the robot control problems is based on
utilizing advances in deep learning to predict the human motion using operator
motion model, attention, and workspace and reachability constraints. Then the
motion prediction is utilized in a coupled dynamic motion model to design safer
controllers for robots. The approach to the manufacturing problems is based on
analyses of random processes, which arise in manufacturing systems with CPHMT
and designing a safety index for the robot to operate based on human motion
intent. As an outcome, this project demonstrates the efficacy of the CPHMT
approach and provide manufacturing professionals with effective tools for
production operation and control of systems with CPHMT. The outcomes of this
research provide manufacturing organizations with a novel type of automation -
flexible automation, whereby the machine learning, artificial intelligence can
be rapidly adapted to manufacture different products. To enable its deployment,
modules related to machine learning, robotics and automation are developed to be
offered as a part of newly approved Robotics engineering undergraduate major at
UConn, where the CPHMT approach is described and illustrated. This study
enhances the students' understanding of machine learning, control and
manufacturing, and their capabilities to solve comprehensive STEM
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported with co-funding from
the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the
Engineering (ENG) Directorate, the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (SMA) in the Directorate of Social, Behavioral and
Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.