* 2134973
* Collaborative Research: NeTS: Small: Reliable Task Offloading in Mobile Autonomous Systems Through Semantic MU-MIMO Control
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Francesco Restuccia, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2024
* USD 264,966.00

Mobile autonomous systems (MASs) such as self-driving vehicles and drones have a
pivotal role in critical applications such as urban mobility, precision
agriculture and remote surveillance. To achieve their tasks, MASs increasingly
rely on high-throughput low-latency streaming of computer vision tasks (e.g.,
object detection) to edge servers. However, ephemeral environmental factors such
as blockages, congestion and fading may erratically interrupt the flow of tasks
to the edge servers. Existing work has addressed computation and communication
issues of task offloading by MASs separately, which necessarily leads to
suboptimal solutions. Task accuracy, indeed, is inevitably tied to the quality
of the multimedia data being sent to the edge, which in turns depends on the
adopted wireless strategy. However, the wireless parameters being used depend on
the quality of data being sent (the more compression, the higher the latency),
which ultimately impacts the desired task accuracy. Thus, to achieve
applications that are â€œresilient-by-design" without compromising task accuracy,
the semantics of the multimedia data must be holistically and fundamentally
intertwined with real-time optimization of wireless transmissions. The core
advance of this project is the design and experimental evaluation of
fundamentally novel techniques for hardware-based semantic-driven joint
optimization of multimedia compression strategies and MU-MIMO transmissions in
the context of resource-limited wireless systems. The PIs will leverage the
support of this project to involve minority and underrepresented students in
research and outreach activities. As part of the project, graduate students will
develop unique expertise at the crossroads of machine learning, embedded systems
and wireless networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technical efforts of this
project will focus on the design of novel deep reinforcement learning
(DRL)-based strategies that will control how the acquired data stream is
compressed and wirelessly transmitted to the edge servers through MU-MIMO. The
PIs will utilize techniques based on split computing to avoid increasing
computational overhead due to the compression and MU-MIMO channel state
information (CSI) feedback, while keeping the task accuracy close to the
original. A full-fledged drone-based prototype based on customized software-
defined radio (SDR) interfaces based on FPGA real-time processing and edge
computing will be developed as part of the project. Large-scale data collection
campaigns will be performed with a 64-antenna SDR testbed at Northeastern, a
drone experimental testbed at UC Irvine, and the AERPAW PAWR platform to (i)
collect the necessary wireless/multimedia data to train our algorithms; (ii)
perform extensive testing and performance evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.