* 2134107
* RTG: Networks: Foundations in Probability, Optimization, and Data Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2027
* Vladas Pipiras, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 04/30/2027
* USD 904,160.00

This research training group (RTG) project will develop a comprehensive training
and mentoring program for undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral
associates, centered around the theme of theory and applications of networks.
Faculty team members bring a broad range of expertise to this effort, including
stochastic analysis, random discrete structures, discrete and continuous
optimization, time series and mathematical statistics, and machine learning. The
training of undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs will contribute to
the readying of the workforce in academia and industry in this high-demand
field. The engagement of undergraduates in research will form pathways for these
students to pursue graduate studies and careers in research. Educational
materials and mentoring mechanisms developed as part of RTG activities will have
impact on the overall curriculum and training practices in the department as
well as on the pan-campus data science initiative. The research intersects with
many other fields, such as engineering, social sciences, business, biological
and medical sciences, epidemiology, and ecology, and is expected to have impact
in these disciplines. Research from the RTG activity will be widely disseminated
through posters, meetings, workshops, colloquia, conference proceedings and
journal articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two key initiatives enabled through this
effort are: (1) a set of ten three-week minicourses, taught by international
leaders in the field, designed for graduate students and other trainees, which
will be broadly disseminated to the community in network science; (2) a weekly
ideas seminar that will serve as a central platform to bring undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoc trainees together with faculty mentors, and which will
serve as a launching pad for undergraduate research projects as well as for
identifying topics for Ph.D. dissertations and postdoctoral research. This
platform will also provide valuable undergraduate research mentoring
opportunities for graduate students and postdocs, and its activities will be
instrumental in developing presentation and technical writing abilities of
trainees at all levels. Other planned initiatives include (a) a summer boot-camp
for incoming graduate trainees; (b) a first year graduate course on research
directions in networks that brings together elements of a seminar and an
independent reading course; (c) a freshman seminar and a capstone course in
networks to form a well-structured pathway for undergraduates, from the freshman
year to the senior year, to engage in meaningful and sustained research
activity; and (d) a data science lab for organizing undergraduate research
activities. The research themes of this RTG will span a broad range of topics,
including: development of foundational large network asymptotics using tools
from stochastic analysis, percolation theory, and large deviations theory;
algorithmic approaches to detection and reconstruction, resource allocation, and
computational questions on networks, using tools from applied probability and
optimization theory; and approaches to estimation and learning questions using
tools from statistics and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.