* 2134465
* Manufacturing Multi-Material Nanostructures Using Supercritical CO2-Assisted Spray Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Dorrin Jarrahbashi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 01/31/2025
* USD 444,710.00

This grant supports research that contributes new knowledge in manufacturing of
nanostructured surfaces, promoting both the U.S. progress in manufacturing
science and technology and advancing national prosperity. Nanostructured
surfaces, often fabricated by depositing and patterning nanomaterials on desired
substrates, are essential to provide functionalities such as structural,
electrical, thermal, magnetic, optical, and audio in many devices. There are
many manufacturing techniques to fabricate nanostructured surfaces. However,
almost all these techniques require costly multi-step processes to prepare both
nanomaterials and surfaces, could use hazardous solvents and are limited in the
choice of materials. If multiple functionalities are required in a single
application, these techniques are often incapable of depositing multiple types
of materials at once on a single substrate. This grant supports fundamental
research to provide needed knowledge for the development of a spray-deposition
manufacturing process that enables scalable and high-precision manufacturing of
multifunctional nanostructured surfaces with multiple materials without the need
for costly preparations or use of hazardous solvents. This research enables
manufacturing of structural multifunctional nanostructured surfaces with sizes
ranging from micrometer to centimeter at large scale and reduced final costs
with applications in functional coatings, wearable electronics, smart textiles
and paints, and electronic devices. The results from this research will equip
multiple U.S. industries with a new scalable manufacturing technique and thus
benefit the U.S. economy and society with increased domestic job opportunities
and more public access to smart technology. This research is an
interdisciplinary effort that involves processing and manufacturing science,
mechanics, materials science, and chemistry and trains the next generation of
highly skilled engineers and scientists for the U.S. workforce. In addition,
this research will provide unique research opportunities for women,
underrepresented minority groups, and veteran students in STEM fields. The
research findings will contribute to the education of K-12 students through
training high-school teachers on nanomaterials and nanostructure manufacturing
and help them integrate these concepts into their educational
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supercritical CO2-assisted spray-deposition
manufacturing process can generate precisely patterned three-dimensional multi-
material nanostructures by composing different nanomaterials patterns. This
research will overcome several limitations existing in fabrication of
nanostructured surfaces such as slow and costly treatment of the
particles/substrates/solvent, use of external stimuli, narrow selection of
materials due to compatibility of nanomaterials and solvent, and small build
areas. This project intends to overcome these barriers by generating new
knowledge on the development of nanomaterial patterns that form surface
nanostructures controlled by intermolecular forces. This research will resolve
the evolution of intermolecular force balance between nanomaterials and solid-
liquid-gas interfaces in evaporating droplets and elucidate the effect of
amphiphilicity and droplet properties on these forces. The research combines
experimental characterization with density functional theory and molecular
dynamics simulations to map specific intermolecular forces to nanomaterial
patterns and the resultant nanostructures. This knowledge establishes Force-
Pattern-Microstructure-Property relationship to transform the researched method
into a viable material-agnostic manufacturing technique for fabrication of next
generation of structural multifunctional components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.