* 2134832
* NSF Convergence Accelerator- Track C: QuSTEAM: Convergent undergraduate education in Quantum Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and Mathematics
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* David Awschalom, Ohio State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pradeep Fulay
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,989,414.00

The NSF Convergence Accelerator program supports use-inspired, team-based,
multidisciplinary efforts that address challenges of national importance and
will produce deliverables of value to society in the near future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop QuSTEAM
(Quantum Information Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts
and&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics), a transformational undergraduate curriculum that
will provide a national educational&lt;br/&gt;model for the emerging field of
quantum information science and engineering
(QISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is in development of a QuSTEAM curricular structure using evidenced-based
research to determine&lt;br/&gt;the scientific and engineering practices that
will be required of the future quantum smart workforce. Our&lt;br/&gt;curriculum
will serve as a national standard for QISE education. This new curricular
structure will be&lt;br/&gt;designed from the ground up to address structural
barriers that have to date limited the diversity and&lt;br/&gt;inclusiveness of
STEM training and will include concurrent training in the societal impact of
QISE&lt;br/&gt;technologies by incorporating content beyond traditional STEM
disciplines. The key outputs of our&lt;br/&gt;research will be: (i) A schematic
of interdisciplinary modules that details how the building blocks
of&lt;br/&gt;QISE-competency can be organized for different educational targets
(module, class, minor, and&lt;br/&gt;certificate). (ii) A map of steps taken to
actively promote equity and inclusivity in the curriculum that
will&lt;br/&gt;serve as a model for future curricular development. (iii)
Individual course curricula that demonstrate the&lt;br/&gt;implementation of
QuSTEAM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of this project
will be in creation of a quantum smart workforce will have a transformative
effect on the US economy and society. The QuSTEAM curriculum, and the
methodology used in developing it, will be made publicly available to serve as a
template for the development of convergent curricula in other
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.