* 2134037
* Bridging Statistical Hypothesis Tests and Deep Learning for Reliability and Computational Efficiency
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Mark Davenport, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 12/31/2024
* USD 733,779.00

This project aims to bridge two fundamental areas — statistical hypothesis
testing and deep learning — through developing reliable machine learning and
computationally efficient modern hypothesis tests. The benefit of such a bridge
goes both ways: on the one hand, it will enable the leveraging of deep learning
to develop efficient and powerful testing tools for high-dimensional and complex
data; on the other hand, it supports the use of testing methodologies to develop
principled validation tools for machine learning models and provide a
theoretical foundation of deep models themselves. The work will address critical
challenges in making deep learning-based algorithms applicable and trustworthy
for making discoveries from data, akin to the role that hypothesis testing has
played in the past decades. The investigators will provide research
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students and develop pedagogical
materials for graduate-level and undergraduate-level courses on machine learning
and data science. The theoretical and computational outcomes of the project are
expected to benefit research and development in industry, government, and
national labs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research project targets fundamental
challenges in the cutting-edge research areas of statistical hypothesis tests.
The topics include robust hypothesis tests, non-parametric tests (high-
dimensional setting), goodness-of-fit tests, sequential tests (including
sequential change-point detection), and tests for non-identically-independently-
districtbuted (i.i.d.) data. The research plan consists of four highly
integrated thrusts: (1) Develop deep learning-based robust hypothesis tests,
provide performance guarantees, and develop efficient computational methods to
leverage modern optimization. (2) Develop deep-learning-based non-parametric
two-sample tests that exploit low-dimensional structure in data. (3) Develop
model diagnosis tools for deep learning models such as goodness-of-fit tests.
(4) Develop learning-based hypothesis tests for sequential and observational
data (non-i.i.d.). The answers to the questions under study will also benefit
several closely related areas, including robust machine learning and domain
adaptation. The research is expected to result in powerful tools for a wide
range of applications and advance knowledge in other scientific and engineering
domains such as single-cell RNA sequencing data analysis, monitoring critical
national infrastructures such as power grids and networks, smart logistic
networks, and disease outbreak detection. The research components will be
tightly integrated with educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.