* 2134956
* EAGER: Dryad BRIDGE: Building Repository Interconnections with Dryad Guidance and Extensions
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2021,01/31/2024
* Mark Musen, METADATA GAME CHANGERS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 01/31/2024
* USD 299,940.00

This project will explore methods to increase the quality of data publication in
a large multidisciplinary repository (Dryad) using techniques that can be
broadly deployed in many scientific communities. The project will be undertaken
by a metadata consulting firm in collaboration with Stanford University, and the
Dryad repository. The quality of metadata associated with datasets is
fundamental to the success of open science. Datasets with poor quality metadata
are far less likely to be discovered or usefully described for open science
purposes of reproducibility of results and generation of new research findings.
Scalable methods for improving the quality of metadata for datasets will be
extremely advantageous for open science purposes broadly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three broad technical goals, as follows.
First, the project team will work with Dryad sub-disciplinary communities in
Earth and Earth Sciences to develop enhanced metadata templates that better
characterize datasets beyond the minimally required metadata fields. Second, the
project team will assess and enhance metadata in Dryad by developing
connectivity metadata metrics and baselines in consultation with Dryad user
groups, integrating missing funder metadata into records, and attempting to
apply the enhanced metadata templates to records. Third, the project team will
apply both the enhanced metadata templates and enhanced metadata records
produced to approximately 40K records in Dryad to identify potential connections
to other repositories and service providers (especially with the EarthCube
Council of Data Facilities repositories) and interlinkages with articles and
funders to further enhance the quality of the metadata in Dryad as a proof of
concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.