* 2134796
* Concealing Infectious Disease
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Joshua Ackerman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2025
* USD 525,000.00

Sickness is a common experience, yet people do not always tell others when they
are sick with an infectious illness. Failing to disclose, or actively hiding,
illness presents clear risks to individual, public, and even organizational
health. For instance, pre-pandemic surveys indicate that up to 90% of U.S.
employees still go to the workplace when sick, and productivity losses from the
common cold alone are estimated at close to $25 billion annually. To help better
understand decisions to conceal infectious disease, this project addresses two
main themes: (1) What individual and social factors are associated with the
concealment of sickness? For example, is concealing illness more common in
specific types of relationships or by people with certain personality traits?
Does it depend on whether the illness is particularly dangerous or not? (2) What
are the psychological consequences of making this decision? For example, does
the mental effort involved in concealing sickness interfere with people’s
thinking and problem-solving abilities, does it impair their social
relationships, and does it trigger feelings of guilt and shame that might
contribute to antisocial tendencies?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To test these
questions, one set of descriptive studies measures how often people hide
sickness and what motivates those decisions depending on who is being concealed
from (friends, coworkers, strangers) and features of the illness being concealed
(transmission risk, harm severity, illness longevity). In a second set of
experiments, study participants are enrolled when they report actually becoming
sick with an infectious illness. The focus here is whether concealing one’s
illness causes changes in cognitive functioning (intrusive thoughts, performance
under stress), social relationships (feeling connected to and valuing others),
and moral judgment (self-identification of dishonesty, guilt/shame). Finally,
psychological processes associated with infection concealment are compared
against processes associated with concealment of non-infectious conditions, such
as stigmatized identities and secrets, to help determine whether concealing
sickness is a unique behavior requiring unique solutions. The project informs
future efforts to mitigate public health challenges associated with the spread
of disease and associated workplace challenges. It also provides a basis for
improving the welfare of infected individuals by advancing knowledge about
perceived barriers to revealing one’s condition and the resulting cognitive and
affective impact when one does not reveal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.