* 2134935
* RECODE: Using light and mechanics to monitor and control the differentiation of lung alveolar organoids
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Celeste Nelson, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Cells can be coaxed into forming organ-like structures outside of the body.
These “organoids” would help scientists study organ development, function, and
disease. Organoids often fail to form in a reproducible manner, currently
limiting their utility. This project will invent new approaches to reliably
build organoids that mimic the lung. The investigators will track and control
organoid formation using light and mechanical forces. The project will introduce
high school and college students from underrepresented communities to scientific
research. The project will also share its approaches by building an
international symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The minimal functional unit of
the lung is the alveolus, which is comprised of alveolar epithelial type I (AT1)
cells interspersed with type II (AT2) cells, surrounded by a meshwork of
myofibroblasts that helps maintain 3D structure. The ability to reproducibly
generate organoids that mimic the alveoli of the lung would have immense promise
for studies aimed at understanding tissue function, the fundamental processes of
respiratory infection, and the biomechanics of tissue structures during health
and disease. Unfortunately, current protocols to generate alveolar organoids
fail to reproduce native tissue structure. This RECODE project will uncover the
rules necessary to differentiate alveolar progenitor cells into precise ratios
of AT1:AT2 cells, and the contractile signaling that permits myofibroblasts to
fold the epithelium into an alveolus. This transformational goal will be
accomplished via a highly innovative combination of expertise from quantitative
developmental biology, mechanobiology, biomaterials, computational modeling, and
synthetic biology, which will be used to identify the spatiotemporal dynamics
that governs alveolar differentiation and morphogenesis. The proposed research
is divided into three main conceptual advances. Aim 1 focuses on using real-time
fluorescent reporters, mathematical modeling, and optogenetics approaches to
define the biochemical signaling dynamics necessary for specifying bipotent
progenitors into AT2 cells. Aim 2 takes advantage of synthetic materials, real-
time reporters, and optogenetics to uncover the mechanical signaling necessary
for specifying bipotent progenitors into AT1 cells. Aim 3 combines computational
modeling, 3D printing, and optogenetics to uncover and reproduce the patterns of
contraction used by myofibroblasts to fold the epithelium into the alveolus.
Altogether, this work will identify the design rules required to construct
organoids that reproducibly differentiate into tissue structures that mimic
alveoli within the lung.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE award is co-funded by
the Systems and Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, the Developmental Systems Cluster in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster
in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.