* 2134912
* RESEARCH-PGR: Impact of Transposable Element Bursts on the Rice Genome and Epigenome
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Susan Wessler, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,300,000.00

Mechanisms that diversify genomes, at both the sequence and epigenetic levels,
underlie phenotypic variation. With accelerated climate change, it is essential
that mechanisms diversifying crop genomes be understood and applied to feed
future generations. Most plant and animal genomes are derived from transposable
elements (TEs), mobile fragments of DNA that often increase in copy number as
they transpose from one genomic locus to another. The ability of TEs to insert
near genes and alter their regulation and to promote genomic rearrangements and
epigenetic changes has recently been recognized as a significant contributor to
adaptive evolution. Stated simply, TEs can shake up otherwise (structurally)
conservative genomes. This project exploits long read DNA sequencing technology
and single cell epigenetic analyses to reveal how the rapidly amplifying TE
called mPing alters, in real time, the rice genome, while avoiding host
(epigenetic) silencing and mutagenic insertions. With respect to broader
impacts, this project also addresses a crisis in the agricultural workforce,
which is the oldest and least diverse among the sciences, by introducing
undergraduates at a Hispanic Serving Institution to the excitement of plant
genomics through authentic research experiences for up to 2000 incoming
students/year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals of this project are two-
fold. The first is to understand the totality of structural genomic variation
generated in three recombinant inbred (RI) populations by the massive
amplification of the rice TE family Ping/mPing. Based on prior results, it is
anticipated that at least 50,000 additional mPing insertion sites [with ~15% in
accessible chromatin regions (ACRs)] and numerous structural variants (SVs)
including copy number and presence absence variants and inversions will be
identified. The second goal is to determine the consequences of a subset of
these lesions on epigenetic regulation and reproductive isolation by generating
a rice single cell cis-regulatory atlas and assessing the impact of mPing
inserts in targeted RI lines. While the vast majority of the ~50,000 de novo
mPing insertions may be neutral or eliminated by selection over evolutionary
time, in the short term they will provide an invaluable tool to evaluate the
function of ACRs more quickly and for far less cost than any other method
currently available. Results of this project will reveal the potential of rapid
TE amplification to reshape the epigenome, lead to reproductive isolation, and,
for SVs, to rapidly generate the genomic variation that underlies pangenomes.
All data generated by this project will be made available through deposition at
established long-term sequence repositories such as the NCBI Short Read Archive
(SRA) and Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.