* 2134436
* 2021 NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure PI Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Jennifer Leasure, The Quilt
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 11,326.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2021 Campus
Cyberinfrastructure Workshop builds upon the success of the previous Campus
Cyberinfrastructure Workshops providing an opportunity for recipients of all
active NSF Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*) awards to meet in-person, exchange
project findings, interact with national cyberinfrastructure experts and
collaborate across project areas and project regions. Due to the on-going
pandemic, the 2021 PI workshop will be conducted virtually. The advantage of
conducting a virtual workshop is the flexibility of the virtual environment for
broader participation of additional CC* award project collaborators such as co-
PIs, researchers, and other campus representatives to participate in workshop
conversations without the additional time demands and travel expenses for
participation. The workshop program will encourage interactions among the PIs
with the broader R&amp;E community through invited participation of
cyberinfrastructure experts and representatives from regional and national
networks. As demonstrated before, the broader scope encourages relationships
between campus cyberinfrastructure, science driven applications, and regional
and national cyberinfrastructure resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project is the interaction between national
cyberinfrastructure experts, exchange of project findings and collaboration
across project areas and regions, all of which will lead to the new ideas,
relationships, and collaborations associated with a focused workshop. The
workshop breakout sessions will provide the opportunity for program PIs and co-
PIs to gain exposure to other cyberinfrastructure technologies or resources. The
workshop furthers the development of cross-discipline, regional, and national
collaborations on cyberinfrastructure to support science research and education
applications. By including awardees from all areas of the CC* programs, the
workshop facilitates interaction and collaboration between research intensive
and under-resourced colleges and universities, as well as different
cyberinfrastructure program areas, in ways that would not otherwise
occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.