* 2134795
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track D:  A Community Resource for Innovation in Polymer Technology (CRIPT)
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kenneth Kroenlein, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Mike Pozmantier
* 09/30/2023
* USD 5,000,000.00

Polymer materials, ranging from clothing and personal protective equipment to
construction materials and food packaging, are fundamental to providing for our
basic needs for food, shelter, health, and transportation. However, developing
new polymers for next-generation products takes decades, and we must move faster
to remain competitive. To accelerate this process, this project is developing
CRIPT, a polymer data ecosystem consisting of a web-based application and cloud
database that allow polymer scientists to easily find, archive, and interact
with complex polymer data. AI-driven chemistry tools and data-driven workflows
within CRIPT will reduce the development time for polymer materials by an order
of magnitude, creating a transformative impact on both the producers and buyers
of the nearly $600 billion of polymers sold each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, searching among existing polymers is a
daunting task because polymer data exists as small, disparate sets, making the
navigation a complex process combining the harmonization of different data
formats and the reconciliation of metadata, both of which currently require
expert intervention. CRIPT offers a cloud database based on a new polymer-
specific data model that simultaneously provides interoperability across
different domains of polymer science and engineering, while retaining critical
metadata that allows domain experts to correlate information across many
independent records. A series of chemically-inspired AI innovations, including a
chemistry-based query language, a graph-based schema preserving temporal
structure in data, algorithms for automatic data validation, AI-human
cooperative tools for data ingestion, and the integration of machines into the
data ecosystem are also provided to add FAIR principles, trust in data, and ease
of use to the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.