* 2134548
* I-Corps: Software-Defined Overlay Virtual Private Network for Edge Computing
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Renato Figueiredo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable and
support the emerging class of Internet-of-Things (IoT) applications by
delivering a scalable, self-organizing, self-healing, virtual private network
connecting devices spanning from the cloud to the network's edge. Edge computing
encompasses a growing set of technologies that enable data storage and
processing within geographic proximity of sensors and IoT devices. This
technology provides a foundation of low-latency response times and high-
throughput data access for a wide range of emerging applications, such as smart
cities, manufacturing, defense, remote sensing/monitoring/analytics,
advertising, and entertainment. Specifically, this project will advance
technologies that have the potential to lower the cost of development,
deployment, and management of edge computing applications by enabling existing
applications to communicate without modifications, across a geographically
dispersed set of heterogeneous edge computing resources residing on multiple
providers. These capabilities are envisioned to be of direct benefit to system
integrators and/or application developers who build products that can
incorporate and utilize the service as part of their respective
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project pursues commercialization
of a network virtualization technology for edge computing that builds on the
research and development of a self-managing and self-organizing software-defined
overlay network. The system assembles its base abstraction (a data-plane of
Internet tunnels organized as a structured peer-to-peer overlay topology) and
then autonomously routes virtual network traffic in a manner that is transparent
to applications. Its decentralized approach has been shown to be flexible,
scalable, and resilient to failures. Internet-of-Things (IoT) class applications
or cyber-physical solutions exhibit workflows that depend heavily on Internet
Protocol (IP) based communications among devices and applications that are
distributed across multiple geographic sites. These environments will typically
incorporate large numbers of heterogeneous devices that have complex, evolving
network configurations that are challenging and error-prone to manually
administer - challenges which are directly addressed by this project at the
network layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.