* 2134955
* RECODE-ing the Logic of Ectodermal Organoid Patterning via Combinatorial Morphogen Treatments and Longitudinal Monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Alex Pollen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,500,000.00

Brain organoids are living models of the human brain derived from stem cells.
Organoids are also promising tools for understanding how the brain develops and
studying neurological disorders. They may also be used for discovering new drugs
and developing therapies. However, organoids are difficult to produce at large
scales. This project aims to improve production of complex brain organoids by
creating a map of differentiation and engineering a “location tracker” of an
organoid's current state. Based on these tools, strategies to route
differentiation to a desired organoid type will be developed. The approaches
developed in this project can be used for broadening participation in STEM,
allowing student to perform remote experiments following organoid
differentiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project is based on the
premise that quantitative knowledge of differentiation trajectories combined
with active sensing will support the reproducible, generalizable, and self-
correcting production of brain organoids. To systematically record organoid cell
types and composition during differentiation, gene expression in single cells
across a range of organoid protocols will be measured, enabled by multiple types
of cellular barcodes. These trajectories will be compared to the development of
diverse brain regions in vivo. Improved life support systems, enabled by
automation and microfluidics, will be developed to support scalability. Non-
sacrificial molecular and imaging based methods will be utilized to
longitudinally track organoid states during differentiation and to supply
missing trophic and patterning factors. The results of this project will support
novel strategies for robust and reproducible organoid generation for disease
models and regenerative medicine. Finally, by enabling remote experimentation
the methods developed in this study support inclusion of diverse communities in
the scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.