* 2134667
* FMRG: Manufacturing USA: Cyber: Privacy-Preserving Tiny Machine Learning Edge Analytics to Enable  AI-Commons for Secure Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Elisa Bertino, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,999,999.00

Current manufacturing systems based on a global supply chain work well,
producing high-volume products at low cost. However, they are fragile to
perturbations (e.g., COVID-19) and even processes that are essential to success,
such as new product development and manufacturing ramp-up and optimization, can
be prohibitively lengthy and expensive. Artificial Intelligence (AI) has
revolutionized many industries and can be an important tool to improve the
productivity and agility of manufacturing, but progress has been slow in
manufacturing. This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) Manufacturing
USA: CyberManufacturing project is a fundamental reimagination of distributed
AI/ML techniques to transform the future of manufacturing by establishing an AI-
Commons that bridges multiple sites and companies using secure, distributed
machine learning (ML), incentivized information sharing, and continuous quality
improvement and training. This addresses a critical shortcoming of the current
approach to AI in manufacturing; the limitation of training data to in-company
data. Since AI algorithms increase in power with more data, secure data sharing
and aggregation has the potential to provide vastly better AI solutions to all
manufacturers. The project will also research the edge computation hardware
needed to execute the resulting algorithms on the factory floor. The team will
work closely with Ivy Tech Community College and the Vertically Integrated
Projects program, which helps students from Purdue, Harvard, and Tuskegee
University work on industry-defined manufacturing AI projects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projectâ€™s goal will be achieved by fulfilling the
following four objectives: (1) Co-optimization of Tiny Machine Learning (TinyML)
hardware and software for manufacturing; (2) Design of privacy and
confidentiality policies for an AI-Commons that encourages and incentivizes
knowledge sharing; (3) Demonstration of data aggregation and predictive
technical cost modeling for some foundational manufacturing processes; and (4)
Introduction of AI in manufacturing curricula and integration with workforce
development. A key focus is on AI system deployment to obtain necessary data for
optimization of ML algorithms for common manufacturing processes in
pharmaceutical, food processing, job shop machining, and hybrid composite
materials. The project team has developed a strong partnership with small and
large manufacturers in the Wabash Heartland Innovation Network (WHIN) region in
Indiana. TinyML devices will be deployed throughout this region, where the
sharing of data and AI could improve operations
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Civil. Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation, the Division of
Computer and Network Systems, the Division of Engineering Education and Centers
and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Social,
Behavioral and Economic Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.