* 2134910
* Collaborative Research: Process and consequences of social partner choice revealed by      multilayer network analysis
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2026
* Elizabeth Tibbetts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 04/30/2026
* USD 607,076.00

Many animals live in cooperative groups with social partners. The success of
social animals is influenced by both an animal’s own characteristics and by the
characteristics of its social partners. A fundamental goal of behavioral biology
is to understand how animals choose partners and determine the impact of these
partner choices on cooperative behavior and future success. Before forming
groups, animals interact with potential social partners in multiple situations
involving both cooperative and competitive interactions. This research will
develop a novel framework to understand how animals integrate interactions in
multiple social situations to make partner choices. It will further test how
differences in partner choice decisions influence individual and group success.
Uncovering how animals choose partners and form long lasting bonds will advance
our understanding of how sociality has evolved and why it persists. Science
education will be an important component of this project, including research
opportunities for students, developing science mentorship programs for middle
school girls from groups who are underrepresented in the sciences, and teaching
network science to high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
will take advantage of recent advances in automated animal tracking and social
network analysis to assess the causes and consequences of partner choice
decisions. Partner choice will be analyzed in nest-founding queen paper wasps,
Polistes fuscatus. Polistes go through a period of partner ‘shopping’, during
which wasps form and dissolve many short-term social relationships before
settling down to nest in stable cooperative groups. First, the research will
test how different types of interactions during the shopping period mediate
partner choice decisions and how the process of partner choice differs across
individuals. Second, the research will examine how costs influence the process
and outcome of partner choice. Third, the research will assess the selective
benefits of partner choice by comparing social dynamics and success of groups
with different composition. By integrating proximate and ultimate examinations
of partner choice, studying fine-scale behavioral mechanisms, and long-term
fitness consequence, our proposed work will provide a powerful model to test
fundamental processes of social evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.