* 2134603
* FMSG: Bio: Microbial Foundry for Distributed Manufacturing of mRNA-Containing Biomaterials
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* George Chiu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 512,200.00

This proposal will develop new microbrewery-like distributed manufacturing
strategies for biomaterials containing messenger RNA or mRNA. There is a
critical need for reliable manufacturing, storage, and distribution of mRNA-
containing materials. For example, the current worldwide shortage of mRNA
vaccines for COVID-19 is caused not only by a need for a cold chain, but also by
centralized manufacturing and distribution. Since mRNA is fragile, it often
requires lipid nanoparticle protection and can only be preserved at ultralow
temperatures. In this context, DNA origami, a self-assembly method that relies
on oligonucleotide sequence complementarity, can be developed into thermally
stable drug carriers with the potential to carry mRNA. In this project, the
investigators will use yeast to produce large volumes of mRNA and oligo DNA
sequences with accuracy and scalability. The resulting single-stranded DNA will
self-assemble into origami nanostructures based on in silico designs, which will
cage a targeted mRNA that is natively made with all needed chemical
modifications. The DNA origami cage will allow for the purification and harvest
of mRNA. The DNA architectures will be programmed for on-demand mRNA release and
3D printed into a hydrogel formulation for stable storage and administration.
The proposed research will also be complemented by an educational and workforce
development program. The proposed activities will develop hands-on and
accompanied instruction-based learning contents to prepare the future workforce
for biomanufacturing sectors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the
research is to create a transformative biomanufacturing platform, where
organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae or S. cerevisiae are programmed to
produce industrial-scale, custom-designed nucleic acids needed for DNA-caged
mRNA biomaterials at decentralized locations. The research objectives include:
(1) a mechanistic understanding of microbial processes to establish a scalable
foundry for mRNA and oligonucleotide DNA; (2) the development of general
principles for programmable environmentally responsive DNA origami cages; (3)
streamlined manufacturing processes where bioreactors and thermal cyclers are
integrated with 3D printers for drug formulations; and (4) the efficacy of the
manufactured mRNA-containing materials. The fundamental knowledge from the
proposed study could transform two critical industries, nucleic acid synthesis
and therapeutic biomaterials. This Future Manufacturing award was supported by
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.