* 2134864
* Terrestrial Organics since The Oligocene (TOTO): The Rains Down in Africa
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2024
* Kevin Uno, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 613,617.00

Terrestrial Organics since The Oligocene (TOTO): The Rains Down in
Africa&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today, nearly 100 million people depend on the lands
in the Sahel region, which is highly sensitive to flooding, droughts, and
wildfires, putting food and other resources at risk. Africa is also rich in
human evolutionary history, including early human fossil sites, evidence for
multiple dispersals out of Africa, and the earliest stone tool innovations.
Despite the region’s importance for understanding climate change and human
evolution, there is a lack of understanding of tropical Africa over long
intervals. To that end, the investigators will generate new West African records
of rain, vegetation, and fire over the last 25 million years to study changes in
the Sahel ecosystem, which runs east-west across Africa south of the Sahara
desert, and to quantify the effects of natural cycles in Earth’s orbit and long-
term changes in global and regional conditions on ecosystem change and human
evolution. The investigators will convene a new African Climate Conference to
facilitate knowledge sharing, networking events, and laboratory tours at Lamont
to directly combat the long history of the exclusion of African researchers in
Western science by forming deep, lasting
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tropics comprise half of Earth’s
surface, serve as the global hydrological pump, and contain the world’s largest
potential source of methane, yet there is a dearth of data and understanding of
tropical climate over the Cenozoic. Tropical Africa, in particular, has been
historically under-studied, despite its importance for understanding human
evolution, tropical hydroclimate, and terrestrial ecosystem responses to climate
change. Projections of future climate scenarios require quantification of past
climatic responses to orbital forcings and boundary conditions (i.e., regional
albedo, ice volume, global temperature). The investigators will generate new
long-term and high-resolution precipitation, vegetation, and fire
reconstructions using biomarkers preserved in a marine sediment core that
capture the last 25 million years of tropical West African climate. Statistical
and time series analyses will evaluate the amplitudes, periodicities, means, and
relationships between hydroclimate, ecosystem, and fire proxies through time to
decipher the differences in the amplitude of variability in the study windows to
characterize sensitivity in the context of various boundary conditions. This
project will provide crucial environmental context for the evolution of our
earliest ancestors and will inform models of future terrestrial responses to
global warming in this highly sensitive region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.