* 2134643
* FMSG: Eco: Integration and Recycling of High Quality Ceramics and Composites Enabled by Scalable Cold Sintering Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Enrique Gomez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Cold sintering is an emerging technology that enables processing of ceramics and
composite materials at temperatures around 100 degrees Celsius, compared to
traditional processes typically requiring longer times at kiln temperatures
around 1000 degrees. This inherent energy reduction in processing enables
unprecedented integration of materials to create new composites. The integration
of organic and inorganic materials also provides a unique opportunity for the
reuse of composites, thereby enhancing sustainability through both waste
reduction and energy savings. The U.S. has established research leadership in
cold sintering over the past decade. The project stands to extend this
leadership into the manufacturing realm by validating a pilot-scale process for
materials used in electrical capacitors. Through a partnership with the American
Ceramic Society and the Pennsylvania Technical Assistance Program (PennTAP), the
team will outline educational workshops to accelerate adoption of cold sintering
by industry researchers. The workshops, focused on bringing students from
vocational schools to Penn State for summer experiences, could serve as a pilot
model for larger efforts focused on integrating vocational schools with
research-intensive universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop
proof-of-concept demonstrations needed for translation of cold sintering to
manufacturing of capacitors. Cold sintering relies on an applied uniaxial
pressure and a transient solvent to reduce the sintering temperature of ceramics
by approximately an order magnitude, down to about 100 degrees Celsius. This
opportunity for co-sintering of polymers and ceramics creates an approach for
the synthesis of re-processable composites. As such, the proposed work will
drive advanced composites towards a circular economy, by demonstrating the
synthesis of reformable composites, and by reducing the energy cost of re-
processing. The specific goals of this project include the development of a
pilot-scale process, the development of acoustic-based characterization tools,
and the optimization of processing conditions to ensure uniformity of cold
sintered composites used in capacitors. Foundational knowledge on process
optimization will be obtained through in-situ techniques, specifically impedance
spectroscopy, post-process nondestructive characterization through acoustic
methods, and integrated data analytic techniques as supported by machine
learning. The optimized processes will benefit a variety of applications where
sintering at reduced temperatures is valuable, including energy storage,
structural materials, thermal management, and electronic devices. Integration of
research, education, and workforce development will be key to advancing cold-
sintering research from the lab to commercial
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET
Division of the Engineering Directorate and the CHE Division of the Mathematics
and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.