* 2134451
* Analysis and Prediction of Magnetospheric Plasma Energy Dynamics with the Wind Driven Magnetospheric-Ionospheric (WINDMI) Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Edmund Spencer, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 247,566.00

This award will provide support for the development of a model of the energy
dynamics of plasma populations in the magnetosphere under various solar wind
driving conditions, focusing in particular on geomagnetic storms and substorms.
The research will achieve a significant insight into how the magnetosphere-
ionosphere system responds to solar wind driving conditions. The new model would
provide valuable information on how the total energy content and energy
transfers among the largest reservoirs within the magnetosphere are to be
understood. This information would be used to establish the possible state of
the magnetosphere prior to and during geomagnetic events. The new model would be
capable of fast and robust predictions that can be compared with results from
more comprehensive magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) or kinetic models. The project
would produce a software implementation of the model as a product to the Space
Weather Prediction Center (SWPC) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) and the Space Physics Community Coordinated Modeling
Center (CCMC) operated by NASA. Space Weather and its effects are assuming major
importance in modern times. The training of students in Electrical Engineering
and Systems Engineering in space weather will increase awareness among
technologists and help them to become more aware of space weather effects. The
scientific methods and model development to be achieved in this project will be
incorporated into otherwise highly theoretical courses for engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new model would be computationally inexpensive to run.
It can be easily ported to a mobile platform and used by space weather
enthusiasts to explore space physics. Undergraduate students, KÂ¬12 students and
the public, will be able to run this model and start to appreciate space science
while getting a powerful glimpse into the tools and methods of the geospace
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.