* 2134986
* RECODE: Synergistic Genetic and Microenvironmental Engineering Platforms For Directed Liver Organoid Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Salman Khetani, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Injury to the liver due to toxic drugs is a leading cause of acute liver
failures. Unfortunately, testing drugs on animals before human clinical trials
is inadequate due to significant differences between animals and humans in liver
function. Therefore, human liver organoids generated from stem cells are being
increasingly utilized to mitigate limitations with animal testing; however,
current organoids are not reproducibly manufactured, and their functions do not
approximate those in the human body. This effort will engineer new cell culture
devices and genetically edit the cells in specific ways to make liver organoids
more reproducible for routine drug testing. The approaches and technologies
developed can be broadly applicable beyond liver to other organ types.
Additionally, underrepresented minority high school and undergraduate students,
as well as high school teachers from underserved districts in Chicago, will be
provided hands-on opportunities to engage in the research topics of this effort,
including novel curriculum development for high schools using the concepts
developed here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE project will synergize advances
in microfabricated cell culture devices, induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)
biology, synthetic biology, single cell transcriptomics, and computational
biology to address a critical question: What are the design rules and underlying
mechanisms that lead to functionally mature and reproducible 3-dimensional
organoids within scalable culture platforms? This effort will utilize iPSC-
derived human liver cells with validation against primary human liver cells and
whole human livers. Specifically, this project will develop an unprecedented
pipeline of microenvironmental engineering, clustered regularly interspaced
short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-Cas transcriptional activation techniques
that can activate introduced and endogenous genes with precise temporal control,
and computational biology approaches that can infer transcriptional factor
activity from single cell RNA sequencing data on liver organoids. The human
liver organoids developed here can be used to develop safer drugs, industrial
chemicals, and vaccines for humans, and for elucidating the underlying
principles of human liver development, physiology, and disease. The
microfluidic, synthetic biology, and computational approaches/platforms
developed here will serve as a broader resource to investigators developing
reproducible organoids for various applications. The research efforts will be
integrated with sustainable hands-on educational efforts aimed at training high
school and undergraduate underrepresented minority students as well as high
school teachers through summer internship programs in the approaches developed
here. Such efforts will introduce cutting-edge research concepts earlier in high
school, thereby preparing students better for a rigorous
engineering/bioengineering curriculum at the college
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This award is co-funded by the Systems and
Synthetic Biology Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
and the Engineering Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.