* 2134765
* SBIR Phase II:  A STEM curriculum platform using augmented reality for real-time collaboration and problem solving
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Amanda Thompson, Explore Interactive, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,020,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to use augmented reality (AR) to activate
rich and measurable STEM experiences such as engineering design projects for any
child anywhere in the world. The market for AR globally and specifically in
education is projected to reach over $200 B and $60 B respectively by 2025 by
growing at 40% annually.Next Generation Science Standards support the premise
that students should be learning the skills of science and engineering by
engaging in work like that of scientists and engineers. According to the US STEM
2026 report, core competencies from effective STEM education will be demanded in
nearly all job sectors and positions. The proposed technology integrates
augmented reality and embedded data collection and analysis for real-time
assessment for STEM projects in a classroom environment. By measuring both
processes and outcomes, this project can better nurture growth mindsets. The
proposed features will reinforce these key pedagogical approaches to promote
STEM learning and prepare students with essential STEM career readiness skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
proposes to integrate augmented reality into the engineering design process
while nurturing higher-level skills essential for workforce success and
measuring key learning processes and skills. The data collection, storage,
reproduction, analyses and algorithm development, while founded in research,
remain sources of technical risk in the field of educational augmented reality.
The proposed system encourages students to acknowledge and reflect on their
emotions and takes an integrated approach to measuring students social and
emotional learning (SEL) during collaborative activities. The research will
determine how and to what extent do these activities support elementary students
to: 1) develop design thinking and collaborative practices; 2) improve social
and emotional skills in collaborative settings; and 3) impact students’ content
knowledge, interest and self-efficacy in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.