* 2134146
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Development of an Energy-Harvesting Real-time Under-ice Monitoring System in the Arctic Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Yaling Yang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2023
* USD 225,000.00

The Arctic is home to some four million people comprising a diverse range of
cultures and an economy worth about $230 billion annually. With global concerns
spanning climate change, energy resources, freshwater supplies, and sustainable
economic growth, the Arctic has sparked intense research and public interest.
International efforts to establish sustained Arctic observing systems,
especially for long-term Arctic Ocean monitoring with near-real-time data
transfer, are urgently needed. The harsh and remote conditions constraining
year-round observation sites present significant logistical challenges and
energy needs for sustained Arctic observations. In addition, monitoring of the
Arctic Ocean using bottom-anchored stationary platforms is limited by a lack of
real-time communication between the sensors deployed and Arctic operators. The
ultimate goal of this project is to develop new energy harvesting and
communication solutions so that it is feasible to have a real-time under-ice
monitoring system in the Arctic Ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project
tests the capacity to address three key challenges, including sustainable power
supply through energy harvesting, near-real-time data communication under the
sea ice, and survivability under harsh environmental conditions. Specifically,
the project aims to develop novel techniques to harvest ultra-low-speed oceanic
current energy using a two-level diffuser augmented turbine and a novel
transverse flux generator. The harvested energy will be used to support sensors
and power a novel real-time communication system through the sea ice. The
proposed communication system adopts a novel antenna design that overcomes
seawater attenuation effects on radio waves and creatively leverages satellite
protocols to ensure the under-ice communication unit can transmit observational
data to satellites. The project also explores techniques to enhance the
survivability of the under-ice monitoring system, such as robust material choice
and ice ridge/keel detection and avoidance systems and extends science and
engineering education among K-12 and PhD-level students in Arctic research with
an emphasis on diversity including female and underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.