* 2134457
* Travel Grant: 240th Electrochemical Society (ECS) Meeting - Biosensors and Nanoscale Measurements Symposium. To be Held in Orlando, Florida October, 10-14, 2021
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2023
* Larry Nagahara, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic not only changed the discourse on how we conduct our lives
and tested the limits of our healthcare system but it also raised important
questions as to how to prepare better for the next pandemic. During the height
of the COVID-19, the lack of rapid detection, the ability to accurately monitor
the spread of the disease, and determine who had already been exposed to the
virus caused a large amount of uncertainty (and anxiety) and demonstrates the
needs for facile, inexpensive, and scalable sensing platforms to help address
the most rudimentary questions being raised by our public health officials. The
objectives of this NSF award are to bring researchers together at all levels
(i.e., students, early career, and senior researchers) from diverse fields to
present and discuss new development and cutting-edge tools related to all
aspects of chemical/biological sensing technology and its translation into
practice. In particular, this NSF award supports students and early career
researchers, who will be exposed in a forum where they can: (1) intermingle with
researchers that have translated their sensor technology along with researchers
who are exposed to the 'real-world' challenges, (2) develop collaborations
across disciplines for new and established researchers in their field, (3)
facilitate networking and career-building opportunities for the early-stage
researchers/students, and (4) enhance participation of women and other
underrepresented groups in this field. A dedicated symposium entitled,
"Biosensors and Nanoscale Measurements" will span four days (October 11-14,
2021) at the 240th Electrochemical Society (ECS) Meeting in Orlando,
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of "Biosensors and Nanoscale
Measurements" symposium at the 240th ECS Meeting is to provide a venue for
students, junior, and senior researchers to exchange scientific ideas, present
cutting-edge research, and expose participants to a diverse array of
chemical/biosensing topics with pragmatic factors and understanding
implementation challenges to deploying emerging technologies for end-users.
Emerging technologies for sensing will enable the next-generation of cyber-
physical systems (CPS) for improved personalized health monitoring, with real-
time sensing and learning, as well as interoperability for a more comprehensive
network coverage and to better prepare us for the next crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic illustrated the need for timely translation and more importantly
understanding 'real-world' needs, integration, adoption, and implementation of
any sensor technology is as critical than simply understanding a transduction
mechanism or characterization of a sensor platform in a purified environment.
The Symposium will be attended by both prominent and early career
researchers/trainees in sensors and nanoscale measurements from around the
world, who will be discussing present and future directions of research,
research challenges and its implementation to real-world applications. The
Symposium greatly benefits every participant due to the interdisciplinary nature
of chemical/biosensing and will foster cross-fertilization of ideas among these
diverse group of researchers. Moreover, this NSF award increases participation
of young scientists and engineers, who would not otherwise be able to afford to
travel to the meeting and contribute, to build their careers by interacting in
person with colleagues, including more senior researchers. The demand for sensor
technology to determine and monitor the effects on human health is critically
important and diverse thinking is needed to accelerate the revolution that will
take place to meet the challenges of the next pandemic and in advancing the
field for the betterment of other societal needs (e.g., climate change, food
infrastructure, overall health/wellbeing, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.