* 2134409
* FMRG: Cyber: Cyber-Coordinated Analytical Framework for Multi-stage Distributed Future Manufacturing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2025
* Giulia Pedrielli, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 10/31/2025
* USD 2,373,085.00

A manufactured product is the end of a long chain of interwoven manufacturing
steps that may span geography, industries, and manufacturing processes. Each
step may be optimized, yet for a step there may be uncertainty about the larger
context of its contribution that if known during production would allow for
greater efficiencies, better quality, and improved productivity. If a global
system analysis and optimization could, in addition, be conducted cooperatively
with each step during production, the end product and overall production would
greatly benefit. Advances in hybrid distributed control and optimization, in
highly networked cyber-physical systems, and in artificial intelligence and
machine learning have opened new opportunities in cyber-enabled manufacturing.
This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) CyberManufacturing project
connects and coordinates the ensemble of various manufacturing processes,
operating at different manufacturing stages under a cyber-coordinated close-knit
system, defined by an analytical framework, known as STREAM, a multi-stage
distributed future manufacturing system. This project provides a public online
repository that hosts the STREAM data, models, simulators, controllers,
analytics, and empirical studies, and that facilitates sharing research
experiences about STREAM with the research and industry communities. The project
creates new outreach and workforce development activities for K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as working professionals in the
field of manufacturing. These research results will be included in the
university curriculum for advanced manufacturing, architecture design, machine
learning, simulation, and system control and optimization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an interdisciplinary research project with
three interconnected research tasks: (1) STREAM architecture design and
implementation. There is a novel bridging middleware architecture to enable
seamless machine interoperability, and software- and hardware-based accelerators
will be built to enable efficient communication and computing in cyber-
manufacturing systems. (2) STREAM modeling and quality control. There is a novel
multi-layer functional graphical model to address the high-dimensional
functional dependencies over STREAM machines and a spatial-temporal iterative
learning control method to achieve an accurate and efficient process quality
control. (3) STREAM simulation and production control. To handle the multi-level
dynamic process interactions in the system that collectively meet process
quality, cost, and resource constraints, there are coordinated, high-fidelity
multi-resolution simulators, assisting with the hybrid control of STREAM
production. These research tasks are validated in an open-source additive
manufacturing testbed for the manufacture of high energy/power density
supercapacitors. The modeling and analysis methodologies form a rigorous basis
for continuous improvement of quality, manufacturability, and productivity of
future multi-stage and distributed manufacturing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Computer and Network Systems (CNS) in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) and the Divisions of Civil.
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and Engineering Education and
Centers (EEC) in the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.