* 2134488
* FMRG: Eco: Process-Structure-Property Relationships of 3D Printed Earth Materials and Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Wil Srubar III, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 2,317,046.00

This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) EcoManufacturing project will
comprehensively characterize optimal mix designs for 3D printed earth materials
and structures, linking microstructural development and soil science with
material and structural property characterization and optimization of 3D
printing methods. Earth materials are an emerging, sustainable alternative to
cementitious materials because of their low embodied carbon, affordability,
safety, and thermal characteristics. By using minimally processed materials and
sourcing raw materials from the construction site, 3D-printed earth structures
could substantially reduce transportation, chemical treatments, excess
manufacturing, warehouse storage, and intermediary storages that are
inextricably intertwined with cementitious materials. Using a range of bacterial
and biopolymer binding agents, as well as bio-based fibers and nano-fibers
reinforcing additives, this project will characterize printable mixtures of
earth- and bio-based building materials—modernized versions of ancient
technologies—as a critical step for climate-friendly digital manufacturing of
the built environment. In addition to creating new scientific knowledge for
additive manufacturing using nonconventional materials, this project supports
education and diversity by developing a graduate earth-based technology course
and an extracurricular experience for students from marginalized communities
that includes hands-on materials assessment, digital fabrication of an earth-
based shelter, and community activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
comprehensive series of optimized mix design development, fresh- and hardened-
state properties characterization will produce an effective and sustainable
framework for improved shape stability and interlayer properties of the final
printed earth structures. The proposed research links, for the first time, the
following multi-scale investigations to advance the science and engineering of
3D printed earth materials and structures: (1) establishing the soil
characterization and microstructural design methodologies of 3D printable earth
mixtures, (2) elucidating the process-structure relationships of 3D printed
earth materials and the effects of additives, including a range of
biomineralizing microbes and biopolymers, on fresh-state properties, (3)
characterizing the hardened-state properties with a focus on alternatives to
stabilization, and (4) advancing the processing science of small- and large-
scale 3D printed earthen structures. This research and educational effort will
contribute to a broader interdisciplinary scope on quantitative and qualitative
expertise related to the automated construction, mechanical, thermal, and
environmental impacts of earth materials, a critical future in low-carbon and
affordable buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing project is
jointly funded by the Divisions of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI), Engineering Education and Centers (EEC), and Industrial
Innovation and Partnerships (IIP) in the Directorate of Engineering, and by the
Division of Materials Research (DMR) in the Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences (MPS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.