* 2134764
* FMRG: Eco: Dry manufacturing of Solid-State Sodium Batteries for Energy STorage at large scale (S3-BEST)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2025
* Andrea Tao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2025
* USD 2,700,000.00

Energy storage systems for buildings, wind and solar farms, and electric grids
are playing an increasingly important role in mitigating the energy,
sustainability and climate change challenges. Rechargeable batteries with high
safety, low cost, long life and high resilience to environment changes are
desired. Today’s lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) can no longer meet these
requirements because of the safety issues associated with flammable liquid
electrolytes and scaling challenges for critical materials (e.g., cobalt,
nickel, lithium) that are typically used for making them. The sodium (Na) all-
solid-state battery (NaSSB) is considered a promising alternative technology to
LIB for emerging large-scale storage applications. However, solid-state
electrolytes (SSEs) used in NaSSB have limited ionic conductivity, air/moisture
sensitivity and interface instability with other components in the battery. The
major challenges towards the development of efficient and eco-friendly
manufacturing process are the achievement of: 1) precision control of the
thickness, porosity, and uniformity of electrodes and SSEs; 2) high-speed mixing
and rolling with low defects; and 3) high-purity of recycled material with the
same level of performance as pristine materials. This Future Manufacturing
Research Grant (FMRG) EcoManufacturing project will develop new knowledge to
help transform today’s NaSSB battery manufacturing to a closed-loop, eco-
friendly, high-precision, and high-yield technology based on a dry fabrication
process. It will also make the manufacturing process safer and cheaper because
of the increased cell energy density, and the elimination of caustic organic
solvents as well as the related safety precautions. Not only limited to solid-
state batteries, the new concept and knowledge developed in this project can be
leveraged to improve the production efficiency and lower the cost of today’s LIB
manufacturing. Therefore, it has the potential to make energy storage more
acceptable and affordable, which will help the energy industry to shift towards
more renewable sources, leading to a carbon-neutral society. In parallel, new
education, training and workforce development programs will be developed to
improve equality and opportunities for pre-college, undergraduate and graduate
students in the manufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a paradigm-shift dry fabrication approach to enable eco-
friendly manufacturing of NaSSBs for safe, low-cost and resilient large energy
storage systems to help the United States meet the sustainable development goal.
This project will assemble expertise in chemical engineering, nanoengineering,
chemistry, materials science, life-cycle analysis/technoeconomic analysis,
machine learning and data science, as well as collaborators in community
colleges and industry to develop new fabrication processes, advanced materials
and new battery protypes that can potentially be used for a wide range of large-
scale storage systems. The research will focus on filling the science and
knowledge gaps in NaSSB manufacturing through four highly synergistic thrusts:
1) Dry fabrication processes design for cathode, solid-state electrolytes and
anode to enable NaSSB cell architecture with high-capacity loading and long-
cycling; 2) Integrated technoeconomic and life-cycle analysis to guide and
improve manufacturing steps, materials advancement and recycling process. 3)
Multiscale quality control and standardization through materials interfacial
engineering and inline analysis for the fabrication process; 4) Design and
demonstration of closed-loop and waste-free recycling. The new knowledge and
tools created from this research will enable eco-friendly, low-cost and safe
energy storage in large scale systems for a sustainable energy
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing project is
jointly funded by the Divisions of Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems
(ECCS), Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET),
and Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate of
Engineering, the Division of Undergraduate Education (DUE) in the Directorate
for Education and Human Resources, and the Office of International Science and
Engineering (OISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.