* 2134375
* I-Corps: Advanced anode material for lithium-ion batteries based on filled carbon nanotubes
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Wenzhi Li, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be in the
improvement of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). Current LIBs are often limited in
energy density and charging speed due to their graphite anode. These limits
result in larger sizes and weights of LIBs for advanced applications such as
long-range electric vehicles (EVs). The proposed technology involves a novel
nanomaterial, nickel sulfide-filled carbon nanotubes, that can replace the
conventional graphite anode and enhance the performance of LIBs. This innovation
can alleviate the aforementioned problems in current anode technologies and can
enable development of the next generation of high performance LIBs for EVs, grid
energy storage, and electric aviation. By enabling wider adoption of LIB
technologies, this project can help reduce emissions linked to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance the knowledge in
the fundamental electrochemical properties of metal sulfide-filled carbon
nanotubes. Specifically, the team will help to understand how the solid core-
shell structure affects the transport of electrons and lithium ions and how the
volume expansion of the lithiated nanowire filler is accommodated by the carbon
shells. The expected results will provide new insight into the electrochemical
properties of carbon nanotubes filled with metal sulfide nanowires in lithium-
ion battery (LIB) applications. In this project, nanomaterials of nickel sulfide
filled carbon nanotubes are developed together with techniques to synthesize
these materials on flexible carbon cloth. These nanomaterials have been shown to
exhibit energy storage capacity which is several times that of the current
commercial graphite anode materials. Further, the nanomaterials have shown
exceptional charging-discharging stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.