* 2134215
* Spindle Flux and Mechanics
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Ross, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 09/30/2024
* USD 745,134.00

Cells are the fundamental unit of life and all cells arise by cell division. To
ensure that each daughter cell receives a complete set of the instructions for
life, cells first duplicate their genetic material (DNA) and then move one copy
to each daughter cell. Cells perform this task millions of times each day. The
machine utilized for cell division is called the mitotic spindle. The mitotic
spindle is required to organize and arrange the chromosomal DNA and segregate it
into the daughter cells. This process is extremely important for the formation,
development and maintenance of all living organisms. The self-organization of
the mitotic spindle cannot be understood using biology alone. Rather, it
requires the understanding of the underlying physical principles that govern the
assembly and function of the mitotic spindle. The research conducted here will
apply physical concepts behind self-organization of liquid crystals (the same
liquid crystals found in computer and cell phone screens) to understand the
ability of the mitotic spindle to organize itself in the absence of outside
instructions. Understanding the fundamental rules of life that underlie cellular
organization will result in new knowledge about how cells work as well as new
insights to help us understand and ultimately fight diseases. The project will
involve outreach to 8th and 9th grade girls in the nearby community, along with
interdisciplinary training of undergraduates and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this
proposal is to understand how microtubule turnover and crosslinking control the
organization and dynamics of the mitotic spindle. The mitotic spindle is a high-
density organization of cross-linked microtubules which should be enough to
stall the inherent microtubule dynamic instability as well as the mobility of
the filaments within the structure. Yet, it has been shown that the spindle
undergoes overall flux from the chromosomes toward the poles. This flux has been
noted to be faster at the chromosomes than at the poles. A new model put forth
by the investigators proposes that the flux is an essential process to fluidize
the spindle near chromosomes where enhanced motion is needed to error
correction. Flux decreases at the poles because of increased adhesion due to
higher levels of crosslinkers put there by the process of flux. This exciting
new model creates a new physical framework to begin exploring the underlying
fundamental principles that enable the dynamic self-organization of the mitotic
spindle. The proposed work will directly test the hypothesized model using
quantitative light microscopy and genetic manipulations. These tests will reveal
new information on the inner workings of the spindle. The proposal directly
responds to several important aspects of modern biological research including
integrating across scales, from single molecules to complex structures and whole
cells. The active matter experiments directly address the synthesis of life-like
systems using minimal purified components. From a physics perspective, the
synthesis of life-like systems are essential to understanding the non-
equilibrium processes of biology that couple to self-organize, sense, and
respond to stimuli. This is a frontier area of physics and materials research,
which will uncover new knowledge about fundamental cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.