* 2134535
* FMSG: Bio: Rapid Biomanufacturing of mRNA Vaccines in Plant Chloroplasts
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Nicole Steinmetz, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

This project aims to enable rapid manufacturing of oral vaccines against viruses
in plants without the need of specialized equipment or skills. Current vaccine
manufacturing technologies need expensive laboratory facilities and cold-chain
delivery systems that result in slow and unequal access of vaccines to people.
This study combines ideas and approaches from the engineering of particles,
chloroplast genetics, and plant molecular farming, to turn chloroplasts of
edible plant leaves like spinach or lettuce into biomanufacturing devices for
vaccine production. The project will increase public awareness of how engineered
particles can be used to turn plants into a biomanufacturing technology through
science outreach events and publicly available videos. It will also provide
unique opportunities for postdoctoral researchers and students to grow beyond
their disciplinary background and practice team science and technology
development. A new college level course on engineering plants with engineered
particles will incorporate these plant biomanufacturing findings into its
curriculum. Partnerships with industry will inform the design, applicability,
and cost-effectiveness of plant biomanufacturing technologies, and provide
valuable networking and education opportunities for students and postdocs. Plant
biomanufacturing hybrid meetings will promote integration of key stakeholders
from academia and industry. Together, these approaches will train a future
biomanufacturing workforce prepared to develop and apply fundamental knowledge
and skills to solve major health, environmental, and sustainability
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop tools that allow
rapid synthesis and universal access of oral mRNA vaccines manufactured in situ
by plant chloroplasts. There is an untapped potential for utilizing chloroplasts
as ubiquitous solar powered molecular factories for personalized
biomanufacturing devices enabled by emergent nanotechnology-based tools.
Chloroplasts are biomanufacturing organelles with a prokaryotic-like genome,
their own transcription and translation machinery, but lack gene silencing
mechanisms. This system enables high expression of transgenes in plants for
rapid, tunable, and scalable manufacturing of mRNA vaccines anywhere plants
grow. Despite great strides made in biotechnology, chloroplast genetic
engineering remains limited to a few plant species, impairing the use of plants
as widely accessible biomanufacturing devices. The main method for the
introduction of recombinant DNA to chloroplasts in plants is costly, and
requires materials and equipment that are only accessible to specialized lab
facilities. Existing methods are also destructive, inefficient, and unable to
target genes into chloroplasts. Novel technologies are also needed for facile
encapsulation and retrieval of mRNA vaccines synthesized in plants in non-
laboratory conditions. The study will investigate biocompatible and degradable
high aspect ratio nanomaterials with controllable dimensions, tunable surface
charge and chemistry as plasmid DNA delivery vehicles for turning edible plants
into mRNA vaccine biomanufacturing devices. Orthogonally, it will determine if
mRNA synthesis in chloroplasts and encapsulation in the organelle double lipid
envelopes provide a layer of protection from degradation in the environment.
Partnerships with industry will inform the design, applicability, and cost-
effectiveness of plant biomanufacturing technologies, and provide valuable
networking and education opportunities for students and postdocs. Students from
UC Riverside, a minority-serving institution, will be recruited to participate
in the project. A new course on plant nanobiotechnology at UC Riverside will
incorporate the findings of this project on plant biomanufacturing into its
curriculum. Nanobiotechnology-based approaches have the potential to democratize
the use of plant chloroplasts for personalized biomolecule manufacturing and
revolutionize the treatment of human and animal
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing award is supported by
the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems
and the Division of Chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.