* 2134083
* EAGER: Accurate Estimation of Indoor Airborne Virus Transmission based on a Novel Multiscale Data-Driven Framework
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2021,05/31/2024
* S. Balachandar, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2024
* USD 356,230.00

Airborne spread of viral diseases is recognized as an important mode of
transmission. Many aspects of this transmission, including the ejection,
evaporation, and dispersion of virus-laden droplets by human expiratory events
within indoor spaces, have been studied. However, a science-based framework that
can quickly and reliably predict the spread of airborne contagion in indoor
spaces needs to be developed. Such a framework would help to assess the risk of
contagion in classrooms, restaurants, elevators, aircraft cabins, etc. and to
inform policy makers. This knowledge would form a science-based foundation for
building a reliable and user-friendly prediction tools that can be used by
researchers, policy makers, administrators, and the general public to make
informed decisions about the risks of viral contagion in indoor
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many important parameters that influence
the spread of airborne contagion, and the inherently nonlinear nature of the
problem makes simple predictions impossible. A multiscale, data-driven framework
for the rapid and accurate prediction of airborne contagion spread in confined
spaces will be developed in this project. There are two key innovations in the
development of this framework. The first involves separating the overall problem
into the key components of virus-scale, source-scale (breathing, talking,
coughing, or sneezing), and room-scale components. The second consists of
inverting the problem by first generating a large database of particle
dispersion information before addressing the individual scenarios of contagion.
These two innovations allow a few high-fidelity simulations to explore countless
scenarios of indoor virus transmission without the need for separate,
computationally intensive predictions of each individual scenario. This
framework, along with the ability to rapidly obtain flow information within
indoor spaces, will offer an unprecedented predictive capability. The framework
will also evaluate uncertainties associated with the prediction by accounting
for the stochastic nature of the ejection and the turbulent nature of the flow.
Improvements to this framework and tool should extend their applicability to
other airborne infectious diseases as well as to indoor air quality. The data-
driven framework can be further extended to address the risk of contagion in
outdoor spaces and can be tailored to address other problems involving
particulate dispersion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.