* 2134168
* Representation Learning via Variational Mean Field Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Rongjie Lai, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 12/31/2024
* USD 749,833.00

Deep learning has had tremendous success in many science and engineering
applications. It revolutionizes classical model-based methods using data-driven
approaches in a computationally tractable way. Representation learning, which
extracts useful information from raw data needed for downstream tasks (for
example, classification, regression, and reinforcement learning), is one of the
most important directions of deep learning. Despite its success in areas such as
image and signal processing, speech and object recognition, natural language
processing, chemistry and drug discovery, theoretical understanding of
representation learning is far from satisfactory. This project aims at new
understanding of representation learning (in particular, deep generative models
and graph representation learning) using mean-field game (MFG) theory. The
research is intended not only to provide a theoretical understanding of
generative models and graph representations but also to serve as a key step in
transforming deep representation learning from a black-box approach to an
explainable and trustworthy method. The project will benefit researchers in
academia, government labs, and industry and will provide interdisciplinary
training in applied mathematics, engineering, and data science to undergraduate
and graduate students. Collaboration with the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, which
offers complementary technical skills and industrial angles, will enhance career
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at i) bridging theoretical and
analytical tools in MFG with deep generative models and graph representation
learning, and ii) exploring new data-driven architecture designs in MFG-guided
representation learning through the lens of bi-level optimization. This first
objective is to understand the practical normalizing flows as the variational
MFG, where reversible particle trajectories in MFG can be naturally viewed as
the generative and normalizing directions in normalizing flows. The second
objective is to propose a new framework for graph representation learning based
on MFG. This new way of modeling with graph-structured data overcomes the
limitation of the message passing framework studied from the graph isomorphism
angle, leading to new network architectures that are faster and more scalable to
train. To complement the expert-based choice of the dependencies and
architectures in MFG, a new bi-level optimization approach will be investigated
to jointly learn model dependences, architectures, and parameters in the first
two objectives. The complementary expertise of the research team is being
leveraged to enrich the theoretical foundations of deep learning through MFG-,
graph-, and optimization-based approaches. This research agenda is expected to
foster multidisciplinary efforts at the intersection of representation learning,
graph learning, bi-level optimization, signal processing, and control
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.