* 2134607
* FMRG: Cyber: A Cyber Nanomanufacturing Platform for Large-scale Production of High-quality MXenes and Other Two-dimensional Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2025
* Babak Anasori, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 09/30/2025
* USD 3,000,000.00

This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) CyberManufacturing grant
supports research that develops new knowledge related to on-demand, flexible
manufacturing of high quality two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, such as
MXenes. A multidisciplinary team develops the fundamental science for
industrial-scale production of 2D titanium carbide MXene flakes economically and
with high yield. Due to their superior mechanical and electronic properties,
MXenes have applications in electronics, biomedical devices, sensors, catalysts,
gas separation, water purification, conductive coatings and smart fabrics, each
of which has a large market size which enhances U.S. manufacturing
competitiveness, economy and national security. MXenes are currently being
produced with highly varying quality at small laboratory scale. This quality
inconsistency is due to the high sensitivity of MXene production to processing
conditions, variability in raw material quality and poor understanding of
atomic- and molecular-level processes. This research aims to understand these
processes and use this understanding to enable industrial-scale
nanomanufacturing of 2D nanomaterials. The project involves several disciplines
including chemistry, chemical engineering, materials science and engineering and
computer science. The project helps broaden the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in research and positively impacts engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address nanomanufacturing
challenges such as rapid discovery, design, and customization of 2D
nanomaterials with desired end-product properties. These challenges are
addressed by studying, developing, deploying and testing innovative cyber
manufacturing solutions. The research involves real-time process monitoring and
control and tracking of nanomaterial macroscopic and microscopic properties. The
effect of Ti3AlC2 structure, defects and grain morphology on the properties of
the resulting Ti3C2 MXene model system is investigated to gain knowledge needed
to control extrinsic defects, such as Ti vacancies due to etching and
delamination, surface termination compositions and intercalant species. The
atomic- and molecular-level processes that are critical for the nano- and macro-
scale properties of Ti3C2 are studied theoretically, via first principles
calculations and molecular dynamics simulations, and verified experimentally to
determine their effects on defects, flake morphologies, and final functional
properties. To capture quantitative relationships between nanomaterial
properties, manufacturing conditions and nondestructive characterizations such
as Raman, SERS and STEM are utilized. Deep neural network models are developed,
trained, and deployed to capture and represent these relationships in readily
available forms. Technoeconomic analysis and life cycle assessment ensure the
economic viability, safety and sustainability of the envisioned
nanomanufacturing industrial-scale platform for MXene
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported with co-funding from
Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and Engineering Education
Center (EEC) Divisions in the Engineering (ENG) Directorate, the Division of
Materials Research (DMR) and Chemistry (CHE) Division in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS), and the Division of Undergraduate
Education (DUE) in the Directorate of Education and Human Resources
(EHR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.