* 2134789
* 2022 GRC / GRS on Colloidal, Macromolecular, and Polyelectrolyte Solutions: Sub-title: “Connecting theory and simulations to experiments and applications.”
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2021,10/31/2022
* Ronald Larson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2022
* USD 30,000.00

This award will provide partial support for the 2022 Gordon Research Conference
(GRC) on Colloidal, Macromolecular, and Polyelectrolyte Solutions: Connecting
Theory and Simulations to Experiments and Applications, which will be held
February 6-11, 2022 in Ventura, CA. The conference will be preceded by a Gordon
Research Seminar (GRS) for graduate students. Together, the two events will
provide opportunities for researchers, especially young investigators and
students, to present results of their research, meet senior experts in the
field, and discuss emerging research trends in colloidal and polymeric
solutions. These materials are important in a variety of technology areas
including coatings, paints, personal-care products and cosmetics, and food
processing. The goal of the GRC and GRS is to bring promote discussions that
will enable comparisons between experiments, numerical simulations, and theory
for these important materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloidal and polymer
science, including polyelectrolytes, is growing in importance in a wide range of
applications, especially those involving biotechnology. The development of RNA
vaccines was enabled in part by creating nanoparticle complexes of DNA, a
polyelectrolyte, with oppositely charged surfactants. Synthetic structures that
mimic cells, such as membraneless organelles, are formed by segregating charged
proteins that exhibit polyelectrolyte phase behavior. Increasing computing
power, new computational methods, and high resolution experiments now allow
comparisons between experiment and simulation at length and time scales that are
accessible to both. This is the theme of the GRC/GRS. Session topics will
include polyelectrolytes and ionic liquids, confined colloids, directed
assembly, propelled colloids, interfacial systems, polymers and biology, polymer
glasses, and driven elastomers. The GRS for graduate students will include
technical sessions as well as career development sessions for students and young
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.