* 2134321
* RCN: LEAPS: Rooting Out Oppression Together and SHaring Our Outcomes Transparently
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Mary Williams, American Society of Plant Biologists
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,141,750.00

The demographic distribution of scientists, especially those in positions of
authority, does not reflect that of the US population. Some of the causes of
this disparity are known, such as a lack of role models and the tendency for
people to look within their own circles when they recruit, appoint, and promote.
This award will provide resources, trainings, opportunities, and structures that
will allow participating plant science and affiliated organizations to change
that construct by Rooting Out Oppression Together (ROOT) and SHaring Our
Outcomes Transparently (SHOOT). The network is unusual in its breadth and scope,
and it extends upon previous collaborative activities in the plant sciences by
incorporating partners that serve underrepresented populations, as well as other
non-profits and companies. The participating organizations have each
independently begun this work, and through this award they will coordinate to
exert meaningful and lasting change to reshape the plant science community into
one that is truly equitable, inclusive, and anti-racist. The network partners
will design and implement interventions to remove barriers that prevent the
participation and success of individuals historically excluded from leadership
and influence roles in science, assess the success of these interventions, and
share the outcomes. Broadly sharing the lessons and outcomes from this deep and
careful self-study will inform other organizations and professional societies as
they strive towards becoming more inclusive and diverse scientific communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the Rooting Out Oppression Together (ROOT) and
SHaring Our Outcomes Transparently (SHOOT) research coordination network (RCN)
is to develop a collaborative network that facilitates cultural changes
throughout the plant sciences to advance diversity, equity, and inclusion. The
network will coordinate the development and dissemination of resources for
building and sustaining equitable and inclusive scientific organizations,
including assessment tools and equity action plans. It will provide broad
training of the plant science communities in equitable practices and operations,
while implementing dual-membership programs and shared participation in
conferences. Hundreds of scholars and practitioners will be trained in topics
such as inclusive teamwork, climate and culture assessment, and culturally
responsive mentoring, even as the participating organizations themselves
implement well-informed changes to their governance and leadership structures.
The network will create shared web pages, guides, workshops, webinars, and
action plans to educate and inform our community members and others across STEM.
The RCN initially consists of seven plant science professional societies and
organizations; it has also established formal partnerships with organizations
committed to supporting underrepresented and marginalized scientists, as well as
industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.