* 2134624
* RCN: LEAPS: Culture Change for Inclusion of Indigenous Voices in Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2026
* Teresa Mourad, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,543,276.00

The five-year project NSF LEAPS project, Culture Change for Inclusion of
Indigenous Voices in Biology is a partnership among the American Indian Science
and Engineering Society (AISES), Botanical Society of America (BSA), Ecological
Society of America (ESA), and Entomological Society of America (EntSoc) to drive
culture change in the field of biology. The Indigenous Voices project seeks to
transform how these societies engage with Indigenous scholars and communities
and improve their inclusion in biological research and professions. AISES in
partnership with the three closely aligned biological professional societies
will form a Steering Committee to: 1) assess the status of Indigenous inclusion
within the organizations, 2) address structural barriers and build Indigenous
communities within the organizations, and 3) expand relationships and
understanding to fundamentally improve Indigenous representation within biology
research and professions. The Indigenous Voices project represents a new
collaboration among AISES, BSA, ESA, and EntSoc to advance efforts among all
organizations to increase the inclusion of Indigenous peoples, culture, and
values in biology, recognizing the unique identities and circumstances of
Indigenous peoples in the United States and the implications for education,
research, and workforce development through the lens of Tribal Nation Building.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this NSF LEAPS project is to test
approaches to achieving culture change with respect to inclusion of Indigenous
representation, from organizational membership to inclusion of Indigenous
knowledge. Due to the pervasiveness of Indigenous STEM underrepresentation,
Indigenous identities, knowledge, and values are often limited or erased
altogether. The proposed project seeks to improve Indigenous representation in
STEM through collaboration, engaging diverse voices and charting a path to
change while also building the foundation of Indigenous scholars who will
further the cultural transformations of their disciplines. The Indigenous Voices
project expands upon current understandings for maintaining persistence in STEM
among Native scholars through culturally connected mentorship, community
building, and professional development centering Indigenous values. The Steering
Committee will focus on assessing current needs and challenges and then identify
benchmarks for building community among Indigenous scholars and increasing
Indigenous representation across the organizations. Failing to center Indigenous
voices and support the unique dimensions of Indigenous scholars and communities
deprives the country of the potential for innovation and transformative
solutions, particularly in the face of climate change and environmental
injustice. Until Indigenous knowledge and science is valued equal to Western
knowledge and science, Indigenous people will not be able to see themselves—the
past and present people and communities they represent—valued in STEM. The
Indigenous Voices project seeks to integrate increased participation with
increased representation to achieve culture change, benefiting Indigenous people
and communities and the fields of botany, ecology, and
entomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.