* 2134658
* FMSG: Eco: Teambuilding, Training, Manufacturing Efficiency and Recycling for Sustainable Polymer Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Steven Nutt, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

This Future Manufacturing Research Grant (FMRG) EcoManufacturing grant supports
research that will contribute new knowledge related to sustainable manufacturing
of composites. Composites are high-performance, lightweight materials used in
the production of structures to minimize weight while preserving performance and
durability. Lighter structures translate to an increase in fuel efficiency and
range for land and air vehicles, and increases in power generated by wind
turbines, each contributing to mitigating atmospheric carbon dioxide content.
These advantages accrue throughout the operational lifetime of the products.
Current composite manufacturing processes consume a significant amount of
energy, and most composite materials cannot be easily recycled. Many of these
processes require ergonomically challenging manual labor. The goal of this award
is to stimulate fundamental research and education that enable the realization
of more sustainable composite manufacturing, with the aim of positioning
composites as a sustainable material of choice for delivering high performance
in a broad spectrum of applications. By decreasing energy consumption,
decreasing carbon dioxide impact, and enabling recycling, the industry can
become greener, while improving composite manufacturingâ€™s cost competitiveness
by improving consistency and quality, and improving conditions for composite
manufacturing workers. This award will also lay foundations for preparing the
workforce for new employment opportunities in manufacturing and increasing the
retention of the existing workforce by developing new skillsets and enhancing
workforce diversity by including students from institutions serving
underrepresented populations, especially via two-year community college
education programs and professional training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
supported by this grant will make advances to enable realization of the next-
generation sustainable composites manufacturing. The holistic approach will
address the life cycle of composites, elements of which are presently regarded
as intractable challenges. These elements include prepreg design, automated
layup, out-of-autoclave cure, end-of-life treatment to separate components, and
return of component materials to second- and third-life service. The team will
develop an overarching technology roadmap for sustainable composites
manufacturing. In addition, new technologies will be investigated for chemical
recycling of both fibers and matrix via catalytic depolymerization, semi-preg
formats that restore manufacturing robustness to out-of-autoclave cure of
composites, and flexible automation of the vacuum bagging process, sheet
handling, and sheet preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing
project is jointly funded by the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems Division, the Office of International Science and Engineering,
and the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.