* 2135730
* BRITE Synergy: Enhancing Prediction of Rock Slope Failures During Earthquakes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Mary MacLaughlin,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 03/31/2024
* USD 212,803.00

Engineering characterization of geological materials is a critical and
challenging endeavor, continuously evolving as new technologies are introduced.
Understanding the strength and behavior of rock and soil is necessary for safe
and cost-effective designs, with applications ranging from robust infrastructure
(roads, buildings, dams, tunnels, etc.) to sustainable development of energy and
mineral resources, all of which are essential to society. News coverage of
recent failures of natural slopes and tailings dams has raised public awareness
and concern across the globe. Although such disasters have significant negative
consequences, study of them enables improved understanding, allowing for
improved safety in the future. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative
and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Synergy project aims to improve
our ability to predict seismically induced rock slope failures so they can be
addressed prior to a triggering earthquake event. Laboratory experiments will be
combined with numerical simulations to enhance our ability to predict and
prevent seismically-induced rock slope failures. In addition to the benefit to
society via improved safety during earthquakes, the project supports the
professional development and research goals of a female PI and a set of students
from groups currently underrepresented in science and engineering. In
particular, this project will provide the opportunity for the PI and her
students to engage with new techniques and technologies as they perform the
experiments and simulations and interpret the results, ranging from acoustic
emissions instrumentation to hybrid finite-discrete element numerical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals will largely be accomplished via
experimental work with two related thrusts: development of an improved direct
shear test procedure for characterizing the shear strength of rock joint
surfaces, and implementation of a suite of shake table tests to investigate the
motion of rock blocks under seismic loading conditions. The associated
experimental datasets will be archived and shared via the DesignSafe repository.
The dataset containing the direct shear test results will allow the global rock
mechanics community to more readily adopt the improved test procedure and the
dataset containing yield accelerations and block displacements will provide a
validation tool that will be of use to earthquake engineering researchers and
practitioners worldwide. Numerical models will be used to augment the
experimental datasets using continuum, discontinuum, and hybrid methods,
allowing exploration of a wider variety of conditions than can be simulated in
the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.