* 2135620
* BRITE Synergy: Programmable Wearable Textile Robotics for Ubiquitous Assistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Ye (Sarah) Sun, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2024
* USD 364,818.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Synergy award supports research into new wearable robotic
systems created with a unique manufacturing process. This project aims to
develop a new class of garment-like robots that will provide assistive
technology for patients with neuromuscular disorders and other disabilities, as
well as augmentive capabilities for workers in everyday use. In clinical
applications, this new class of wearable robots will be able to provide vital-
signal monitoring for diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation with high
comfort, biocompatibility, and operability, improving personalized healthcare.
The assistive robots can augment upper limb capabilities and prevent injuries in
challenging working conditions. This project will disseminate the research
products to a broad audience in both classrooms and communities through various
activities. It will also provide training to students, especially those from
groups underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this
project is to establish a new class of smart and programmable wearable textile
robots for upper extremity assistance. The robots will integrate sensing,
understanding, and mimicking of skeletal muscle behaviors in real time, through
mechanisms based on textile materials made by novel manufacturing techniques. To
achieve the goal, multidisciplinary knowledge needs to be integrated, including
wearable sensing, continuous feature recognition, distributed actuation, and
wearable robot design and control. Two research tasks are planned for achieving
the research goal: 1) Developing smart and robust textile-based human interfaces
and building understanding of muscle behaviors and 2) developing wearable
textile robots based on programmable distributed actuators controlled by human
inputs. The success of this project will promote the mass production of textile
robots as a next-generation technology for ubiquitous
assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.