* 2135805
* A Holistic Two-Generation Approach to Improving STEM Education Outcomes in the South Bronx
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Sarah Hoiland, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2026
* USD 2,299,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
addressing the immediate needs of student-parents as they complete undergraduate
STEM degrees. The project will support student-parents at CUNY Hostos Community
College, a two-year Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) in the South Bronx.
Student-parents comprise nearly one-third of the student body at the
institution. Hostos Oasis for Parents’ Education (HOPE) is a holistic Two-
Generation (2Gen) STEM summer program for college-ready parents and their
children. It will provide equitable access to STEM career paths and to two-year
degree completion for student-parents while providing a robust summer STEM
Academy experience for their preK-8 children. HOPE will incorporate a three-
dimensional (3D) holistic support model focused on three distinct areas: family,
academic, and social/professional support. The project will use this support
model to address the many obstacles encountered by academically proficient
student-parents. These obstacles include "time poverty", insufficient time to
devote to college, work, and family. While student-parents' motivation for
college completion is strong, their role as a parent substantially increases
their likelihood of leaving college without a degree. Part-time status often
precludes them from existing support programs. By leveraging high quality
evidence-based practices like Experiential Learning Opportunities (ELOs), and
evidence-based programs, this transformative project intends to advance the
understanding of whether the HOPE model can improve the quality and
accessibility of STEM education for community college student-parents and their
children. Project outcomes have potential to improve access to high quality STEM
education for an often overlooked population. This holistic intervention is a
potentially crucial mitigation strategy in the post COVID-19 landscape for a
community disproportionately affected by the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to: (i) make systematic improvements to undergraduate
community college STEM education through ELOs in STEM and social sciences; (ii)
provide high quality STEM experiences for children ages pre-K-8th grade; (iii)
create an openly sourced ELO STEM Toolkit with an accompanying professional
development sequence; (iv) promote diversity, equity, and inclusion by
recruiting Hostos student-parents and their children who are predominantly
racial/ethnic minorities with special recruitment efforts aimed at justice-
impacted student parents; and (v) provide new knowledge on the effectiveness of
HOPE’s 3D Model. This comprehensive and holistic 2Gen program will enroll 22
student-parents, and approximately 42 children during the first year and
increase capacity each year. Approximately 450 participants over five years,
including student parents, children, teachers (preK-8), college faculty, and
undergraduate education students, will benefit from the HOPE Program. The
effectiveness of the project will be evaluated using a mixed methods approach,
leveraging both quantitative and qualitative research including pre- and post-
program surveys, focus groups, and peer observation among a group of instructors
and faculty. A team with expertise in program evaluation, online education, and
teaching STEM to middle school students with learning differences, will provide
ongoing assessment as part of our process development and evaluation. Research
on the HOPE 3D model will be disseminated through a project website, conference
workshops and presentations, and peer-reviewed articles. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that advance STEM
education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description promotes
innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-
year colleges. This project is supported by the NSF HSI Program and the NSF
IUSE: EHR Program. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education,
broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity at
HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.