* 2135538
* EAGER: Equity in Scientific Co-production Processes: Creation of a Framework
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Kristin Timm, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 09/30/2023
* USD 206,765.00

Federal agencies increasingly fund programs that encourage, or even require,
research to be “co-produced” by both scientists and stakeholders. However, there
is little guidance for researchers and agencies for how to do this work and
evaluate its outcomes, especially when communities with low levels of resource
access, social capital, and/or a history of discrimination and exclusion are
involved. Since the 1990s, the U.S. federal government has established climate
research and decision-support programs to produce science that informs local,
regional, and national policies. This project will leverage the experiences and
perspectives of scientists and stakeholders who have worked with these programs
to lend insights for the development of co-production processes that facilitate
equitable partnerships with communities. By focusing on key federal programs and
working in collaboration with an advisory board of agency staff and national
organizations that support social justice, the project increases its
transformative potential and likelihood of broader impacts to science policy and
government investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This early-concept research will
develop a framework for addressing equity concerns in the coproduction of
knowledge. Employing Q methodology techniques, the study will identify common
discourses among U.S. regional climate science center scientists, stakeholders,
and partners in governance,such as tribal nations. These data—collected through
interviews and a survey—will serve as an initial draft of the framework to be
vetted at a workshop held with coproduction scholars, representatives of
historically underserved communities, federal agency program managers, and the
interviewed co-production scientist and stakeholder groups. Publication of a
special journal issue on equity and co-production will follow the workshop. The
project will contribute to the development of co-production and related
literatures by empirically establishing differences in the ways that its
processes and outcomes may be perceived, connecting normative and descriptive
strands of a multidisciplinary field that crosses public administration,
sustainability science, and science and technology studies
(STS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.