* 2135112
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturing of gallium nitride (GaN) membranes for efficient thermal management
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2023
* David Lee, FUTURE SEMICONDUCTOR BUSINESS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
seeks to provide gallium nitride (GaN) membranes for the production of
semiconductors for numerous applications including power electronics, radio
frequency devices, and optoelectronics, etc. The prooposed technology seeks to
alleviate two major problems in the current GaN-based manufacturing technology:
thermal management and expensive wafer material costs - by peeling off the GaN
membrane from the parent wafer and integrating it on the heat sink. Integration
of thin-film GaN on a heat-sink substrate may solve the intrinsic thermal
management issues of GaN-based devices by efficiently dissipating the heat.
Commercialization of proposed technology could decrease production costs of GaN-
based devices by reusing the expensive parent substrate multiple times while
maintain the material quality. Gallium nitride-based technologies have been
widely adapted in various fields including healthcare and defense, 5G networks,
clean energy applications, electrical vehicles, power inverters and mobile
device chargers, etc. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to manufacture
the high-quality, free-standing GaN membranes integrated on heat sinks by using
two unique technologies: remote epitaxy and 2-dimensional layer transfer (2DLT).
Remote epitaxy and 2DLT technologies utilize 2D materials inserted between the
substrate and epilayer for the growth and lift-off of GaN thin-film. Combination
of remote epitaxy and 2DLT processes allow for the production of high-quality
GaN membranes with multiple reuses of costly GaN substrates. Feasibility of
proposed technology will be confirmed via time-domain thermoreflectance (TDTR)
techniques by measuring the GaN and heat sink
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.