* 2135345
* Research Initiation Award: QoS-Aware Energy Management for Sustainable Real-Time Embedded Systems
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Linwei Niu, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 06/30/2024
* USD 252,763.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to West Virginia State University has potential broader impacts in a
number of areas. The goal of the project is identify a unified power management
solution for real-time embedded systems (RTES) in order to maximally lower ES
energy consumption while satisfying the quality of service (QoS) constraint and
system reliability requirements. Undergraduate students will gain research
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, traditional real-time
scheduling technology is leveraged to create a scheduling framework in the
design of energy-efficient embedded systems, exploiting modern power-management
features without sacrificing system performance. Three specific aims are to:
develop energy-efficient scheduling algorithms that can reduce energy
consumption for weakly hard real-time embedded systems while preserving the
system reliability; develop algorithms to create a scheduling framework that can
maximize the QoS for reliable RTES under hard energy budget constraint; and
extend this scheduling framework to multicore platforms. The novel feature of
the project is the combination of the three critical dimensions of RTES design -
energy efficiency, quality of service, and reliability - into a single, unified
framework to reduce energy consumption of real-time embedded systems from the
system level. The findings will shift how embedded systems are designed to be
able to meet performance demands on a green and sustainable computing
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.