* 2135463
* I-Corps Team: Battery-Free, Millimeter-Scale Silicon Devices for Tempertature Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Bonnie Bachman, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to assure the
integrity of temperature regulated supply chains. In the pharmaceutical and food
industries, temperature disruptions can cause loss of potency or safety, leading
to adverse effects on public health and increased costs. For example, each of
the current COVID-19 vaccines requires its own specific environmental conditions
during transport, ranging from -70 C to 5 C. Excursions from this temperature
range can lead to damaged vaccines that do not work as intended. Within the
scope of vaccine distribution, significant numbers of vaccine vials may be
discarded due to a lack of per-vial temperature monitoring information. Although
COVID-19 has highlighted this problem, there is a global demand for small,
inexpensive temperature sensors that could verify the integrity of
pharmaceutical temperatures. The problem of spoilage is not unique to the
pharmaceutical industry, which constitutes only around 25% of the cold supply
chain market, but is also widespread in the food distribution systems, creating
additional opportunities for the application of temperatures sensors developed
in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further develops a
small, time-temperature sensor as a means of addressing temperature disruptions
in the cold temperature supply chain. At the core of the sensor technology is
novel battery-free quantum dynamical systems which change their state based on
the temperature conditions to which they are exposed. These systems are
manufactured using standard silicon fabrication techniques and are cost-
effective and scalable. As compared to existing temperature monitoring methods
which are often bulky and expensive, these silicon-based devices enable an
economically-viable approach for robust and quantifiable temperature monitoring
at the per-vial level. Additional benefits of using an electronic monitoring
solution are that they can be used across a range of temperature monitoring
profiles, detect freeze damage and vibrations, have zero-downtime, and perform
continuous logging which may facilitate pinpointing faults in the supply chain
for future mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.