* 2135937
* NSF-DFG: Solvent-Free Manufacturing of Perovskite Large-Scale Electronics
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Oana Jurchescu, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2025
* USD 384,478.00

Future generations of optoelectronic devices will enhance the quality of our
lives and shape major industries, as well as the medical sector and national
security. To impact all societal sectors, semiconductor manufacturing must
develop techniques that circumvent the current technological and economical
constraints. This project utilizes laser printing for low-cost manufacturing of
optoelectronic devices under ambient conditions. A solvent-free, environmental-
friendly technique, which is scalable at technologically meaningful levels,
could provide for broader development and an alternative path for the Internet
of Things (IoT). The main focus is the processing of metal halide perovskite
devices, but the methods developed will be applicable to other thin-film
technologies, thus enhancing the impact. As laser printed devices mature enough
to enter the marketplace, there will be a rising need for highly skilled workers
who can implement this technology. This project will provide a multidisciplinary
and multicultural environment for training undergraduate and graduate students
which prepares them for joining the global workforce. The project creates and
nurtures a culture of inclusive excellence which will enhance the scientific
literacy of the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to develop the fundamental understanding of perovskite film formation using
laser printing and to apply it towards the development of manufacturing
protocols for high performance optoelectronic devices. This method is expected
to provide an alternative method to process electronic devices and to enable
wide-spread applications that are currently not possible. This could potentially
advance industries where traditional electronics are not applicable or would be
cost-prohibitive. The project will combine materials processing, advanced
spectroscopy and device physics to develop perovskite thin films with
electrical, electronic and optical properties similar or superior to those
obtained via other deposition methods with high spatial uniformity over large
areas. The understanding developed over the film deposition and processing will
allow for the extension of the method to other materials systems. The films will
be incorporated in proof-of-concept devices (transistors, photodetectors,
photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes) fabricated on flexible substrates.
Successful completion of these objectives will generate detailed knowledge on
the key processes and mechanisms involved in film formation using this
manufacturing method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.