* 2135508
* SBIR Phase I:  An Opioid Taper Clinical Decision Support Tool for Use in a Primary Care Outpatient Setting
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Justin Kromelow, OPOS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2022
* USD 267,557.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce opioid dependence. A critical
challenge in the use of opioids on a long-term basis is balancing benefit and
risk, based on determining the optimal dosage to manage the associated risks
against side effects. Opioid tapers are used to manage this risk and may last
from several weeks to several years. However, following the voluntary reduction
of long-term opioid dosages, many patients report improvements in function,
sleep, anxiety, and mood without worsening pain or even with decreased pain
levels. Furthermore, tapers are typically used to manage opioid tolerance,
hyperalgesia, enable more effective pain management prior to surgical
procedures, or transition to another form of opioids or non-opioid pain
medication. Nearly 18 million Americans may benefit from an opioid taper to
improve the long-term management of their chronic pain and improve the safety
and effectiveness of chronic opioid therapy. In particular, in rural
communities, patients may not have access to pain specialists and rely on their
primary care physicians for chronic pain management. The proposed technology
provides a critical tool for opioid tapering to rural primary care physicians,
where almost half of the opioids are prescribed. Using the clinical decision
support tool, primary care physicians will have a virtual pain specialist
advising of the anticipated predictive outcomes and actions to ensure a
successful taper with direct feedback from the
patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will apply machine learning techniques to develop algorithms
using a dataset that describes successful and unsuccessful tapers with clinical
data, medical decision making, patient experience, and physician /patient
interaction and communication. The predictive model will inform the medical
decision-maker of the likelihood of successive patient events and their impact
on the taper outcome based on real-time data about the patient's physical,
psychological, social, and emotional experience. This innovation will be
implemented on a smartphone platform to extend the physician / patient medical
decision model beyond the clinical setting into the patient's environment. This
will create a new model of a patient-centric taper wherein the estimated
clinical outcomes and associated actions are informed by optimizing the patient
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.