* 2135771
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Pacific Ocean Pathways in Support of Sustainable Development: An Integrated Approach
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Rense Kelsey, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2023
* USD 71,421.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
establish cost-effective, efficient, and sustainable transdisciplinary
processes, methods and networks to assist stakeholders, scientists, public
officers and citizens of the Pacific Islands to share common objectives and
actions to achieve environmental sustainability. The project will build a
network focusing on two pilot sites, Fiji and New Caledonia. The project will
examine the impacts of climate change and other stressors on the ocean
environment and ecosystem services. The team will investigate the consequences
of these impacts on the environment, society, and economy, to develop
sustainable and complementary pathways for future development and sustainable
ocean stewardship. These pilot sites will create the framework and methodology
and serve as a guide for application and adaptation to other interested Pacific
Island Countries. PACPATH will integrate a broad range of existing data sets,
generate new data sets, and develop new, locally relevant products that will
rely on freely available sources such as from the Copernicus Marine
Service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.