* 2135922
* Student Support: 2022 Powder Metallurgy &amp; Particulate Materials Conference and Additive Manufacturing with Powder Metallurgy Conference; Portland, Oregon; June 12-15, 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Daudi Waryoba, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2022
* USD 48,000.00

Powder metallurgy (PM) is a topic with applications in literally every portion
of the manufacturing sector in the U.S. economy, and therefore, directly impacts
economic welfare and national security. It is, thus, important to ensure that
the workforce need of powder metallurgy is met as well as the recruitment of
current undergraduate and graduate students for this industry matches such a
need. This award supports 40 selected graduate and undergraduate students
studying at US institutions to participate in the 2022 Powder Metallurgy and
Particulate Materials (PowderMet2022) conference, and co-located Additive
Manufacturing with Powder Metallurgy (AMPM2022) conference in Portland, Oregon,
June 12 - 15, 2022. These annual conferences are the primary source for PM
technology transfer and the major host to the largest annual North American
exhibit showcasing leading suppliers of PM, particulate materials, and metal
additive manufacturing (AM) process equipment, powders, and products, etc.
PowderMet/AMPM are considered the premier conferences in this field and draw
participants from industry, government laboratories and academic institutions,
and thus, ideal for student exposures to this field and the workforce
recruitment in a diverse manner for the PM industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award provides student participants with unique opportunities to exchange ideas
with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic
and international universities. This will not only stimulate learning and
training for the students, but also allows them to be exposed to new research
concepts and interact with those researchers who have made new advancements. In
addition to acquiring knowledge and an appreciation of the breadth of PM and
metal AM, becoming involved with professional societies will motivate students’
intellectual curiosity through developing a network of professional contacts and
resources. These opportunities will not only improve participants’ knowledge in
the field but also develop scientists and engineers who are ideally suited to
create the next generation of designs in PM and AM that will further advance the
nation’s manufacturing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.