* 2135586
* BRITE Fellow: Rigid Engineered Living Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Christopher Hernandez, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2027
* USD 962,837.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow grant will establish basic scientific and design
approaches needed to combine materials used in engineering applications
(plastics, metals, ceramics, etc.) with living organisms (bacteria). The
addition of living cells to engineering materials has the potential to instill
biological traits (growth, healing, etc.) to the materials used to make
vehicles, buildings, and commercial products. In particular, the ability of
living cells to continuously repair a material has the potential to reduce
financial and environmental costs generated when worn parts/devices are repaired
or replaced. The creation of new longer-lasting materials has the potential to
reduce energy needs associated with material manufacturing which are responsible
for 25 percent of global carbon emissions. In addition to advancing engineering
science, the work includes efforts to maintain US leadership in technology by
increasing domestic engineering talent pools through broadening participation by
members of underrepresented groups. Specifically, the efforts involve building a
network of engineering faculty to coordinate volunteer service, mentorship and
advocacy toward the long-term goal of achieving demographic parity in
engineering by the US Hispanic population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most convergent
research spanning engineering and biology focuses on the use of engineering
principals to address challenges in biology. In contrast, this BRITE Fellow
project focuses on the transformative concept of using biological systems to
address challenges in engineering. This project seeks to advance the field of
Engineered Living Materials by focusing on the design and function of rigid,
load carrying materials functionalized by the presence of living organisms. The
project addresses the following research questions: (i) What design principles
are required to maintain viability of resident cells within rigid engineered
materials? (ii) What are the best ways to populate or repopulate a rigid
material using living cells? (iii) What existing manufacturing techniques can be
used to create materials easily populated by bacteria? and (iv) How could
mechanically sensitive bacteria be used within the materials to sense mechanical
damage? The research uses a naturally occurring rigid living material, bone, as
a biological inspiration. Nanofluidic devices are used to identify functional
design principles for channel morphology, nutrient delivery, and the utility of
externally applied fluid pressure and/or mechanical loading. The findings will
be applicable across several classes of rigid materials (polymers, metals,
ceramics) and several types of cells researched for use in engineered living
materials (bacteria, fungi, microalgae, etc.).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.