* 2135846
* EAGER: Transfer by Contact using Adhesion Engineering for Integration of Two-Dimensional Materials into Functional Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Farnaz Niroui, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2022
* USD 185,595.00

The discovery of graphene has led to the discovery of atomically thin two-
dimensional materials with diverse and unique properties. Two-dimensional
materials have rapidly grown into one of the leading material platforms for
next-generation electronics, optoelectronics and quantum devices. For these
materials to be integrated into functional devices, they need to be isolated
from their growth substrate and transferred onto a target surface without damage
and contamination. This materials integration is challenging to achieve through
the current transfer techniques which generally rely on wet and high temperature
processes using additional support layers. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project looks to overcome these challenges by
developing and understanding a dry and low-temperature process that allows
direct transfer of two-dimensional materials from a source to target by a single
direct contact and delamination step without a need for a support layer. Such a
technique can help reduce damage and contamination during the transfer to
achieve otherwise hard to realize structures in a scalable and high-throughput
manner. As a result, this transfer platform can help in promoting our nation’s
global competitiveness in the rapidly evolving field of two-dimensional
materials and their applications. This research program will provide
opportunities for training students in this area. The results of this research
will be directly integrated as a laboratory teaching module in a new course
being developed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research is to develop a
dry, low-temperature, sacrificial layer-free transfer of monolayer two-
dimensional materials. In this approach, transfer occurs as the source and
target surfaces are brought into contact and delaminated under controlled
conditions using an aligned transfer printing platform. Foundational to this is
engineering of the target substrate surface with interactions and adhesion
mechanisms beyond van der Waals forces that promote a successful transfer. This
EAGER will develop this approach for 2D monolayer transfer with a focus on
surface adhesion engineering through tuning the surface chemical terminations
and mechanical characteristics, studying the adhesion mechanisms, probing the
transfer quality and accordingly optimizing for a damage and contamination-free
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.