* 2135743
* Synthesizing Research on Spatial Taxonomies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2021,03/31/2024
* David Uttal, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 03/31/2024
* USD 98,858.00

This award will support a series of workshops focused on spatial abilities and
tests related to STEM education. Individual difference in spatial thinking has
been tied to differences in STEM learning, but advances in applying these
research findings to practice have been impeded by the lack of an organizing
theory and related measurement protocols. The team of investigators from
Northwestern University, Temple University, and the University of California at
Santa Barbara propose to address this gap in the literature by convening a
series of workshops and will produce a theoretical review and explication of
taxonomies of spatial abilities and a consensus document that summarizes the
most important next steps in research and development of spatial tests for STEM
education. The project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which
supports fundamental research that advances the research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will consist of a series of three
meetings (both virtual and in-person) bringing together researchers from
cognitive science, psychometrics, science education and discipline-based
education research (DBER) fields. The iterative nature of the meetings is
designed to facilitate consensus-making in developing the taxonomy. The
participants will conduct a review of the literatures in multiple fields in
order to bring into contact the various theoretical and analytic frameworks that
have governed measurement of spatial cognition. Their preliminary findings will
be presented at conferences in a number of different fields in order to get
further input. The final documents will be written for wide
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.