* 2135879
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Residual Risk of Extreme Floods: a challenge for achieving sustainable development goals
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Mathias Kondolf, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 70,000.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will create an
international network of experts and a community of practice to address the
residual risk of flooding damage to help inform sustainable development. The
exposure of human populations to flooding has increased in the last several
decades, but many people are unaware that they reside in flooding risk zones.
Residual risk of extreme floods (RREflood) project aims to help manage this risk
and increase communication with the public by creating a network focused on the
interplay among residual risk and its management. The project members will
collaboratively design a framework to integrate residual risk in local planning
efforts, create a platform to facilitate advances in basic knowledge and tools
to reduce residual flood risk, and identify research needs that will be
beneficial to countries worldwide. This project will promote mechanisms to raise
capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management and will
identify effective ways to communicate the residual flood risk to residents and
stakeholders, with the goal to reduce the adverse effects of natural disasters.
The international scientific community will be enhanced by the addition of a
novel network of experts on residual flood risk; this network will facilitate
exchanges and mutual learning to improve methods in global practice. The
RREFlood project will thus create a new community around global flood risk and
engage in pathways to sustainability through global research and community
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.