* 2135328
* Collaborative Research: Research: Early-Career Engineers Experiences with Equity and Ethics as They Transition to Practice and Implications for Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Rebecca Atadero, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2025
* USD 159,038.00

Transportation systems, computing algorithms, and healthcare devices are among
the many designs, products, and systems developed by the engineering profession
that have important impacts on society. The decisions made by engineers can help
advance fairness and justice in society, or these decisions can increase and
build upon existing inequities leading to adverse consequences for minoritized
populations. Furthermore, the engineering profession is a field with a history
of exclusion where People of Color, people with disabilities, members of the
LGBTQ+ community, and white women remain underrepresented after years of effort
to increase diversity. To address these concerns about engineering practice, we
need to understand and then transform how new engineers form their attitudes and
behaviors around social equity and inclusion in the workplace. Engineering
students learn about the ethical obligations of engineers to benefit humanity
while they are in school, and it is becoming more common for engineering
students to learn specifically about how diversity, equity, and inclusion are
important to the engineering profession. And hiring organizations might also
provide learning opportunities on issues of diversity and inclusion with various
goals such as creating more inclusive environment. In this project we will study
new engineers, in their first five years of practice, to learn how these
engineers are using lessons from school and the messages they receive in the
workplace to shape their professional behavior at a key transitional stage. The
ultimate goal of this study is to help develop ethical and equity minded
engineers who are prepared to use their professional work to enhance fairness in
society and in engineering workplaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
use a sequential mixed methods design including a national survey and
interviews. The research process will document the perceptions and experiences
of early-career engineers involving equity and ethics and their preparedness to
address these issues based on their learning experiences at both engineering
school and the workplace. Our research seeks to answer the following questions:
1) What aspects of their academic preparation and exposure to issues of equity
and ethics do early-career engineers find relevant and use in their professional
work? 2) What are early-career engineersâ€™ experiences of on-the-job learning
related to equity and ethics and what types of resources are available to
support these learning experiences? 3) What are the perceptions of early-career
engineers about equity and ethics and their importance in interpersonal
interactions in the work environment? 4) What are the perceptions of early-
career engineers about equity and ethics and their importance in the
professional work of engineers? In addition, what experiences/situations have
contributed to these perceptions? And 5) To what extent and in what ways do
early-career engineers with different social identities have differing views and
motivation to act on issues of equity and ethics in engineering? We will use our
findings to create learning activities (such as videos) based on the situations
where our participants encountered decisions with equity and ethics
implications. These activities can be used by engineering instructors to
incorporate realistic early-career situations involving equity and ethics in
undergraduate education. This project has an advisory board including members of
professional societies and industry who will help guide the study and convey our
findings to organizations that can use our findings to shape early-career
professional development of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Research in the Formation of Engineers (RFE) and the
Ethical and Responsible Research (ER2) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.