* 2135446
* EAGER: Computer-Assisted Redaction and Anonymization of Scholarly Communications and Products (CARASCAP)
* CSE,OAC
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Christopher Lee, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,858.00

The Computer-Assisted Redaction and Anonymization of Scholarly Communications
and Products (CARASCAP) project will produce a proof-of-concept open-source
application stack to assist research teams and individual scholars in
identifying, documenting, and redacting sensitive and personally identifying
information within their research products. The potential presence of personally
identifying information (PII) and other sensitive information is a significant
inhibitor to public access to datasets and other products of publicly funded
research. Without reliable and cost-effective processes for identifying such
information, the default response is most often to indefinitely prevent the
public from accessing entire collections of research products. By developing new
components and tools for iterative redaction functions incorporated into
workflows to prepare datasets for public dissemination, this project will foster
a stronger ecosystem of research data publishing efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The software will be developed primarily in Python, MIT
Licensed, and packaged for distribution on the Python Package Index (PyPI).
Independent modules will interpret and modify the source material data
structures. For this prototype phase, the project will focus on formats likely
to be of interest to a broad range of collections, including open text scraped
from web pages at specific URLs, text formats, and modern office formats (e.g.,
PDF,.odt, .docx, .pst, .ost).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.