* 2135988
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Securing Network Embedding against Privacy Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Wendy Hui Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 12/31/2024
* USD 499,941.00

Many complex systems take the form of networks, such as social networks,
biological networks, and information networks. It is well recognized that
performing data analysis on large networks is challenging. To tackle this
challenge, numerous network representation learning (NRL) approaches have been
designed to learn low-dimensional vector representations (embedding) that
preserve the network information. Due to their advantages, network embedding,
instead of the original network data, is either released to the public or shared
with third-party machine learning service providers or other parties for
downstream analytics. Since the network embedding inherently captures the
structure and properties of the original network, it raises the serious concern
whether the embedding also encodes the sensitive information in the input
network data. An adversary can launch various privacy attacks on the network
embedding to infer the sensitive information in the input network data. Despite
significant progress in machine learning privacy, most of the existing privacy
attacks mainly focus on the models trained on non-graph data (tabular data,
text, and images). Privacy of NRL models and their output network embeddings are
largely ignored. The understanding of the nature and extent of vulnerabilities
of network embedding against the privacy attacks as well as the investigation of
effective defense mechanisms are extremely limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address the core privacy issues of network embedding through a
unified research program that consists of exploring the privacy vulnerabilities
of network embedding, investigating the causes of these vulnerabilities, and
developing rigorous, yet practical, techniques to mitigate these
vulnerabilities. The project plans to tackle three fundamental research
problems: (i) design three types of privacy attacks, namely membership inference
attacks, attribute inference attacks, and property inference attacks, to infer
the sensitive membership/attributes/properties in the original network data from
network embedding; (ii) analyze which types of data characteristics and model
properties impact the privacy vulnerabilities of network embedding against the
three types of attacks; and (iii) design effective defense mechanisms to secure
network embedding. The research outcomes of this project will be disseminated
broadly through developing new courses, involving students at various levels
into cutting-edge research in machine learning, and training of female and
underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.