* 2135324
* I-Corps: Automated DNA testing device based on a nanopore genetic sequencer with a graphene nanoribbon
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Nathan Gianneschi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
private genetic testing and specialized bacterial and viral screenings. The
demand for genetic testing has increased over the past decade, however existing
genetics companies often rely on selling clients' genetic information in order
to remain profitable. While this platform will originally be used for human
genomes, it can be modified in order to sequence bacteria and viruses. This
could have applications for reaching remote populations and enabling diagnostics
for infection and illnesses, as well as offering the possibility of at-home
viral and bacterial testing. With COVID-19 highlighting the importance of early
detection and quarantine for infected populations, this technology could be
adapted to test for the yearly influenza or other contagious diseases, and to
more generally streamline screening and diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project develops a genetic sequencer using a graphene nanoribbon with
nanopores suspended in ionic fluid to detect voltage changes as DNA translocates
through it. Nucleotide base pairs are distinguished based on their unique
electronic signature, which are analyzed to determine the genetic code of the
gene and detect crucial mutations in the gene of interest. A recent discovery
has found that fortifying the graphene with an alloy allows the DNA to pass
through in a controlled manner. While it was previously only able to sequence a
few nucleotides, the improvements made on the model have allowed for full gene
sequencing. The platform has the potential to enable more accurate, rapid, and
cost-effective sequencing compared to other protein membrane
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.