* 2135439
* EAGER: From Theory to Practice of Elastic Interval Runtime Schedulers
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Samee Khan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Data centers and high-performance computing systems (HPC) across the globe form
the backbone of modern-day computing services and applications, such as Internet
searches, scientific discoveries, emails, weather predictions, social media
platforms, and data sharing. Resource (computational, memory, and network)
orchestration within data centers and HPC, is, and always has been, a challenge,
the foremost reason being that application requirements and resource utilization
cannot be predicted with 100% accuracy. Consequently, resource-orchestration
methodologies undertake critical assumption on the application needs (for
example, job arrival rates and job completions times) to utilize resources. More
than often, such assumptions lead to bottlenecks or underutilization. This
project investigates a new class of resource-orchestration methodologies, called
the Elastic Interval Runtime Schedulers (EIRIS), that do not undertake
assumptions on the job arrival rates or completion times or bounds on the
application parallelism. The project will develop practical solutions for EIRIS
anchored in solid mathematical underpinnings. The project is expected to have a
profound impact on the scheduling theory and runtime systems for data centers
and HPC. Applications immediately benefiting from this work include (but are not
limited to): cloud gaming, video coding, and video transcoding. The project
research findings will be integrated into a graduate class on computer systems.
Moreover, a monthly podcast, entitled concepts in computer systems, will be
broadcasted to Mississippi high school students with the goal to encourage them
to pursue education in computer and information science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the mathematical
underpinnings, theoretical bounds, and translatable runtime for EIRIS. The
project will be divided into three interleaving thrusts focusing on: (1)
mathematical underpinnings for EIRIS by utilizing concepts and operations from
group theory to: (a) develop an oracle for analyses, (b) derive theoretical
lower bounds, and (c) make an attempt to further refine the lower bounds; (2)
developing a set of resource-orchestration methodologies for EIRIS by utilizing
concepts from bin packing algorithms to develop procedures predominantly relying
on: (a) actual job duration times and (b) remaining job duration times; and (3)
an autonomic runtime for EIRIS in G-Hadoop by implementing (a) distributed
resource management systems, (b) metadata servers, and (c) packages for
reproducible artifacts. All thrusts will be deployed and tested on large-scale
computer systems for demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.