* 2135734
* BRITE Pivot: Dynamic Strain Engineering of Atomically Thin Semiconductors
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2025
* SungWoo Nam, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2025
* USD 555,570.00

Continued advances in micro- and nano-electronics require a fundamental
rethinking in the approach behind device concept, manufacturing, architecture,
energy efficiency, and modeling and simulation. For example, the use of
deformation or strain, in particular dynamic strain, has remain largely
unexplored. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable
Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award supports fundamental research to
elucidate our understanding beyond static straining by bringing dynamic, high
frequency mechanical resonances to strain engineering of atomically thin
semiconductors. Dynamic strain modulated properties of these semiconductors will
enable reconfigurable micro- and nano-electronic and photonic technologies. The
advances made here are expected to impact the micro- and nano-electronics
systems industry and facilitate the continuity of United States’ leading
position in semiconductors. As part of the award, the lead researcher will also
receive training in design, fabrication, and characterization of high frequency
small scale electromechanical systems as a visiting researcher at the NASA Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL). Graduate students too will be exposed to JPL’s
collaborative environment and mentoring. Additionally, the award will be used to
engage minority and women, veterans, and high school students in nanoengineering
research via summer opportunities and field trips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research addresses the knowledge gap in ultrafast strain engineering and dynamic
strain-coupled properties of two-dimensional (2D), atomically thin
semiconductors. Dynamically tunable, high frequency surface acoustic waves
(SAWs) will be employed as a mean to modulating local strain in various 2D
semiconductors. By pushing the SAW modulation frequency in GHz regime, the
effects of dynamic straining or matched mechanical resonance and optical
(lifetime of exciton) transition on optoelectronic properties will be
investigated. Another focus of the research will be on the coupling of SAW with
the lattice straining and local strain reconfigurability in transition metal
dichalcogenides (TMD) semiconductors under different SAW patterns for modulated
exciton devices. Multiscale, multiphysics modeling of dynamic straining will be
used to build a comprehensive understanding of these dynamically reconfigurable
local strain and strain-coupled optoelectronic
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.