* 2135954
* EAGER: Developing a framework to identify and mitigate perceptual and technical barriers in code sharing to facilitate reproducible and transparent research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Serghei Mangul, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,934.00

This project will conduct exploratory research into the barriers and strategies
for making research code publicly accessible. While there has been significant
progress in making research datasets accessible for purposes of open science and
reproducibility, code and other forms of software developed in research projects
are less frequently made available persistently. In scientific research, it is
not only imperative to publish a detailed description of the study design,
methodology, results, and interpretation, but there is a pressing need to make
all the research products (including code and software) publicly available,
shareable, well documented, and organized to facilitate reproducible and
transparent research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An important research product that is
an essential element ensuring reproducible research is the analytic code used
for the analysis. In contrast to sharing data, which is widely enforced by
scientific journals and research organizations, there is limited guidance on
code sharing which in addition to data represents an essential component of
reproducible and rigorous research. The project will result in: A) Descriptive
information which will be collected through one-to-one interviews through
teleconferencing, as well as by distributing surveys across 5,000 randomly
selected principal investigators who were supported by NSF and/or NIH, B)
Recommendations for code sharing to be developed through a series of structured
teleconferences with informed experts, notably editors of scientific journals
with a strong interest in code sharing and reproducible research, and C)
Formation of a Research Code Alliance (RCA) to develop a framework to mitigate
perceptual and technical barriers in code sharing to facilitate reproducible and
transparent research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.