* 2135584
* BRITE Pivot: Micro-Macro Modeling of Reactive Flow and Rock Weathering Enhanced by Artificial Intelligence
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Chloe Arson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 525,070.00

Reactive flow is key to geomechanical instabilities that occur over
spatiotemporal scales spanning several orders of magnitude. It is particularly
challenging to formally link the microstructure changes induced by chemical
reactions and pore deformation to measurable physical and mechanical properties,
because the microstructural features that govern macroscopic fluid flow differ
from those that dominate elastic, plastic and brittle behaviors. This Boosting
Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE)
Pivot award will deploy Artificial Intelligence (AI) strategies to predict the
spatiotemporal scales of thermo-hydro-chemo-mechanical (THCM) instabilities and
automatically adapt the representation of the microstructure as localizations
occur. This adaptive multi-scale modeling approach will help improve the safety
and sustainability of long-term underground geological storage facilities and
understanding of chemical weathering processes in the bedrock, which play a
central role in nutrient supply, landslide hazards, and the global carbon cycle.
The integration of computer science, applied mechanics, geotechnical engineering
and geomorphology aims to grow convergence research towards the design of new
materials and the fundamental understanding of the behavior of solid and soft
matter, hence providing new modeling tools to decipher the rules of life and
harness the data revolution through deep neural networks that will highlight
hidden correlations between topological features and phenomena. The PI will
create multi-semester undergraduate research opportunities and international
research experiences for students, develop a diversity/equity/inclusion (DEI)
seminar series and co-design innovative inclusion metrics in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploration of AI for computational
geomechanics is at its infancy. The researched integration of AI with the
homogenization theory will spearhead impactful advances in applied mechanics,
including the modeling of open thermodynamic systems, the development of a new
class of adaptive micro-macro models and applications over a wide range of
spatiotemporal scales. The research plan will integrate training, research,
dissemination and DEI activities for the PI and the students involved in the
project, and will be organized around the five following scientific objectives:
(1) Construct a database of virtual experiments of confined reactive flow with a
full-field method; (2) Train and test a deep convolutional neural network (CNN)
to recognize microstructural features that attract high spatiotemporal
variations of field variables; (3) Enrich Eshelbyâ€™s homogenization theory with
inclusion-specific characteristic times; (4) Train and test a deep CNN to adapt
the homogenization scheme as a function of the microstructure changes and
localizations that occur after characteristic times have elapsed; (5) Solve
coupled THCM boundary-value problems of geomechanics with the adaptive
homogenization method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.