* 2135907
* Effects of Mechanical Stress and Phenotype Switching on Human Stem Cell-Derived Vascular Smooth Muscle Cells:  Modeling Gene Regulatory Networks
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Kenneth Boheler, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will reveal how human vascular smooth muscle cells (vSMCs) adapt to
mechanical forces like blood pressure to switch from a state that favors the
formation of new vessels to one designed to control blood flow to tissues. The
mechanisms responsible for this transition in humans are poorly understood,
despite the importance of this switch in human vascular development and tissue
repair. Beyond scientific advances, the project will promote the training and
education of undergraduate and graduate students in cell biology, physics and
computational modeling that will prepare them for careers in academia and
industry. Research internships with a local majority-minority magnet math-
science high school will also offer training opportunities for Baltimore City
students to encourage STEM-based careers. Long-term the benefits to society will
likely include new approaches to model or utilize vSMCs for vessel formation and
vascular repair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to determine
how mechanical forces regulate vSMC phenotype switching using a human vSMC
surrogate model of perinatal development. The model system employed here relies
on lineage-specific vSMCs differentiated from human induced pluripotent stem
cells with well-defined synthetic and contractile phenotypic states. The
mechanical properties and response of these vSMCs to stress/strain will be
assessed using platforms that enable single cell analyses and stretching of
cells in both 2D and 3D geometries. Once “tuned” to maximize internal force
development, the model systems will be used with RNA-seq, bioinformatics, and
computational modeling to identify key regulatory factors (e.g., transcription
factors, signaling molecules) and to model regulatory networks predicted to
control hPSC-vSMC responses to increased stress/strain. When coupled with ChIP-
seq assays, the results will be used to decipher how mechanical forces affect
transcriptional mechanisms responsible for phenotype transitions in
vSMCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded jointly by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function (CDF) and Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB) clusters of
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.