* 2135296
* Signaling Logic Underlying Mammalian Germ Layer Differentiation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2025
* Aryeh Warmflash, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,191,793.00

All organisms begin life as a single cell which then grows, divides, and
specializes into all of the diverse cell types which form the organs of the
body. How this occurs is one of the most fundamental questions in biology and is
key to understanding our own origins as well as the diverse forms of life on
earth. It is now known that cells can coordinate their differentiation to
specialized cell fates by communicating using extracellular proteins which are
secreted by a cell and then received by its neighbors, influencing the outcome
of their differentiation. Cells experience signaling through multiple pathways
simultaneously, and the outcome depends on the dynamics of how these multiple
signals are received and interpreted. Understanding how a cell processes the
dynamic information received in making a cell fate decision is a central
question in developmental biology. A key challenge in solving this question is
the complexity of these signals and the regulatory networks which cells use to
interpret them. In this project, we will use experiments with stem cells
together with a novel mathematical framework to investigate the first decisions
that embryonic cells make as they begin to specialize into the cell types that
will ultimately form the brain, heart, lungs and other organs. The investigators
expect the results to reveal fundamental mechanisms by which these decisions are
made, as well as to yield a model which can be used to predict the outcome of
different signaling dynamics on cell fate, which will ultimately improve our
ability to direct stem cells to any given fate. As part of the performance of
this project, the investigators will train a diverse group of scientists from
the undergraduate to the postdoctoral level, and will engage in public outreach
and education on the topic of stem cells. They will undertake a project to
improve a key public resource for science education by editing the articles
dealing with stem cell research on Wikipedia. The investigators will also
generate resources for both mathematical modeling and experimental studies of
stem cell dynamics which will be widely shared with the scientific community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In mammalian embryos, the initial cell fate decisions
within the embryo proper occur at gastrulation stage. A cascade of three
signaling pathways, BMP, Wnt, and Nodal is essential for gastrulation. Each one
initiates the next pathway by transcriptionally activating its ligand, and loss
of any of these pathways leads to a failure in gastrulation. It is known that
cell fate decisions are made combinatorially as a function of the dynamic
activity of these three pathways, however, the relationship between each pathway
and the next and how they combine to generate cell fates remains unknown,
because of the difficulty of manipulating and measuring signaling and cell fate
in the mammalian embryo. Here the investigators propose to use embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) as a platform for investigating these questions using a combination
of live-cell imaging, quantitative analysis, and mathematical modeling. We will
quantitatively characterize and model how BMP induces Wnt and then how Wnt
induces Nodal, and how cell fate is a function of the dynamics of these multiple
signals. They will then generate a synthesized model for how these three
pathways control fate decisions. Due to the complexity of this problem, they
will not attempt to model the gene regulatory network directly but will use
landscape models, a mathematical formalization of the concept of the Waddington
landscape in which a differentiating cell is envisioned as a ball rolling down a
hill to valleys which represent stable cell fates. The investigators and others
have recently had success in using this framework to quantitatively fit data and
to make predictions about developmental systems, and here we will extend it and
apply it to this key phase of development. They expect this to reveal the
landscape in which cells make fate decisions, providing fundamental insight into
this important problem as well as serving as a tool for predictive control over
stem cell differentiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.