* 2135530
* 2021 Carbon Capture, Utilization and Storage: Permanently Removing CO2 from Our Emissions and Atmosphere
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Greeshma Gadikota, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 33,600.00

2135530 (Gadikota). This grant provides funding to support U.S -based graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and early career investigators to attend the
2021 Gordon Research Conference on Carbon Capture, Utilization, and Storage
(CCUS ) to be held October 24-29, 2021 at Sunday River, Maine. The conference
will serve as a forum to discuss scientific advancements, technological
progress, and policy implications associated with permanently removing CO2 from
emissions and the atmosphere. The conference will address opportunities and
challenges at the forefront of smart carbon management including process-
intensified, energy efficient pathways for capturing, storing, and utilizing
carbon, novel materials for removing carbon from dilute and distributed sources,
integrated reaction and transport considerations in natural and engineered
environments, efficient CO2 recycling strategies, and policy and environmental
justice implications for deploying these technologies. The conference is
designed to foster international collaborations in the area of carbon management
and facilitate the co-creation of scalable, deployable pathways for a
sustainable climate future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The need to attract and train
the next generation work-force to tackle challenging problems in the field of
carbon capture, utilization, storage, removal, and recycling is critical. To
address this challenge, the Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on CCUS has been
organized in tandem with the conference. This seminar will involve the
participation of early career researchers who organize discussions for ambitious
and creative approaches to develop and sustain innovative careers in the area of
carbon management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.