* 2135159
* Community-engaged Courseware for STEM Success at Two-year Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Pamela Pape-Lindstrom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 10/31/2024
* USD 1,747,187.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by integrating two-year college
instructors into the development and improvement of Carnegie Mellon University’s
Open Learning Initiative (OLI) adaptive courseware that will improve student
outcomes while reducing the cost for a broad range of gateway STEM courses.
Evidence suggests that engaging a larger population of educators and students in
the process of data-driven customization, improvement, and expansion of the
courseware can act as a multiplier, better situating courseware in the local
context and connecting with learners’ prior knowledge. The COVID-inspired pivot
to remote instruction has highlighted the potential of active, asynchronous
learning activities to improve learning, and has left a larger population of
educators open to innovating with these types of educational technologies. The
project will build on prior work where educators have engaged with OLI, and
lessons were learned on how to best support faculty with integrating courseware
into their instructional practice. Based on these prior findings, the project
plans to expand these efforts to two-year systems in other states. The project
plans to engage students, instructors, and college community leaders to
understand the specific needs in terms of policy around the implementation of
online learning for underserved STEM learners at scale. This project will
involve faculty and staff at 16 two-year institutions in New York and Maryland,
reaching at least 50 STEM classrooms, and impacting thousands of learners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve outcomes for learners in STEM
gateway courses through adoption, customization, and learner-contributions to
OLI courseware. The project will leverage learner-interaction and authoring data
that is captured by the system, and will use analytic methods, made widely
available via LearnSphere, to investigate the impact of courseware changes on
outcomes for targeted learning populations while simultaneously informing the
iterative improvement of courseware by faculty. Specific goals include improving
the user experience for these activities, better understanding the impact of
these activities on STEM success, especially with regard to traditionally
underserved and adult STEM learners. The project will provide tools for
customization and learner sourcing, expand open STEM adaptive courseware
content, understand the ed-tech innovation policy landscape, and produce policy
recommendations for scaling nationally. The project will provide access to OLI
professional development (PD) workshops; collecting necessary outcome and
demographic data; and collaborating with OLI researchers on analysis. The
project will create tools and methods to support faculty to engage in data-
driven customization and provide expanded contributions from students to
learning materials and insights. Carnegie Mellon University will partner with
State University of New York (SUNY) and Maryland community colleges and leaders
reaching broad and diverse populations. Lead implementation partners including
Harford (MD) and Nassau (NY) Community Colleges will drive core research efforts
and facilitate recruitment of faculty in multiple STEM domains. In conjunction
with these efforts, leaders from state-wide organizations SUNY OER Services and
the Maryland Open Source Textbook initiative will help to disseminate these
efforts more broadly throughout their respective state community college
communities via existing grant and outreach programs. The NSF program
description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education
at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects seeking to
improve STEM education using innovative and high-impact practices that are
evidence-based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.