* 2135864
* Establishing Community College Pathways to Environmental Science Through Research Opportunities and Professional Engagement along the Buffalo National River
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Laura Berry, North Arkansas College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 540,142.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by redesigning the typical two-
year college model of environmental science education to improve the success,
completion, and transfer rates of community college students. The project will
provide an undergraduate research program. It will include extended time for
field work and involvement in applied science using research and monitoring
projects deemed critical by environmental partners. The research program will
also include a curriculum that integrates science-thinking, communications, and
analytics. This will support building connections between North Arkansas College
(Northark) students, university faculty, and environmental professionals. Each
semester, pairs of complementary courses will be scheduled in convenient blocks
to provide extended time for field research and serve as a platform to integrate
science and non-science content. The College’s greenhouse, high-tunnel, and
planned environmental studies plot, will provide on- and near-campus research
facilities. Sites on the Buffalo National River will be the launching points for
multiple research and monitoring projects needed by environmental partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s specific goals are to (1) embed authentic
project-based learning and undergraduate research into Northark’s existing
Associate of Science in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics, (2) recruit and
retain a diverse group of students, (3) utilize engaged environmental and
educational partners in program development and training, and (4) provide
professional development for program faculty. Activities are designed to advance
the understanding of techniques and interventions required to provide in-depth
undergraduate research experiences and professional connections. The project
will incorporate evidence-based strategies to support women, first generation,
low income, and Hispanic/Latino students with well-structured collaborative
learning, relevant projects, and ongoing interaction with faculty and
professional environmental scientists. The key activities of this proposal will
be designed to be scaled and adapted by other two-year colleges. This project
will also provide much needed resources for environmental monitoring in the
state. Northark will share all results from this project with other disciplines
and programs in the college, on its media outlets, through presentations at the
college and at local, state, regional, and national conferences. Specifically,
the Northark team will share the project’s strategies for enhancing experiential
learning through undergraduate research and immersive field work with other
community colleges. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation and
Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher
Education supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year
colleges. The program description promotes innovative and evidence-based
practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.