* 2135310
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Learning Fault Tolerance at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Joshua Booth, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 12/31/2024
* USD 199,647.00

In computer-aided design and analysis of engineered systems such as automobiles
or semiconductor chips, computational models are simulated on high-performance
computers to characterize and evaluate key attributes. The sheer scale of such
high-performance computing systems, e.g., over 20 billion transistors in Summit
(one of the world's fastest supercomputers), increases the likelihood of
transient hardware faults from events such as cosmic radiation or processor-chip
voltage fluctuations. The likelihood of such errors and their negative impacts
are further increased as such simulations are typically long running, and the
corruption of a single data field or variable may require weeks to months of re-
computations before critical decisions can be made. This project will develop
automated approaches that bring fault tolerance to hardware faults for such
applications which are widely used not only across multiple industrial sectors
but to also increase the predictive power of climate or weather models to aid
critical decision making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional fault-tolerant
schemes can be either application-specific, requiring significant programmer
effort to redesign or customize large-scale software, or application-agnostic
where all or most data are redundantly stored periodically to allow for
recovery, thus limiting their scalability due to their significant memory and
processing overheads. This project seeks to address these limitations by
providing a theoretical foundation for a new class of fault-tolerant schemes
that are suitable for the broad array of applications based on iterative
numerical simulations that evolve over time on discretized spatial domains. This
project is based on the premise that in such physics-based applications, the
rate of change of the solution vector components across time steps (iterations)
and spatial domains is a key metric to automatically identifying the critical
computational variables, monitoring their evolution, and dynamically selecting
the type of safeguarding techniques that should be applied. The investigators
will pursue three key directions: (i) characterizing the intrinsic resiliency of
the application by developing resiliency gradient metrics, (ii) developing and
testing fault-tolerance schemes that adapt the level and type of protection to
the resiliency gradient with the goal of reducing computational overheads and
increasing scalability, and (iii) constructing an automatic online decision-
based learning framework for adaptively selecting fault-tolerance methods in
relation to the system's ability to use approximate computing and co-scheduling
techniques. The investigators will also work closely with application and
runtime system developers to seek broader use of this fault tolerance framework,
develop specialized undergraduate and graduate curriculum for student training,
and offer research experiences to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.