* 2135617
* The Fluid Mechanics of Bacterial Swimming in Yield Stress Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 459,414.00

Biological fluids such as mucous can behave like elastic solids or complex
viscous liquid depending on the applied stress. The goal of this project is to
understand the fluid mechanics of bacterial swimming in model complex fluids
that resemble biological fluids. This comprehensive theoretical, computational,
and experimental study will fill an important knowledge gap in understanding the
relationship between the properties of biological fluids and the mechanics of
bacterial motility. Swimming capabilities significantly contribute to the
virulence of pathogenic bacteria by allowing them to reach the plasma membrane
of susceptible cells and cause systemic infections. Therefore, data acquired in
the project will be useful to researchers who want to mitigate or treat
bacterial diseases. It will also be crucial for bioengineers aiming to deliver
drugs via bacteria or synthetic swimmers. In addition, the project will provide
outreach that inspires interest in engineering among K-12 students by
illustrating the societal impact of engineering science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial motility in biological fluids such as mucous is
complicated by the presence of a yield stress, a minimal stress necessary to
deform the fluid, the coupled viscous and elastic responses of the fluid, and
the non-continuum nature arising because the bacteriumâ€™s flagella have a
thickness comparable with the spacing between mucus strands. A novel
computational approach accounting for this complex rheology will capture the
bacterium cell using an immersed boundary method and the bundle of flagella
using slender-body theory. The solvent and polymer will be modeled as two
interpenetrating fluids with the thin flagella exerting their stresses directly
only on the solvent. In complementary experiments, nanoparticle organic hybrid
bio-compatible materials will be designed with rheology and structure that mimic
the biological fluids. Dark-field and phase-contrast microscopy of suspensions
of E. coli will provide statistically accurate measurements of the swimming
speed and cell rotation rate distribution. In microscopy tracking individual
cells, separate fluorescent dyes will enable the determination of the different
rotation rates of the cell and flagella bundle. Observations in Newtonian fluids
will be used to characterize the rotary motors that drive the flagella. The
motility measurements will be performed in collaboration with Professor Wilson
Poon at the University of Edinburgh. The experiments will determine the
criterion for cells to swim, the speed of cells that do swim, and the distinct
resistances the non-continuum fluid exert on the cell and flagella, thereby
testing three crucial predictions of the computation and
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.