* 2135761
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Building Urban Community Networks for Sustainable Cities in Africa
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Olufemi Taiwo, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2024
* USD 69,999.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 55-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations focused on support for transdisciplinary approaches to global
environmental change challenges and opportunities. It aims to accelerate
delivery of the international research most urgently needed to remove critical
barriers to sustainability by aligning and mobilizing international resources.
Each partner country provides funding for their researchers within a consortium
to alleviate the need for funds to cross international borders. This approach
facilitates effective leveraging of national resources to support excellent
research on topics of global relevance best tackled through a multinational
approach, recognizing that global challenges need global solutions. This award
provides support for the U.S. researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist
of partners from at least three of the participating countries. The teams will
establish transdisciplinary networks to develop innovative solutions for
sustainable development pathways and seek to assess the positive and negative
inter-linkages between the economy, technology, institutions with the
environment, climate, biodiversity, and human well-being to understand potential
pathways to a sustainable world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
determine the social, economic, and ecological challenges and their
interdependencies affect the sustainability of African cities. The project will
develop and work with urban community networks in six representative African
cities networks to develop potential pathways to foster sustainability of these
and other African cities. The project will assess the social, economic and
ecological assets of these cities and determine how these assets are distributed
in space and time. This data will help the project reframe the question from
“what city communities do not have” to “what city communities have” for building
synergies and interdependencies. The project will utilize ground-truthed,
satellite images, social and ecological facilities and participatory geographic
information systems, maps of community spaces of interest, along with data from
and extensive review of existing urban policies, directives, and by-laws, to
build potential sustainability pathways. The stakeholders will then localize and
downscale the plans from global to national level, and from national to
community level. Based on these findings and experiences, plausible scenarios
for sustainable African cities will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.