* 2135185
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Massive Phytoplankton Blooms over the Australian-Antarctic Ridge
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Joseph Resing, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 08/31/2025
* USD 508,887.00

Phytoplankton blooms throughout the world’s oceans support critical marine
ecosystems and help remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from the atmosphere.
Traditionally, it has been assumed that phytoplankton blooms in the Southern
Ocean are stimulated by iron from either nearby land or sea-ice. However, recent
work demonstrates that hydrothermal vents may be an additional iron source for
phytoplankton blooms. This enhancement of phytoplankton productivity by
different iron sources supports rich marine ecosystems and leads to the
sequestration of carbon in the deep ocean. Our proposed work will uncover the
importance of hydrothermal activity in stimulating a large phytoplankton bloom
along the southern boundary of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current just north of
the Ross Sea. It will also lead towards a better understanding of the overall
impact of hydrothermal activity on the carbon cycle in the Southern Ocean, which
appears to trigger local hotspots of biological activity which are a potential
sink for atmospheric CO2. This project will encourage the participation of
underrepresented groups in ocean sciences, as well as providing educational
opportunities for high school and undergraduate students, through three
different programs. Stanford University’s Summer Undergraduate Research in
Geoscience and Engineering (SURGE) program provides undergraduates from
different US universities and diverse cultural backgrounds the opportunity to
spend a summer doing a research project at Stanford. The Stanford Earth Summer
Undergraduate Research Program (SESUR) is for Stanford undergraduates who want
to learn more about environmental science by performing original research.
Finally, Stanford’s School of Earth, Energy, and Environmental Sciences High
School Internship Program enables young scientists to serve as mentors, prepares
high school students for college, and serves to strengthen the partnership
between Stanford and local schools. Students present their results at the Fall
AGU meeting as part of the AGU Bright STaRS program. This project will form the
basis of at least two PhD dissertations. The Stanford student will participate
in Stanford’s Woods Institute Rising Environmental Leaders Program (RELP), a
year-round program that helps graduate students hone their leadership and
communication skills to maximize the impact of their research. The graduate
student will also participate in Stanford’s Grant Writing Academy where they
will receive training in developing and articulating research strategies to
tackle important scientific questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary program combines satellite and ship-based measurements of a
large poorly understood phytoplankton bloom (the AAR bloom) in the northwestern
Ross Sea sector of the Southern Ocean with a detailed modeling study of the
physical processes linking deep dissolved iron (DFe) reservoirs to the surface
phytoplankton bloom. Prior to the cruise, we will implement a numerical model
(CROCO) for our study region so that we can better understand the circulation,
plumes, turbulence, fronts, and eddy field around the AAR bloom and how they
transport and mix hydrothermally produced DFe vertically. Post cruise,
observations of the vertical distribution of 3He (combined with DMn and DFe),
will be used as initial conditions for a passive tracer in the model, and tracer
dispersal will be assessed to better quantify the role of the various turbulent
processes in upwelling DFe-rich waters to the upper ocean. The satellite-based
component of the program will characterize the broader sampling region before,
during, and after our cruise. During the cruise, our automated software system
at Stanford University will download and process images of sea ice
concentration, Chl-a concentration, sea surface temperature (SST), and sea
surface height (SSH) and send them electronically to the ship. Operationally,
our goal is to use all available satellite data and preliminary model results to
target shipboard sampling both geographically and temporally to optimize
sampling of the AAR bloom. We will use available BGC-Argo float data to help
characterize the AAR bloom. In collaboration with SOCCOM, we will deploy
additional BGC-Argo floats (if available) during our transit through the study
area to allow us to better characterize the bloom. The centerpiece of our
program will be a 40-day process study cruise in austral summer. The cruise will
consist of an initial “radiator” pattern of hydrographic surveys/sections along
the AAR followed by CTDs to selected submarine volcanoes. When/if eddies are
identified, they will be sampled either during or after the initial surveys. The
radiator pattern, or parts thereof, will be repeated 2-3 times. Hydrographic
survey stations will include vertical profiles of temperature, salinity, oxygen,
oxidation-reduction potential, light scatter, and PAR (400-700 nm). Samples will
be collected for trace metals, ligands, 3He, and total suspended matter. Where
intense hydrothermal activity is identified, samples for pH and total CO2 will
also be collected to characterize the hydrothermal system. Water samples will be
collected for characterization of macronutrients, and phytoplankton physiology,
abundance, species composition, and size. During transits, we will continuously
measure atmospheric conditions, current speed and direction, and surface SST,
salinity, pCO2, and fluorescence from the ship’s systems to provide detailed
maps of these parameters. The ship will be used as a platform for conducting
phytoplankton DFe bioassay experiments at key stations throughout the study
region both inside and outside the bloom. We will also perform detailed
comparisons of algal taxonomic composition, physiology, and size structure
inside and outside the bloom to determine the potential importance of each
community on local biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.