* 2135932
* Engineering &amp; Science Integration in Mathematics – An Initiative to Retain and Complete more STEM Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2021,09/30/2024
* Robert Chaney, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 487,465.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
mathematics instruction. Traditionally, math courses have emphasized objective
and abstract topics that do not reflect the cultures and lived experiences of
many students. Gateway math courses continue to serve as gatekeeper courses,
preventing students from successfully entering STEM pathways that require
College Algebra and beyond. To support student interest, retention, and
completion in STEM disciplines, this project will develop themed labs and
exercises to enhance instruction and student learning in three gateway
mathematics courses: College Algebra, Trigonometry, and Calculus I. Given the
growth of STEM-related career opportunities, and the high occupational wages
associated with many STEM career pathways, engaging and retaining undergraduate
students in STEM is essential to meet future workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to increase the number
of students entering and completing high workforce opportunity STEM pathways,
with an emphasis on engaging students from underrepresented populations. This
project will have a positive impact on both STEM and non-STEM majors. The
project team will research how multidisciplinary problem-based curriculum and
activities affect attitudes, learning, and eventual degree program selection and
retention among the community college students who will be impacted by the new
curriculum enhancements over the three-year project period. By pulling in real-
world examples from numerous STEM fields, students will better identify shared
concepts among disciplines and see the importance of math in everyday life. The
themed labs will be framed by the Universal Design for Learning guidelines,
which helps engage all learners, including typically underrepresented learners,
in meaningful learning activities. The integration of Knowledge and Skill
Builders, common in university engineering programs, will help students tackle
mathematical concepts in the form of stackable “pre-labs.” The new curriculum
will be developed to be compatible with Jupyter Notebook and GoPiGo Robots so
that students can experience the power of math using the Python programming
language. These efforts will develop a diverse population of STEM-literate
citizens to address current and future challenges in STEM fields. The NSF
program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that
advance STEM Education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description
promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education
at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.