* 2135625
* CNS Core: Small: Towards Timing-Predictable Autonomy in DNN-driven Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,11/30/2022
* Cong Liu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 11/30/2022
* USD 484,041.00

Machine learning techniques, particularly deep neural networks (DNNs), are
enabling dramatically better autonomy in important domains, such as robotics and
transportation. For instance, in automotive systems, DNNs are used to map raw
pixels from on-vehicle cameras to steering control decisions. Recent end-to-end
self-driving frameworks even make it possible for DNNs to learn to self-steer
from limited human driving datasets. NVIDIA and Audi recently announced their
plans to deliver DNN-based automated vehicles. A major challenge of safely and
reliably adopting DNNs in any safety-critical embedded systems (e.g., cars) is
the need to ensure timing predictability (i.e., enabling timing constraints to
be analytically validated at design time), which is one of the most important
tenets in the certification required for such safety-critical systems. For
example, the functional correctness of an automobile hinges crucially upon
temporal correctness, as the control operations depend on the processing of
certain environmental sensing and computation tasks within specific time
constraints. Unfortunately, it is not straightforward to achieve timing
predictability in such systems, due to the resource bottlenecks that DNNs can
impose.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to achieve timing
predictability in DNN-driven autonomous embedded systems. A novel system model
leveraging Heijunka, a mature production leveling approach first developed by
Toyota, will be established. New DNN-aware, real-time resource allocation
methods and associated analysis techniques for validating timing constraints
will be developed that can be applied in DNN-driven embedded systems. Moreover,
an open-source ecosystem with efficient memory management under heterogeneous
hardware architectures will be implemented. The outcome of this project will
pave the way to enable DNN-driven solutions to be safely and confidently adopted
in many embedded domains in which timing predictability is a natural
requirement. This project will also result in a pipeline of computer engineers
and scientists who are skilled in the interdisciplinary nature of DNN-driven
embedded systems, as well as increase awareness of real-time and autonomous
system design concepts among students at all academic
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.