* 2135464
* 2021 NSF Student Poster Competition at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE); Virtual; November 1-5, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Po-Hao Huang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2023
* USD 19,900.00

The objective of this researched effort is to provide support for 100 students
who are currently working with Principal Investigators through NSF funding from
the Directorate for Engineering (ENG) or Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) programs to attend the 2021 ASME International Mechanical Engineering
Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE) virtually and participate in a student
poster competition. The awardees will be selected based on application including
a brief resume, a one-page statement of why they want to attend the conference,
and a statement of support from their faculty advisor. Consideration in the
selection process will be given to inclusion of members of underrepresented
groups, diversity of institutions that the students represent, and diversity of
programs within engineering. The competition is divided into the topics of (1)
NSF-funded research grants/programs and (2) Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REUs). This award will benefit the nation through the education
of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce better prepared to provide
transformative solutions the challenges of their chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit students'
professional, scientific and technical development as they present their NSF
funded research projects to the broad Mechanical Engineering community.
Attendance at the conference will provide the students a wonderful opportunity
to learn about the engineering profession and state-of-the-art research in their
fields via access to technical and professional development talks by domestic
and international speakers. Students will enhance their communication skills via
lively discussions of their work with the top researchers in their fields during
the society-wide Poster Symposium. They will also have an opportunity to attend
many technical presentations, join the keynote and plenary sessions featuring
technological pioneers, and network with potential mentors, colleagues, and
employers. This interactive experience will significantly broaden their
education, increase their enthusiasm for their research topic, acquaint them
with expectations for scientific careers, and expose them to new avenues for
innovative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.