* 2135941
* SBIR Phase II:  Integrated propulsion solution to enable reusable upper stages of space vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Andrew Lapsa, STOKE SPACE TECHNOLOGIES, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is the development of reusable rockets that are
designed to fly to space daily, delivering satellites directly to their final
orbit at order-of-magnitude lower costs. Fully reusable launch vehicles will
relieve three key elements of customer pain: price, availability, and service.
These disruptive changes are needed to make a new frontier of proposed in-space
solutions commercially viable. This proposed solution may provide internet
access to un- and under-served populations and the ability to monitor Earth
systems, combat climate change, and produce energy. Space assets may
additionally provide the ability to track, predict, and ultimately control the
environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project develops a new technology that enables space launch vehicles to
reenter the atmosphere and land propulsively so that they may be reused. This
capability has long been sought but remains unproven due to the combination of
high efficiency propulsion, robust thermal protection, and low structural mass
required for upper stage reuse. The technical hurdles lie in finding a solution
for reentry thermal protection that can withstand the stressing environments of
rocket engine operation and atmospheric entry while also being low-weight and
low-cost and not requiring maintenance between flights. The goals of the
proposed research and development are to continue to develop the heat shield
concept identified in Phase I, building a full-scale prototype and testing it in
environments that simulate both the operating conditions during the ascent phase
of flight and the hypersonic phase of flight during atmospheric reentry. This
testing will be conducted in several phases with increasing complexity. The test
data from each phase will be used to iterate the design and converge on an
acceptable solution, reducing the development risk of the novel heat shield
architecture prior to an orbital flight attempt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.