* 2135007
* STTR Phase I:  Real-Time Smart Data Lake
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,08/31/2022
* Xiangyao Yu, AIRMETTLE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will be to fundamentally accelerate the pace of data science. New
solutions that alleviate or bypass the bottlenecks inherent in existing data
analytics technologies are required to unlock the value contained in “big data”
and bring greater benefits to research, business, and society at large. The
potential benefits include improved quality control for manufactured goods,
reduced fraud in financial transactions, and enhanced customization of consumer
services. Many common software applications, such as search engines, online
shopping, e-commerce, medical applications, and social networks, are backed by
data analytical processing services. This project will enable massive data sets
to be pre-processed directly by a shared storage service, then allow this
capability to be efficiently utilized by client analytic applications. This
project will accelerate transformation of analytical data to useful insights
while reducing network congestion, simplifying complex analytics systems, and
lowering information technology costs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project examines the challenge of how to
dramatically accelerate data-intensive computing problems by enabling large data
objects to be processed directly in the storage layer then efficiently utilized
by client applications. The technology will be built on a software defined data
lake used for big data applications. Key technology will be added to enable
JSON, one of the most widely used data interchange formats, to be processed in a
distributed manner in-place within this storage solution with the objective of
enabling client analytic applications to retrieve not the complete object but
only the desired subset of content they require. The storage solution will be
augmented to transform the data into a format that can be directly consumed by
the clients. This will substantially increase efficiency within the storage
itself and between analytics clients and the storage solution – while
acceelrating data processing by bypassing bottlenecks. The result will be a
smart data lake that can reduce network traffic, improve data freshness, and
enable real-time operation – while accelerating big data analytics by an order
of magnitude or more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.