* 2135695
* Collaborative Research: Using Multiple Stable Isotopes to Investigate Middle to Late Holocene Ecological Responses by Adelie Penguins in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2026
* Steven Emslie, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 08/31/2026
* USD 264,881.00

The Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) is the most abundant penguin in
Antarctica, though its populations are currently facing threats from climate
change, loss of sea ice habitat and food supplies. In the Ross Sea region, the
cold, dry environment has allowed preservation of Adélie penguin bones,
feathers, eggshell and even mummified remains, at active and abandoned colonies
that date from before the Last Glacial Maximum (more than 45,000 years ago) to
the present. A warming period at 4,000-2,000 years ago, known as the penguin
‘optimum’, reduced sea ice extent and allowed this species to access and
reproduce in the southern Ross Sea. This coastline likely will be reoccupied in
the future as marine conditions change with current warming trends. This project
will investigate ecological responses in diet and foraging behavior of the
Adélie penguin using well-preserved bones and other tissues that date from
before, during and after the penguin ‘optimum’. The Principal investigators will
collect and analyze bones, feathers and eggshells from colonies in the Ross Sea
to determine changes in population size and feeding locations over millennia.
Most of these colonies are associated with highly productive areas of open water
surrounded by sea ice. Current warming trends are causing relatively rapid
ecological responses by this species and some of the largest colonies in the
Ross Sea are likely to be abandoned in the next 50 years from rising sea level.
The recently established Ross Sea Marine Protected Area aims to protect Adélie
penguins and their foraging grounds in this region from human impacts and
knowledge on how this species has responded to climate change in the past will
support this goal. This project benefits NSF’s mission to expand fundamental
knowledge of Antarctic systems, biota, and processes. In association with their
research program, the Principal Investigators will create undergraduate
opportunities for research-driven coursework, will design K-12 curriculum and
assess the effectiveness of these activities. Two graduate students will be
supported by this project to update and refine the curricula working with K-12
teachers. There is also training and partial support included for one doctorate,
two master and eight undergraduate students. General public will be reached
through social media and YouTube channel productions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
suite of three stable isotopes (carbon, nitrogen, and sulfur) will be analyzed
in Adelie penguin bones and feathers from active and abandoned colonies to
assess ecological shifts through time. Stable isotope analyses of carbon and
nitrogen (δ13C and δ15N) are commonly used to investigate animal migration,
foraging locations and diet, especially in marine species that can travel over
great distances. Sulfur (δ34S) is not as commonly used but is increasingly being
applied to refine and corroborate data obtained from carbon and nitrogen
analyses. Collagen is one of the best tissues for these analyses as it is
abundant in bone, preserves well, and can be easily extracted for analysis.
Using these three isotopes from collagen, ancient and modern penguin colonies
will be investigated in the southern, central and northern Ross Sea to determine
changes in populations and foraging locations over millennia. Most of these
colonies are associated with one of three polynyas in the Ross Sea. This study
will be the first of its kind to apply multiple stable isotope analyses to
investigate a living species of seabird over millennia in a region where it
still exists today. Results from this project will also inform management on
best practices for Adelie penguin conservation affected by climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.