* 2135683
* BRITE Pivot: Tissue Research Advances for New Surgeries-Facilitating Organ Reconstruction with Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Raffaella De Vita, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 615,998.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot project will develop tissue mechanical property data
and advanced computer modeling approaches to improve surgeries specific to
transgender people. This work will mechanically characterize tissue from human
genitalia. This work will leverage the researchers’ existing expertise in
evaluating the mechanics of soft tissues, such as ligaments and tendons.
Specifically, this work will make a computer model of how these tissues behave
at the microscopic level based on data from measurements of actual tissue. The
model will be used to evaluate differences among genital tissues of all genders.
This work will improve our understanding of reproductive biomechanics of all
persons. The results may ultimately improve healthcare by including this
engineering assessment of tissue properties in surgical planning and procedures,
including gender confirmation surgeries. This project will also promote
inclusion in the engineering biomechanics research community through dialogue
about conceptualization of gender, both within research and within the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on providing the first
scientific-based data for gender confirmation surgeries that alter the genitalia
of individuals with gender dysphoria to conform to their desired gender. State-
of-the-art mechanical testing will be conducted on tissues from human genitalia
to fully characterize their elastic and viscoelastic properties that are crucial
for the success of surgeries including those for gender confirmation. Novel
mathematical and computational models will be developed to capture both the
similarities and differences between male and female genitalia. Through this
BRITE Pivot project, the principal investigator will gain new expertise in
advanced numerical techniques for reducing the computational complexity of
numerical simulations for gender confirmation surgeries. Efficient and robust
computational tools will lead to the development of novel engineered tissues and
guidelines for gender confirmation surgeries, addressing the extant healthcare
challenges of transgender people. The outcome of this project will thus promote
gender diversity and equality in medical research while also changing the
assumption of binary genders in the research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.