* 2135544
* Collaborative Research: Smart Coils for AC Motors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Fariba Fateh, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 09/30/2024
* USD 247,818.00

AC motor drives are widely utilized in many on-the-move energy technologies
(e.g., electric vehicles and industrial or medical robots) to control the speed
or position of a mechanical scheme. The industry is constantly seeking
lightweight, efficient, and reliable solutions for these high-performance AC
motor drives. Recent advancements in semiconductor materials have enabled
electrical engineers to design ultrafast switches and motor drive systems with
higher efficiency and power density. However, the ultrafast switches can cause
severe voltage stress on the motor stator winding insulation, reducing the motor
lifetime and eventually leading to unexpected shutdowns. This collaborative
research will address such reliability concerns through developing the
technology of smart coils. Since the proposed technology avoids the conventional
bulky and lossy filters, it will advance the compactness of high-performance
motor drive systems. In this project, innovative educational modules will also
be collaboratively developed to inspire prospective undergraduate and graduate
students to pursue education and careers in applications of control theories in
power electronics and motor drives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop the technology of smart coils for AC motor drives. The envisioned smart
coil technology will make the surge impedance of the motor windings adaptively
vary by the sharpness of the voltage pulses which are produced by a drive,
travel along cables, and reach the motor terminals. The evolving technology of
ultrafast wide bandgap semiconductor switches enhances the efficiency and power
density of AC motor drives by minimizing the size of passive components and
cooling apparatuses. However, the sharpness of the generated voltage pulses can
induce reflected waves in the cable and overvoltages at the motor terminals. The
smart coil technology can mitigate the overvoltage stress caused by the
reflected wave phenomena regardless of the length of the power cables. Unlike
conventional approaches for mitigating reflected wave phenomena that use bulky
and lossy passive filters, the smart coil technology will enable AC motors much
more compatible with the emerging wide bandgap-based fast-switching drives. This
technology can also lead to more electric powertrains with high efficiency, high
power density, and high reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.