* 2135564
* Building Capacity for International Network-to-Network Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Marisa Rinkus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 09/30/2024
* USD 616,211.00

Building effective international network-to-network collaborations is a complex
process, bringing together researchers from different disciplines, institutions,
and nations. Attention to communication and collaboration is crucial to ensuring
steady progress toward project objectives and sustained engagement. The Toolbox
Dialogue Initiative (TDI) will support the Accelerating Research Through
International Network-to-Network Collaboration (AccelNet) program by providing
project teams with early, focused opportunities to develop key components of
their project and by conducting research on the process and practice of building
international networks of research networks. TDI will contribute to the AccelNet
program in three ways: 1) organize and facilitate awardee meetings for the 2021,
2022, and 2023 cohorts; 2) support and grow an AccelNet community of practice
open to all AccelNet cohorts; and 3) conduct research on very large-scale groups
of distributed researchers and linked networks. This work builds on the previous
AccelNet awardee meetings facilitated by TDI and expands the ability to enhance
complex research on communication and collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to generate knowledge and resources for the AccelNet
program and awardees about the nature and function of international networks of
research networks. As part of a multi-phase awardee program, the TDI team will
design and deliver project-focused Toolbox workshops, an awardee meeting, and a
series of interactive sessions to support information and resource sharing.
These elements will enable funded teams to interact with NSF staff, participate
in activities designed to improve project capacity, and learn from and with
other AccelNet projects and experts as part of a community of practice. Together
these elements will enhance complex research communication and collaboration
among broadly distributed network communities. The research component of this
project will provide an evidence-based understanding of the process of building
international networks of research networks in various contexts. The new
understandings will help to identify best practices for international network-
to-network collaboration and investigate the potential for scaling up team-
focused facilitation approaches for very large-scale, distributed groups of
researchers and linked networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.