* 2135579
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Coordinating Actors via Learning for Lagrangian Systems (CALLS)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Alexandre Bayen, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,630,936.00

This project will improve the ability to build artificial intelligence
algorithms for Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) that incorporate communications
technologies by developing methods of learning from simulation environments. The
specific application area is connected and automated vehicles (CAV) that drive
strategically to reduce stop-and-go traffic. Employing communication between
vehicles can improve the efficiency of vehicle control systems to manage traffic
compared to vehicles without communication. The research of this project will
explore the simulation of CAVs and how we can improve their algorithms to reduce
traffic congestion, with core technology developments that are applicable to
homes, health, and smart and connected communities. Increasingly at the heart of
CPS are artificial intelligence algorithms, which can be programmed using a
simulation of how the system should operate in the real world. A major challenge
is building a simulation that accurately captures the complexity of the system
in question, and how it can be controlled. The project includes partners from
Toyota and Nissan that support testbeds enabling the research and accelerate
transition of research to practice. The project aslo includes state and local
Government stakeholders / partners which will facilitate experimentation in the
real-world and demonstration of traffic congestion objectives as well as
potentially emission reduction. Tools, technologies, and datasets generated in
this project will be shared as active resources to support access beyond the
life of the project. The project brings a focus on mentorship for undergraduate
researchers, in order to broaden participation in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new reinforcement learning
approaches for Lagrangian control that accommodate communication and networking
between actuators. A motivating domain that will be an application area of the
project is CAVs. A major challenge is leveraging a small number of CAVs before
those technologies realize full adoption rates. Vehicle and infrastructure
communication technologies can be more useful for congestion management when
feeding into a group of sparse, coordinated Lagrangian control agents. The
project will use data from existing traffic sensors and testbeds to drive
learning and control development. A fleet of instrumented and controllable
passenger vehicles will be used for data collection and actuation. Validation
experiments will be conducted using these vehicles on live roadways, and the
results will be validated using a camera-based testbed that collects detailed
traffic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.