* 2135005
* Rapid isolation of high-affinity DNA aptamers for small-molecule targets via nuclease-assisted SELEX
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2021,06/30/2024
* Yi Xiao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 289,908.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Yi Xiao and her research team in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at Florida International University (FIU) seek to
develop a widely usable method for the rapid generation of DNA-based
bioreceptors, termed aptamers, which selectively recognize small molecules
targets. Aptamers have shown promise as key sensing components for point-of-use,
small-molecule biosensing detectors that recognize target molecules by aptamer
binding to the targets, making them potentially valuable for scientific,
clinical, and forensic applications. However, current methods for aptamer
generation are labor intensive, time consuming, and typically yield aptamers
that are unable to clearly tell the difference between molecules of similar
shape and size. The proposed approach produces high-quality aptamers with
superior recognition properties and significantly accelerates the aptamer
isolation process. Moreover, this technique might replace existing methods for
aptamer generation. In parallel with these research efforts, Professor Xiao, in
partnership with Hispanic-serving and historically black colleges and
universities, as well as student training programs at FIU, plans a multi-level
outreach effort focusing on underrepresented minority (URM) students. These
activities will provide students with opportunities to participate in scientific
research and encourage them to pursue careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. In pursuit of this, Dr. Xiao gives
science seminars and presentations, organizes summer science camps, and provides
summer internships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging the high structural
specificity and efficiency of flap endonuclease 1 (FEN1), Professor Xiao and her
research team seek to develop an innovative and generalizable nuclease-assisted
aptamer isolation technique, termed NA-SELEX, for the rapid isolation of high-
affinity, small-molecule-binding aptamers. To establish this technology, a model
SELEX system is first used to systematically study and optimize FEN1-based
strand separation. The feasibility and generalizability of NA-SELEX is then
demonstrated by isolating high-affinity aptamers for different small-molecule
targets with clinical and forensic relevance. Finally, the sensing capabilities
of the resulting aptamers is assessed by fabricating electrochemical aptamer-
based sensors for analyte detection in biological samples. This new approach has
the potential to efficiently generate high-affinity, customizable aptamers on
demand for any small-molecule target and greatly facilitate the development of
sensing elements for the detection of small molecules for various applications
such as food safety, environmental monitoring, therapeutic treatment, and
medical diagnostics. In addition, an educational outreach program at FIU
increases the exposure of graduate, undergraduate, and high school URM students
to STEM fields and promotes an inclusive environment for URMs engaged in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.