* 2135927
* Testing for the stages of vertebrate radiation using freshwater fishes of the family Percidae
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Jessica Arbour, Middle Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 01/31/2025
* USD 263,712.00

Understanding why some groups of organisms are made up of species of many
different shapes and sizes, while others are not, is a key goal of evolutionary
biology. Does morphological diversity arise in a sudden burst of evolution, or
does it accumulate gradually? The gradual model of adaptive radiation
hypothesizes that organisms first diversify in traits to explore new habitats,
then to feed on different resources, and lastly to communicate reproductive
fitness. However, few rigorous quantitative tests of this model have been
performed, and mostly on unique, island-based radiations. This project will test
this model of diversification using the family Percidae (e.g., perches, walleye
and darters), one of the most diverse families of freshwater fishes in the USA.
This research will use advanced 3D imaging techniques to create a comprehensive
database of traits linked to habitat, diet and communication and analyses to
better understand how and when these traits evolved during the history of
Percidae. This work will also expand an open access digital library of fish
anatomical diversity, contribute to local ichthyology courses, expand a Natural
History Center’s aquatic exhibit space, and train undergraduate and graduate
students in fish biology, evolution and statistical
programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to test Streelman and
Danley’s “three stages of vertebrate radiation” using rigorous phylogenetic
comparative methods and comprehensive datasets of ecologically-linked phenotypic
characters within percid fishes. The project will use non-destructive 3D imaging
(e.g., laser scanning, micro-CT, dice-CT) of field-collected and museum-
preserved specimens, including extensive taxonomic sampling across the family
Percidae. Phylogenetic comparative methods will be used to test for peaks in the
diversification of these trait complexes using a newly published all-Percid
phylogeny. The researchers will investigate how the evolutionary lability of
these trait axes has been impacted by intrinsic mechanisms such as allometry,
modularity or biomechanical/constructional constraints, and whether this
contributes to a hierarchical pattern of trait evolution. Lastly, the
researchers will test for an association between each trait axis and speciation
rates. This work will help to elucidate the macroevolutionary drivers of
biodiversity, and enhance our understanding of the contributions of selection
and adaptation to trait diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.