* 2135167
* EAGER: Toward a tractable genetic model of DNA virus - Drosophila interaction
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* David Davido, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 253,573.00

DNA viruses are a difficult problem in health care and a widely-used tool for
managing pest populations, particularly in agriculture. However, researchers
lack good models to study the interactions between DNA viruses and their hosts.
This project aims to create a tractable genetic model for studying host/DNA
virus interaction using fruit flies (Drosophila), one of the most widely used
model organisms. This advance would allow for genetic manipulation of the virus
through standard laboratory techniques to better understand the molecular
genetic basis of virulence, host manipulation, and the emergence and evolution
of infectious disease. Researchers will also optimize the growth of the
nudivirus in cell lines, making possible a drove of experiments in the future.
In addition, the project would train undergraduate researchers from a transfer
student program to provide them with hands-on scientific training and contribute
to broadening participation in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
objective is to create new cell lines and optimize conditions for viral
replication. To date available cell lines have been used to grow the virus with
limited success. Utilizing new cell lines based on natural host tissues and
optimized conditions promises to improve viral replication in cell lines. The
second objective is to clone the large, double stranded DNA genome into a
bacterial artificial chromosome for ease of production, then show that genetic
manipulation of the virus is straightforward using standard site-directed
mutagenesis and PCR-based recombinant techniques. Upon project completion,
researchers will have developed a versatile, tractable system for studying
host/DNA virus coevolution that can be used to inform treatment of DNA virus
diseases and biocontrol strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.