* 2135448
* EAGER: Quantifying the relative importance of reproduction in forest dynamics under historical and future climate change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rebecca Snell, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2024
* USD 194,085.00

Environmental change will alter forest dynamics and species composition. Tree
reproduction and recruitment are critical processes for tree populations and
ultimately, determine the future species composition of forests. Even though
tree reproduction is sensitive to climate, the relative importance of this
process for forest dynamics is unclear, especially compared to anticipated
climate-change effects on tree growth and mortality. Seed production and
seedling survival are also determined by individual and stand level properties.
For example, seedling survival is affected by light availability. Increasing
mortality due to climate change will alter the amount of light hitting the
forest floor, and affect seedling survival. Seed production is also affected by
size (i.e., larger individuals tend to produce more seed). If tree growth
responds positively to climate change, this could indirectly cause an increase
in seed production. Thus, to capture all these direct and indirect effects, the
project will update a dynamic vegetation model (DVM) to explicitly simulate
reproduction as a function of weather and stand structure. Including tree
regeneration dynamics in process-based vegetation models is a major research gap
and a critical step for accurately projecting forest responses to climate
change. The project broader impacts include (1) training for students in
computer programming, database management, data analysis, and communicating
science, and (2) outreach activities to broaden participation of women in
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using forests located in the Pacific
Northwest (PNW) as a case study, the project will quantify the relationships for
seed production (as a function of weather and size) and seedling survival (as a
function of weather and stand structure), for common tree species in the PNW.
These relationships will be incorporated into a forest model, that already
includes species-specific simulations of growth, competition and mortality as a
function of the environment. The updated model will be used to simulate forest
stands located in the PNW under historical climate and various climate change
scenarios. By comparing model versions, the research will be able to quantify
the relative role of reproduction on forest dynamics and species turnover and
identify species vulnerable to climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.