* 2135749
* Relational Metrics to Evaluate Chemistry-Transport and Chemistry-Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Michael Prather, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 01/31/2025
* USD 616,131.00

This project will develop observation-based metrics for evaluating global
atmospheric chemistry models. This suite of metrics will assist with climate
model development and planning for the next chemistry Model Intercomparison
Project (MIP) for the 7th IPCC assessment. This effort will document the
development and improvements occurring in next-generation models and the
traceability of confidence in policy-relevant model projections.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new or revised set of metrics focused on gas-phase
chemistry will be developed involving high-order metrics (e.g., reaction rates,
budgets, statistics, covariance of species) and/or relationships (e.g., budgets
vs. perturbations, seasonal/interannual patterns in transport). Chemical
transport models (CTM) at the University of California at Irvine and MIP
archives will be used to draft the metrics. Scientific issues to be addressed
include: (1) heterogeneity in chemical composition; (2) chemical budgets of
tropospheric O3 and CH4; (3) CH4 chemistry feedback and O3 sensitivities; (4)
tropospheric humidity, an emergent constraint; (5) N2O from the stratosphere to
the surface; (6) stratospheric column ozone; (7) tropospheric column ozone and
air mass; (8) photolysis rates and emergent constraints; and (9) surface O3, an
air quality metric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A graduate student will participate in
the design, testing, and documentation of the metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.