* 2135083
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Electrically Pumped Monolithic Bi-photon emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2022
* Alexey Belyanin, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 07/31/2022
* USD 62,000.00

Integrated photonic systems hold promise to provide a scalable and robust
platform for quantum technologies including secure quantum communications,
quantum imaging, and quantum sensing. A practical quantum photonic system should
monolithically integrate the sources of entangled photons with the rest of the
photonic circuitry. Such sources have to be compact, monolithic and electrically
pumped. The existing solutions are bulky and require external laser pumping,
which puts many practical applications out of reach. We propose a new type of
bright compact monolithic source of entangled photons based on the original
electrically pumped semiconductor laser heterostructure. We intend to develop
the theoretical model, formulate the detailed design concept, and demonstrate
efficient generation of photon pairs in the mid-infrared region of spectra. The
proposed collaborative efforts will enable a new class of the applications
harnessing quantum properties of light. The two PIs will incorporate research
results into graduate and undergraduate classes and their ongoing outreach
effort to high school students and physics teachers. They will continue their
commitment to recruiting under-represented students into STEM careers. The
proposed quantum technology research will prepare future scientists and
engineers and facilitate implementation of the discoveries of the next quantum
revolution into modern
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Strong second order
nonlinearity of III-V semiconductors can be used for production of the entangled
photon states by means of cavity spontaneous parametric down conversion (SPDC)
where the waveguides and other photonic integrated circuit components can be
utilized to facilitate phase matching and perform quantum information processing
operations. The monolithic integration of the pump laser and SPDC source of mid-
infrared photon pairs is needed for practical applications and is the primary
goal of our proposal. We will develop new class of laser heterostructures which
can yield high power and narrow linewidth pumps and simultaneously enable
efficient parametric down conversion of laser light into photon pairs. In
standard single core laser waveguides the phase matching conditions for SPDC
process are virtually impossible to achieve because of normal dispersion. The
original coupled-waveguide design will be used to achieve modal phase matching
required for efficient generation of the correlated photon pairs by intra-cavity
SPDC. The pump photons will comprise an asymmetric super-mode with a reduced
effective refractive index overcoming normal dispersion â€“ a key enabling feature
of the proposed design. The type-II intracavity SPDC will produce correlated TE
and TM polarized pairs of signal and idler photons. Theoretical description of
the generation, propagation, and detection of the non-classical light states in
the proposed monolithic quantum photonic structure will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.