* 2135589
* BRITE Relaunch: Examining the Role of Mechanotransduction in Smooth Muscle Cell Phenotype Modulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Chartrisa Simpson, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2024
* USD 559,949.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vascular smooth muscle cells
(VSMCs) that make up one of the layers of arteries exhibit two distinct types:
contractile and synthetic. Contractile VSMCs regulate blood pressure in the
artery by contracting or relaxing. However, they can revert into the synthetic
type in response to an injury to the blood vessel. Synthetic VSMCs are
responsible for synthesis of replacement cells and secretion of substances that
are needed for vessel healing. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative
and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch project has hypothesizes
that a third type of VSMCs exists, and the change in the cells to this third
type is caused by stretch within the vascular tissue. It is further hypothesized
that this change to the third type of VSMC happens through a signaling pathway
known as Wnt. Through this pathway, the VSMCs become bone-like cells and deposit
mineral (calcium) into the arterial tissue that surrounds the cells, the
extracellular matrix. The mechanical changes leading to this potential third
phenotype are caused by hypertension, known as the silent killer. By
understanding the signaling pathway associated with this change in the behavior
of VSMCs, future research can be supported to develop targeted therapeutics to
treat vascular calcification (i.e., hardening of the arteries) at the cellular
and molecular level. This work could drive future research that will reduce the
severity of heart disease complications experienced by patients and reduce the
costs of treating high-risk patients. This project will also increase the
participation of students from underrepresented groups in research -- in
particular, first-generation, low-income students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance knowledge by investigating the hypothesis that the
continued plasticity of VSMCs to a third phenotype is caused by mechanical
strain activating the canonical Wnt signaling pathway. An in vitro vascular
calcification model will be used to examine the role of mechanotransduction in
VSMC phenotype changes. This project will: 1) investigate the activation of a
Wnt signaling pathway in synthetic VSMCs; 2) examine the impact of surface
mechanics on the activation of phenotypic modulation via the Wnt signaling
pathway; and 3) examine the phenotypic modulation of VSMCs under mechanical
strain. This mechanical loading will mimic the physiological exposure of VSMCs
to increased stretch due to hypertension, which is then hypothesized to cause a
response within the tissue to increase its stiffness through calcification and
return the range of strains to a tissue-specific homeostatic level. This
mechanical transduction response is known to occur in most biological tissues,
including in bone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.