* 2135747
* BRITE Fellow: Systems-level Mechanobiology from the Cellular Mechanome to Sustainable Meat Production
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2027
* Amy Rowat, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2027
* USD 995,498.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow grant will advance knowledge of cells as materials
and translate findings for sustainable protein production. Biology is commonly
described in terms of genomes and biochemical reactions. But the physical
properties of cells are critical for many of the body’s functions. How cells
deform to circulate through the body; how cells resist physical forces—like
stretching or squeezing, and mechanical cues—like the stiffness of the cellular
environment, are important for human health, and critical in many diseases. This
project strives to understand the cellular ‘mechanome’, or the set of genes,
proteins, and pathways that regulate how cells sense and respond to physical and
mechanical cues. Findings would enable us to address fundamental questions
including: How do cells integrate mechanical and soluble cues to regulate their
behaviors? The vision of the research is to establish new foundational knowledge
of cells as materials, and to translate this knowledge to develop innovative
engineering methods to “grow” animal protein for foods. The research also
includes initiatives to promote diversity in engineering and science research
using food as a tool to strengthen mentorship and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the research are to (1)
build a systems-level knowledge of how cells sense and respond to mechanical
stimuli and regulate their mechanical properties; and (2) test the hypothesis
that the mechanical crosstalk between cells and scaffolds is critical for the
sensory and nutrient properties of cultured meat. To build a unified knowledge
of the mechanome, we will (i) investigate predicted mechanical regulators that
emerged from our high throughput deformability screen; (ii) engineer a genome-
wide screen to identify novel regulators of mechanical memory; and (iii) compile
a mechanome web resource. To translate findings for food production, we aim to
achieve efficient muscle tissue growth by (i) defining the optimal stiffness of
edible microcarrier scaffolds for the myogenesis of livestock animal cells; and
(ii) identifying combinations of scaffold stiffness and media additives to
enhance satellite muscle cell proliferation and myotube contractility in a
bioreactor context. Findings will enable the PI to address fundamental questions
in mechanobiology with translational applications for protein production and
tissue engineering. Complementary methods for protein production are urgently
needed to address the increasing need to feed the world’s growing population to
protect against disruptions in the food chain resulting from natural disasters
or epidemics that limit or halt production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.