* 2135157
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Improving Sanitization and Avoiding Denial of Service Through Correct and Safe Regexes
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Dongyoon Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 274,000.00

This project will improve the security of software. The project will focus on
cybersecurity issues in regular expressions. Regular expressions are an
important tool used by computer programmers to manipulate data. Regular
expressions are applied in many ways, including to validate input in a web form
and to check internet traffic for malicious activity. Unfortunately, computer
programmers often use regular expressions incorrectly, leading to insecure
program behavior. These behaviors result in errors with serious cybersecurity
consequences, including allowing malicious actors to steal personal information,
seize control of a computer, or cause many websites to crash. This project will
address these limitations by improving regular expression engineering practices,
and by and making more trustworthy the infrastructure on which regular
expressions rely. The team will incorporate undergraduate researchers, develop
educational material, and engage with K-12 students. The successful completion
of the project will be a significant step towards eliminating cybersecurity
incidents related to regular expressions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
design, develop, and evaluate (Part 1) New techniques to make it easier for
programmers to re-use high-quality regular expressions; and (Part 2) Novel regex
engines that are safe from regular expression denial of service (ReDoS). In Part
One, the team proposes processes and tools to help engineers develop correct
regexes. The approach is grounded in the re-use paradigm, helping engineers
learn from others' expertise. However, to enable re-use, open problems must be
addressed in regex indexing, querying, matching, ranking, and comparison.
Building on a dataset of 853,818 regexes, the team will develop regex clustering
techniques, and integrate novel tool development with user studies to understand
modalities and metrics for querying, ranking, and comparison. Synthesizing these
techniques, machine learning and new algorithms to enable the reuse-based
composition, synthesis, and repair of security sensitive regexes will be
applied. Project findings will be embodied in a novel publicly-accessible regex
search engine and accompanying tools. In Part Two, the team will improve the
trustworthiness of regex engines by eliminating the problematic worst-case
characteristics. The team has begun exploring algorithmic advances that address
its worst-case super-linear behavior. The team will design a ReDoS-safe
algorithm with a provably constant space bound and develop novel worst-case
analyses for extended features (e.g., backreferences). For practicality, the
team's regex engine changes must be transparent. However, backwards
compatibility checking for regex engines is an open problem. The team will
develop the first regex engine semantic testing techniques, based on metamorphic
and differential testing; and enable regex engine performance regression testing
through the first systematic regex performance
benchmark.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.