* 2135316
* The Tale of Three Systems: Fate of Primary Production in the Chukchi Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Kevin Arrigo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,097,606.00

Part 1&lt;br/&gt;Single-celled photosynthetic primary producers generate most of
the fixed carbon that supports Arctic Ocean food webs and drives numerous
biogeochemical cycles. Three main sources of net primary production (NPP) have
been identified in the Arctic Ocean that differ primarily in their timing and
location within the water column. These include (1) single-celled microalgae
growing within the sea ice, (2) phytoplankton that bloom in water under the sea
ice (UIB), and (3) phytoplankton that bloom in open water, including in the
marginal ice zone (MIZ) and at the depth of the subsurface chlorophyll maximum
(SCM). Increasing our knowledge of the relative rates of NPP and particle export
efficiency from these three systems is critical if we are to understand how
continued sea ice loss, and the associated shifts in ice algal and phytoplankton
bloom dynamics, will differentially impact benthic and pelagic food webs in
shallow seas throughout the Arctic Ocean, including many organisms on which
Indigenous human populations rely. The particle flux aspects of this proposal
could be truly transformative. We know very little about the relative carbon
fluxes from sea ice, UIBs, and open water phytoplankton blooms and virtually
nothing about the processes that control those fluxes. Our ability to
characterize, for the first time, buoyancy regulation by individual members of
each of these three critical microalgal communities will shed new light on how
these organic matter fluxes vary as a function of algal cell size, taxonomy, and
physiological state, as well as environmental conditions. This information will
contribute greatly to the foundation of knowledge needed to understand
potentially significant ecosystem changes, both now and in the future.
Furthermore, the project broadens the participation of underrepresented groups
through participation in Stanford University’s Summer Undergraduate Research in
Geoscience and Engineering (SURGE) program. The Arrigo lab also takes part in
Stanford’s School of Earth Sciences high school internship program. Results of
this work will be integrated into lecture and laboratory classes at Stanford
exploring the effect of UIBs on the biology and biogeochemistry of the Arctic
Ocean. Finally, this project will contribute to the education and training of
two Ph.D. students (one female African American) and one post-doc. Training of
undergraduates will be an integral part of this project, and we expect 4-6 to
participate in this cruise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2&lt;br/&gt;Detailed
observations of microalgal blooms in the Chukchi Sea have been largely made at a
time of year when most of the Chukchi shelf is already in open water. As such,
the relative rates of daily net primary production (NPP) by sea ice microalgae,
under-ice phytoplankton blooms (UIBs), and open water phytoplankton blooms are
not well known. Additionally, the fate of the organic matter associated with
these three NPP sources is poorly known. Hence, there is a strong need for
comprehensive measurements beginning in late spring that capture all three
blooms, with particular emphasis on particle export events. The primary
objectives of this proposed study are to utilize data obtained from a ship-based
field program to the Chukchi Sea to 1) measure rates of NPP associated with the
sea ice, UIBs, and open water phytoplankton in both the MIZ and SCM, 2) use
sediment traps to characterize and quantify the vertical sinking fluxes of bulk
particulate matter from the sea ice, UIBs, and open water phytoplankton blooms,
and 3) use our newly developed Hydrodynamic treadmill to determine how sinking
speeds of microalgae from all three NPP sources vary by community composition,
physiological state, and environmental condition. The centerpiece of our
proposed program is a 45-day process study cruise that will take place in June
2023. The cruise will consist of a series of hydrographic surveys/sections that
will repeatedly transition between the deep ice pack and the marginal ice zone.
150 hydrographic survey (HS) stations will include vertical profiles of
temperature, salinity, currents, light, nutrients, and Chl a concentration. At
90 of these (referred to as biological sampling (BS) stations), we will also
collect samples to measure algal and zooplankton abundance/species/size (the
latter using the underwater vision profiler, UVP), algal physiology, NPP, POC,
particle sinking speeds (Hydrodynamic treadmill), deploy a Haps corer to measure
sediment Chl a, and deploy sediment traps to measure vertical fluxes of ice
algae, phytoplankton, detritus, and fecal pellets (at 1/3 of the BS stations).
During transits, we will continuously measure atmospheric conditions as well as
sea surface temperature, salinity, and Chl a fluorescence from the various
ship’s systems to provide detailed maps of these parameters above and below the
ice. About every second day, we will conduct a 6-hour sea ice (SI) station near
solar noon where we will measure the physical, chemical, and biological
properties (see above) of the ice pack and underlying surface water, as well as
deploy sediment traps to measure sinking fluxes of algae, detritus, and fecal
pellets from the sea ice and from the UIB. The ship will also be used as a
platform for characterizing buoyancy regulation and measuring sinking speeds of
microalgal cells and aggregates under various manipulated environmental
conditions using the Hydrodynamic treadmill. This instrument provides unlimited
scope for active vertical tracking of particles (scale-free), while concurrently
providing micron and millisecond-scale spatiotemporal resolution. The
Hydrodynamic treadmill also directly measures the flow field around the diatom
to measure any bound matrix materials (not visible optically) associated with a
single cell and can provide estimates of particle porosity and density. At each
BS and SI station, measurements of sinking speed will be combined with detailed
analyses of algal taxonomic composition, physiology, and size structure, as well
as environmental characteristics (e.g., light, temperature, nutrients) to
determine functional relationships and assess the relative importance of each of
the three primary bloom communities to sinking particle
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.