* 2135901
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the influence of tectonic setting on the depth of magmatic processes in the mid‐ocean ridge system
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Glenn Gaetani, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2025
* USD 249,068.00

Collaborative Research: Understanding the influence of tectonic setting on the
depth of magmatic processes in the mid-ocean ridge system&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The rocks that pave the seafloor cover ~70% of the Earth’s surface
and are produced by volcanoes along the mid-ocean ridge (MOR) system. These
volcanoes arguably represent the largest geologic system in the Earth’s crust.
By analyzing the lavas erupted at the MOR, geologists understand how these
magmas are produced and how they chemically change as they rise to the surface.
However, less is understood about depths of formation and how that may change in
different parts of the MOR system. New data on depth of formation of the
crystals in MOR lavas, based on CO2 in trapped droplets of magma in crystals
(melt inclusions), indicate that the crystals are produced over a wide depth
range. Those crystals therefore provide a record of magma compositions
encountered during transport from depth and of processes controlling ocean crust
formation. This study will chemically analyze microscopic melt inclusions and
crystals to understand how the depth of magma formation varies globally. This
new data will provide information on the depth of crystallization in different
MOR environments and the carbon budget of the mantle. A core aspect of this
proposal involves outreach to students at the tribal colleges in South Dakota
which will consist of three parts including current programs at South Dakota
Mines, mentoring students from Oglala Lakota College (OLC), and providing advice
on the development of the analytical facilities at
OLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of the evolution of
the ocean crust relies heavily on submarine volcanic glasses and, more recently,
melt inclusion (MI) compositions. Such data is most informative about the
complex array of mixing and differentiation processes active in the upper mantle
and crust - in essence “what” is happening. What has been difficult to constrain
is “where” specific processes are active in terms of depth, making it
challenging to resolve the influences of processes occurring in the melting
regime versus those that occur during transport to the surface. New data on
depth of entrapment for melt inclusions (based on CO2 saturation/concentration)
indicate that much of the crystal cargo in ocean floor basalts, particularly
those from plagioclase ultraphyric basalts (PUB) are the products of
crystallization at a wide range of pressure. They therefore provide an
opportunity to investigate how the array of magma compositions evolves during
transport and how the distribution of energy and mass of the processes
controlling ocean crust formation differs between tectonic settings (different
spreading rates, magma supply, extent of melting, etc.). This study will conduct
combined analysis by electron microprobe (for major element composition), Laser
ICP-MS (trace element compositions), secondary ion mass spectrometry (glass CO2,
H2O, S), and Raman spectroscopy (MI bubble density/composition). The samples
selected represent a number of PUB lavas from a range of settings, on axis, pull
apart basins, ultra-slow to intermediate spreading rates and from ridges
characterized by different crustal thicknesses. This new information will
improve understanding of a number of fundamental questions in MORB petrology
including: 1) the comparative depth of crystallization in different MOR
environments for olivine and plagioclase (how crystal sorting influence what is
being sampled), 2) the depth dependence of the processes responsible for MOR
differentiation, 3) the extent to which CO2/trace element ratios can be used to
estimate the mantle C budget. A core aspect of this proposal involves outreach
to students at the tribal colleges in South Dakota which will consist of three
parts including current programs at South Dakota Mines, mentoring students from
Oglala Lakota College (OLC), and providing advice on the development of the
analytical facilities at OLC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.