* 2135275
* Collaborative Research: Sensing by Leveraging Cellular Communication Networks: A Framework of Medium Distance Baseline Interferometry
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2024
* Allen MacKenzie, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 208,000.00

There is a long history of reusing communication signals for radar sensing, in
which the illumination by communication signal is not intended for radar
sensing, thus being a `bonus' of communications. In 5G communication networks,
the signals from densely deployed base stations provide substantial illumination
over the region served by the network, similar to the way that densely-placed
streetlamps illuminate an area. In particular, the base stations form a large
virtual antenna, where large distances between the base station antennas can
help improve the sensing resolution, since the spatial resolution is inversely
proportional to the antenna size. A motivating example for the use of a large
virtual antenna to improve sensing resolution is the milestone achievement in
radio astronomy, namely the first successful imaging of black hole in 2019. The
black hole is 550 light years away from the earth, thus requiring an angle
resolution of 20 microarcseconds. Due to the full reuse of the waveforms and
infrastructure to achieve both communications and sensing, various applications
are expected for the proposed communication-signal-based sensing scheme, such as
outdoor positioning, wide-area imaging for surveillance, and remote sensing
using communication satellites. The function of sensing with high resolution is
achieved at the marginal cost of computation, without requiring extra radio or
sensing hardware for implementation. The project is extended to education
purposes, including K-12 outreach, and undergraduate/graduate level course
development. The achievements of the proposed research are disseminated to
academia and industry communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technique in the
imaging of black hole is the very long baseline interferometry (VLBI). It is
based on the principle of interferometry, which stems from optics: two coherent
beams from the same source interfere with each other at a receiver and form a
fringe (namely the pattern of intensity); the fringe experiences substantial
changes when the source has a tiny displacement, thus yielding high sensitivity
of sensing. Due to the much shorter propagation distance for communication
signals, the proposed scheme is called Medium Distance Baseline Interferometry
(MDBI). Major challenges in the proposed MDBI scheme are addressed, including:
(1) the near field analysis, in contrast to the far field in VLBI, (2) limited
number of baselines, (3) time/frequency synchronization errors in base stations,
and (4) interference/clutter. The proposed MDBI scheme is tested using software
and hardware testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.