* 2135173
* Imidazolium Functionalized Transition Metal Phosphide Catalysts for Electrochemical Carbon dioxide Conversion to Ethanol
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Carlo Segre, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 01/31/2025
* USD 546,868.00

Electrochemical reaction is a promising technology for converting the waste
greenhouse gas, carbon dioxide (CO2), to valuable chemical products. When
powered by sustainable electricity from sources such as wind power or solar
energy, electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (eCO2RR) technology potentially
offers a negative carbon emission route to chemical manufacturing. Current
eCO2RR technology is limited, however, by dependence on expensive noble metal
catalyst materials, energy losses in the electrocatalytic reactions, inefficient
conversion of CO2 to targeted products, and low rates of CO2 capture and
transfer to the working catalyst surface. The project addresses those technology
gaps through research aimed at developing an effective catalytic system based on
a low-cost transition metal phosphide (TMPs) class of materials modified with a
chemical compound (imidazolium (Im)) that enhances the transfer of CO2 to the
catalyst surface. Together the two components promote the capture and conversion
of waste CO2 to ethanol for use in downstream fuel and chemical applications.
Beyond the technical aspects, the project supports educational and research
programs educating future leaders in technology related to clean energy and
sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is built on the hypothesis
that imidazolium-functionalized TMP catalysts can tailor the electronic
properties of surface metal atoms to promote carbon-carbon coupling for high
rate ethanol production. The project employs a systematic approach, combining
experimental and computational studies to design and validate different
components of the Im-TMP catalytic system, and to identify key factors that play
crucial roles in activity, selectivity, and stability of the proposed catalytic
system. The project exploits existing collaborative relationships with the aim
of establishing a novel catalytic system for electrosynthesis of ethanol from
CO2 through directed experimental efforts in electrochemical testing and
analysis. Various nanostructured TMP nanoparticles, with stoichiometry of MP (M:
transition metal)and their Im-functionalized structure, will be characterized
and evaluated. The materials combinations are selected based on preliminary
results from the investigators’ research showing that imidazolium-functionalized
molybdenum phosphide (Im-MoP) nanoparticles work as a unified system to produce
ethanol. Crucial to the goal of this project, is the combination of cutting edge
in-situ, ex-situ, atomic- and molecular-scale experiments with DFT calculations
that will be performed to identify electronic and structural properties of TMP
surface atoms and their interactions with imidazolium. This information will be
utilized to develop electronic–structural–performance relationships of the Im-
TMP catalysts. The insights gained from the research will establish new methods
for the development of advanced materials for other common electrocatalytic
processes, such as nitrogen fixation, and the oxygen reduction and oxygen
evolution reactions, where functionalizing the surface of catalysts with organic
molecules may show similar benefits. From the educational and outreach
perspectives, the project will interface with the joint initiatives Program for
Undergraduate Research Education (PURE) on the investigators’ campus.
Additionally, the investigators will collaborate with Elizabeth City State
University, a HBCU and public baccalaureate institution, to bring knowledge
related to materials design, synthesis, and characterization for various
electrochemical applications and provide research opportunities for students
coming from under-represented groups, encouraging them to pursue advanced
degrees in energy sciences. The project will also provide hands-on research
opportunities to underrepresented groups of high-school students from regional
Chicago schools through an immersive summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.