* 2135687
* BRITE Relaunch: A Liquid Phase Process for Graphene Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Vicki Colvin, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2024
* USD 649,999.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remarkable materials can be
engineered from carbon. Fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and most recently graphene
have garnered huge interest due to their special chemical, optical, magnetic,
and mechanical properties. Whether it is protecting metals from corrosion or
enabling the next generation of lightweight and strong plastics, these new
carbon materials are poised to enable a greener and more sustainable society. To
fully exploit these systems requires transformative approaches to their
manufacturing. The highly inefficient and energy consuming techniques used by
researchers to make these special carbons, while adequate for the laboratory,
are poorly suited to the large scale and sustainable production needed to
translate them to widespread commercial use. This Boosting Research Ideas for
Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch award
capitalizes on a recent discovery that will support the manufacturing of
graphene at relatively low temperatures, and it will apply this advanced
manufacturing technique in order to form intricately shaped magnetic polymers as
well as porous carbon sponges. Such sponges are excellent bulk materials for
removing waste materials from contaminated water. This effort will offer an
alternative manufacturing route to the rapidly expanding graphene industry and
provide intensive research training for graduate students and undergraduates
alike, with efforts aimed at increasing the retention of STEM undergraduates in
engineering. It also supports the development of sustainable materials education
for engineers, providing a quantitative framework for assessing the overall
impact of a manufacturing process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals in
this work center on the development and optimization of a liquid phase process
for forming carbon materials. This project tackles this challenge by forming
carbon materials directly in a liquid phase process, much like processes used to
make specialty polymers. The method exploits the recent discovery that a fine
powder of iron oxide can catalyze formation of carbon nanomaterials. By
instrumenting the reaction process, real-time information will result in the
efficient formation of materials with tailored formats and properties. Control
algorithms will be developed for optimized manufacturing using this real-time
information. This will also create new knowledge about how graphene forms within
a solution environment. Graphene formation will first occur on nanoparticles,
followed by porous structures and 2D graphene sheets. The magnetic carbons
formed will also be blended with polymers in an additive manufacturing approach
using three-dimensional printing to form shaped permanent magnets. Other formats
of these carbons, such as porous sponges and thin films, will be applied to
problems in water treatment and transparent
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.