* 2135089
* RAPID: Archiving and Contextualizing Data around Academic Program Delivery during the Covid-19 Pandemic
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Mary Kurz, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 146,585.00

Like many other public and private enterprises, academic institutions have
struggled to continue operation during the COVID-19 pandemic while protecting
students, faculty and staff. Almost all universities faced considerable service
disruptions as they made decisions such as transitioning from in-class teaching
to remote teaching and keeping dorms open or sending students home. This Grant
for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will collect, clean, link, de-
identify, curate, archive, and contextualize data related to and informing
decisions made about academic program delivery during the pandemic at a large
public university. Clemson University provides a rich case study in university
decision-making and will allow the research community to review the decisions
made, availability data on which the decisions relied, and outcomes of those
decisions. It is expected that further studies using this dataset will inform
the decision making, particularly with respect to data needs, to improve
planning for similar large scale disturbances. A novel feature of this project
is the pairing of numerical and textual data, allowing researchers to discover
the interplay between policy and collected data. Researchers will be able to
utilize the collected quantitative and textual data to pose and answer research
questions that reflect the rapidly changing environment during the beginning and
first 12-18 months of the pandemic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
consolidate a variety of data from many sources across the university, including
housing and dining hall data, class configuration data, cross-campus testing
data, wastewater testing data, vaccine uptake data, and qualitative data from
multiple campus decision-makers. All data will be deidentified and appropriately
aggregated and the project will not involve human subjects. These data will be
preserved in a central location, mapped in a manner consistent with information
extraction and queries, and contextualized in terms of decisions made by
university administration, and their outcomes. Numerical research data, stored
appropriately in spreadsheets or databases will be archived with support of the
Clemson Computing and Information Technology staff and facilities. Access to the
data will be provided for individual researchers and research groups through
Clemson University. Digital data, such as emails, website archiving, meeting
minutes, and other textual data, appropriately redacted to hide sensitive
information, will be archived for the use of social science researchers and to
contextualize the numerical research data. The data files will be deposited into
TigerPrints (Digital Commons), which is Clemson University Libraries’ open
access institutional repository and publishing/dissemination
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.