* 2135686
* BRITE Synergy: Holistic Framework for Structural Stability Design of Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Larry Fahnestock, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 04/30/2024
* USD 221,182.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Synergy project will synthesize distinct threads of research
on building structural stability to create a holistic framework for assessment
and design that consistently applies fundamental principles across a broad range
of real-world scenarios. These scenarios include: low-seismic where wind is most
important and behavior is nominally elastic; moderate-seismic where behavior is
often inelastic with low-ductility response and severe degradation; high-seismic
where behavior is inelastic with high-ductility response. In all cases, whether
response is static or dynamic, the essential cause of instability is the effect
of gravity acting on the deformed system configuration. This project will
coalesce the current research state-of-the-art and industry state-of-the-
practice into a consistent view of stability behavior. The consideration of
multiple loading conditions and hazards will encompass a large portion of the
building stock in the United States. Ultimately, this project will benefit
society by supporting economical design and construction of buildings with
resilient performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework for structural
stability design of buildings that will be developed in this project will focus
on providing persistent positive stiffness across the full range of expected
response to counteract P-Delta effects. Although this central concept is simple
– the lateral system of the building must have adequate stiffness to resist the
applied lateral loads plus the destabilizing effects of gravity loads acting
through lateral displacements – its simplicity belies the complexity of
stability behavior and the nuances associated with stability design for diverse
combinations of demand and structural response. The current stability design
framework for non-seismic scenarios, where the structure has modest overstrength
and the ultimate strength of the structure occurs prior to significant inelastic
deformation, is rigorous, but its focus on force amplification does not
translate to seismic scenarios where significant inelastic deformation,
overstrength and/or degradation are expected. A consistent focus on stiffness
will unify the treatment of building structural stability and provide a coherent
philosophy that enables innovation in design and supports development of next-
generation building lateral systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.