* 2135969
* Support for US Early Career Researchers to Present at 25th International Congress of Theoretical &amp; Applied Mechanics (ICTAM); Virtual; August 22-27, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2021,07/31/2022
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,689.00

This grant will support 60 fellowships for US early career researchers
presenting papers at the 25th International Congress of Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics, organized under the auspices of the International Union of
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, to be held virtually on August 22-27, 2021.
The purpose of this fellowship program is to increase the number of scientists
and engineers from U.S. institutions, with an emphasis on graduate students and
junior researchers, presenting papers and posters at the aforementioned
Congress. One highlight of this program is a unique mentoring experience in the
mechanics field, which brings together early career mechanicians, members of the
U.S. National Committee for Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, and other senior
U.S. mechanicians with extensive leadership experience. The increased
involvement of researchers from the U.S. will strengthen U.S. mechanics research
enterprise and help build international collaborations and global networks. This
award is aligned with the mission of the National Science Foundation and
promotes the advancement of science, engineering, and mathematics. It also
fosters research and development in the field of mechanics, which has an impact
in innovation, commercialization, and national security. Furthermore, the
project seeks to expand the capacity and capability of U.S. early career
researchers and has a strong focus on education, professional development, which
benefits the U.S. society at large.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fellowship program
has the following objectives: 1) support early career U.S. mechanicians in
sharing their research at the Congress, 2) enhance engagement of a diverse group
of early career researchers, 3) provide opportunities for interaction between
U.S. early career scientists and leading U.S. and international mechanicians, 4)
provide the fellows with a mentoring experience, 5) expose the fellows to new
areas of mechanics research, 6) build a network of early career and senior U.S.
mechanicians, 7) foster international collaborations between U.S. mechanicians
and their international peers, 8) enhance the communication effectiveness of
mechanicians broadly, and 9) initiate an ongoing relationship between early
career researchers and the U.S. National Committee for Theoretical and Applied
Mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.