* 2135754
* 2022 CONFERENCE: A Workshop on Undergraduate Research for Faculty in Glass Science and Engineering (Cedar Rapids, Iowa)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2021,11/30/2023
* Steven Feller, Coe College
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 11/30/2023
* USD 40,876.00

This workshop is supported by three programs: Condensed Matter Physics (CMP),
Metals and Metallic Nanostructures (MMN), and Ceramics
(CER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This multiday workshop in
May 2022 serves to encourage faculty who work with undergraduates to conduct
research in glass science and engineering. Best practices are discussed and
include what are suitable projects, funding opportunities and writing proposals,
collaborating with R-1 institutions, and how research is best carried out with
undergraduate students in the summer and in the academic year. Building a
diverse workforce in the field has high value. Thus, various aspects of
diversity and undergraduate research are discussed including its inherent
importance, recruitment of diverse scholars, and encouragement and mentoring.
Follow-up with the faculty members participating in the workshop is taking place
to ensure that the goals of undergraduate research are being reinforced. One
important broader impact is that many Coe College undergraduate students, with
research experience, consistently over time enter graduate school and industry
in the field at rates approaching 75%.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
There is a documented need for more glass scientists and engineers. A key
element that encourages undergraduate students, in general, to engage at a high
level is involvement in publishable research. This workshop, at Coe College,
involves twenty faculty who are working with undergraduates in glass science and
engineering. The workshop is led by Professors Feller and Affatigato and several
nationally known experts in research with undergraduate students and diversity.
At Coe College, nearly 400 students who perform publishable research enter the
field in industry and graduate school at about the 75% level. This impact occurs
while simultaneously increasing diversity. Workshop participants are benefitting
from well over 100 years of hands-on experiences by the presenters. A
transformational aspect of the activity is the multiplicative effect of having a
large cadre of faculty geometrically increasing student involvement in the field
at the undergraduate level. Documentation of these efforts take place by
presentations at meetings of the American Ceramic Society, the Iowa Glass
Conference, and the International Congress on Glass.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.