* 2135619
* BRITE Relaunch: Persistent and Accessible Maritime Monitoring (PAMM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Leigh McCue-Weil, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 12/31/2024
* USD 538,032.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Boosting Research Ideas for
Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch project
represents a unified research and education program dedicated to creating
opportunities for students interested in, and researchers requiring, persistent
and accessible maritime monitoring. With a blended program of STEM outreach for
students in grades 6-12 to promote interest in maritime robotics, undergraduate
project-based learning in the design and construction of novel marine vehicles,
and graduate level research on the use of accessible control hardware coupled
with machine learning to support coordinated control of multi-vehicle maritime
robotics operations, these efforts will develop tools, platforms, and a
workforce that will improve the applications of unmanned marine vehicles and
expand opportunities for their use to support research in a variety of maritime
environments. The novel control systems that will be developed through this
project will inform other unmanned vehicle operation. By integrating control
input systems that are often used by individuals with significant limitations in
motion (e.g., eye gaze and sip-and-puff), this project will also open up data
collection in maritime environments to a broader population, including those
with disabilities..&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researched Persistent and
Accessible Maritime Monitoring (PAMM) activities further the state of the art of
maritime robotics through novel vehicle design and innovative use of machine
learning to support multi-vessel coordinated control while reducing physical
demands associated with marine robotics use. Vehicle design activities will be
focused on systems that will enable data gathering: (1) in coastal and riverine
environments before, during, and after a storm; (2) over extended durations
where both efficiency and sprint capability to overcome current, waste water, or
other heavy flows are required; and (3) in arctic climates where transitioning
between ice and water may be critical for environmental monitoring. Machine
learning supported, human-in-the-loop, marine vehicle control using controllers
more commonly seen in the accessibility community, such as sip-and-puff and eye
gaze control, will reduce barriers for researchers with physical constraints
while also providing new opportunities for all scientists using maritime
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.