* 2135176
* Supporting and Empowering Polar Early Career Scientists through the Polar Science Early Career Community Office
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2024
* Anne Gold, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 10/31/2024
* USD 847,237.00

The University of Colorado at Boulder will provide support for the Association
of Polar Early Career Scientists (APECS) to accelerate national and
international polar workforce development. This effort will bring the APECS
leadership office to the USA for the first time and support the US-APECS office
functions. The APECS office provides organizational support to the trans-
disciplinary international membership of ~3800 early career polar scientists.
The goal is to provide leadership development, training, networking and a voice
to polar science students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three key
activities are to: 1) establish an APECS office in the USA to provide
infrastructure and expertise to the network, 2) build US early career polar
science capacity through travel grants and support of the USAPECS national
committee, and 3) directly support impactful initiatives that support Belonging,
Accessibility, Justice, Equity, Diversity and Inclusion (BeAJEDI) in polar
science. The CU Boulder-based APECS office will leverage existing NSF
investments to elevate the visibility of polar science and connect early career
scientists to international polar research efforts, such as large field and
modelling campaigns, and efforts aimed at improving the inclusion of local and
Indigenous voices in Arctic research. US polar research will benefit by
connecting to this international and diverse pool of early career scientists,
creating pathways to new collaborations and opportunities and being exposed to
new voices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.