* 2135884
* RTG: Electronic Computational Homotopy Theory Research Community
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Daniel Isaksen, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2025
* USD 1,097,286.00

Traditionally, academic research communities are built around departments within
universities, requiring participants to be in physical proximity. However,
modern telecommunications technology allows people to interact productively in
new ways, and online communities will play a growing role in research in the
21st century. This project will develop online relationships and human
infrastructure, with the goal of creating a self-sustaining online research
community in pure mathematics. This includes graduate student training,
fostering collaboration, and building community. Online communities can reach
new audiences and take advantage of efficiencies that are not accessible to
traditional communities. This project will:&lt;br/&gt;* demonstrate to
stakeholders that online research communities are a viable and effective means
for conducting mathematical research;&lt;br/&gt;* experiment with different
types of online programs to determine which are the most effective at engaging
participants and positively impacting their long-term careers; and&lt;br/&gt;*
determine whether online communities are more effective than traditional
departments at reaching certain audiences, especially with regard to U.S.
citizens, nationals, and permanent residents and with regard to groups that are
historically underrepresented in the mathematical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;The
electronic Computational Homotopy Theory (eCHT) research community will conduct
online courses, reading seminars, and research seminars, as well as an
undergraduate research program. Each year, several graduate students and
postdoctoral associates will be funded by the project. Under the supervision of
senior personnel from different institutions, these students and postdoctoral
associates will manage the eCHT activities. Students and postdoctoral associates
will be advised and mentored by the senior personnel in a collaborative online
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific theme of the project is
computational homotopy theory. One aspect of modern homotopy theory is the study
of algebraic invariants that inform on the structure of geometric objects. Part
of this theory involves the effective computation of these invariants, both for
general classes and in very specific cases. One central example is the
computation of the stable homotopy groups of spheres. The eCHT research
community will focus on these types of computational questions in homotopy
theory and will support machine computation, a tool of growing importance in
homotopy theory. The participants in the program will be drawn from an
exceptionally large pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.