* 2135085
* Workshop: Halo-DaSH: The Deep and Shallow History of Aquatic Lifeâ€™s Passages between Marine and Freshwater Habitats
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Lisa Park Boush, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 11/30/2022
* USD 24,365.00

This award supports a symposium and workshop, the goal of which is to highlight
how biological exchanges between salty and freshwater habitats have transformed
the biosphere. Life in the ocean and in freshwater habitats have long been
intertwined. Major branches of the tree of life originated in the oceans and
colonized fresh waters, often adapting to the new regime and diversifying.
Similar exchanges continue to this day, including some species that continually
migrate between salty and fresh waters. Scientists who study these processes
typically focus on a single group of living organisms, or on the fossil record
that documents ancient colonizations. The purpose of the activities supported by
this grant is to stimulate new research on the history of life and present-day
stresses to aquatic systems. Planned activities will consist of a day-long
symposium during the 2022 Annual Meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology, and a one-day workshop designed to facilitate innovative
thinking and the involvement of scientists who are diverse in disciplinary
orientation, country of origin, and stage of professional development. These
interactions will yield products including manuscripts that synthesize research
findings across disciplines and grant proposals for new research on gaps in
knowledge that have been highlighted by the workshop collaborations. Because
global conditions such as sea level that shaped ancient exchanges are currently
changing at a rapid rate due to intensifying human impacts, the results of the
symposium and workshop should help scientists understand emerging threats to
biodiversity related to changes in aquatic habitat solute concentration and
global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium and workshop will
address several questions about how biotic exchange between salty and fresh
habitats has transformed the biosphere: When did major colonizations of fresh
waters happen? What circumstances facilitated the transition? How frequent have
been returns to marine habitats? How porous is the boundary: is change in
halohabitat routine, requiring few modifications, or does it rarely occur
because it requires special conditions and substantial genomic alterations? What
adaptive changes occurred to accommodate the physiochemical and ecological
differences? How do marine and freshwater lineages differ in organism-level
features, ecological relationships, evolutionary processes? To what extent has
diversification been propelled by the transitions? What differences in ecosystem
services arise from these transformations? In what ways are the freshwater and
marine forms subject to different anthropogenic stressors? The symposium,
workshop, and resulting products will integrate findings at multiple levels of
biological organization and from disparate fields, and use this science to
better understand responses to global change in each realm. The
transdisciplinary approach will allow participants to establish new
collaborations and address questions that cross disciplinary boundaries, thereby
stimulating new research to fill identified gaps in knowledge. Diverse
scientists from a broad range of disciplines, including graduate students and
individuals from groups under-represented in science, will participate, and
results will be disseminated in journal articles, white papers, and via a
project website, Twitter account and Instagram feed. The resulting
collaborations will enhance interactions across biological and geoscience
disciplines and will impact interdisciplinary curricula for undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Sedimentary
Geology and Paleobiology Program in the Division of Earth Sciences, Directorate
for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.