* 2135009
* IRES Track 1: Sustainable Materials Development
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Elizabeth Dickey, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 09/30/2023
* USD 298,155.00

The International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) in Sustainable
Materials Development aims to educate undergraduate and graduate students in the
environmental, technical and legislative aspects of sustainable materials
development and manufacturing. The overall goal of the program is to increase
students' awareness of the environmental and societal impacts of the materials
lifecycle, while involving them in specific research activities aimed at
improving and quantifying materials sustainability. Over a three-year period,
eighteen students from North Carolina State University and North Carolina
Central University will spend ten weeks at The University of Sheffield
conducting mentored research in a multidisciplinary environment. Student
research projects will fall into three general areas: i) Low-energy Materials
Processing, ii) Design of Materials for Critical Element Substitution and iii)
Materials Lifecycle Analysis. Pursing these activities in an international venue
will provide a broad, global context for materials sustainability, as the
legislative and research environments associated with these issues can be highly
country-specific. The program intends to develop globally aware and engaged
students, who think about materials science, engineering and manufacturing
within the global context of sustainability and environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will leverage the unique
interdisciplinary environment of the Substitution and Sustainability in
Functional Materials and Devices (SUBST) center at the University of Sheffield,
which brings together interdisciplinary scientists developing new materials
synthesis and processing strategies alongside leaders in the development and
application of life-cycle analysis (LCA) models for materials manufacturing. The
students will be co-mentored by faculty within the participating US and UK
institutions and will conduct research within three technical areas: Low-Energy
Materials Processing (e.g. near-room temperature sintering of ceramics via cold-
sintering processing), Design of Materials for Critical-Element Substitution
(e.g. development of Pb-free BaTiO3- and BiFeO3 based ceramics for energy
harvesting and storage applications), and Materials Lifecycle Analysis (e.g.
hybrid life-cycle analysis of lead-free piezoelectrics). Providing critical
input data for materials LCA, the program will help assess the potential of
newly discovered materials and processes to improve the sustainability of key
electronic-ceramic technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by Cross-Cutting Activities in the Division of Materials Research (DMR/MPS), the
Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA/MPS), and
OISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.