* 2135874
* EAGER: Completing the Lifecycle: Developing Evidence Based Models of Research Data Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2021,10/31/2023
* Cynthia Vitale, Association of Research Libraries
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 10/31/2023
* USD 297,019.00

Effective data sharing practices are vital for the success of scientific
research, especially in the emerging context of Open Science principles. This
project will conduct a detailed analysis of data sharing activities in several
specific institutional and organizational contexts in order to better understand
the patterns, practices, costs, barriers, and workflows that support public
access to research data. The project is being undertaken with coordination
between several major associations which are key supporters of scientific
research in the United States. Many academic institutions provide infrastructure
to support researchers in data sharing activities. These services and
infrastructures are often distributed across the institution, housed in various
administrative units, such as campus IT, the university libraries, and the
research office, among others. Given this distributed and often undocumented ad
hoc nature, the true costs of public access to research data is not well
understood. This project is designed to illuminate many of the currently unknown
factors about the institutional landscape for public access to research data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of this analysis project are as
follows. An assessment of research data repository use patterns will be
accomplished by analyzing metadata harvested by means of the DataCite
application programming interface (API). A retrospective study of discipline-
specific and format-specific research data practices will be accomplished
utilizing a NIST-based institutional functional model for public access to
research data applied to a series of institutions and sub-disciplines. Finally,
financial data will be collected and analyzed from the institutions using a
combination of NAS and NIST cost models to consistently compare costs of data
sharing activities and thereby produce a generalizable understanding of
institutional expenditures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.