* 2135031
* Supporting Student Participation and Distinguished Speakers in the Biomedical Engineering Research Community for IEEE International Conference on Digital Health 2021
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2022
* Sheikh Ahamed, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2022
* USD 12,968.00

This proposal provides support for students, mentors, speakers, and postdoctoral
attendees for professional development activities in conjunction with the IEEE
International Conference on Digital Health (ICDH). ICDH and its associated
activities will take place virtually, between September 5 and 10, 2021. The
funds will be used to fund about 40 students’ registration fees, research
competition prizes, and small stipends for faculty mentors, distinguished
speakers, and postdoctoral scholars, with the goal of providing high-quality
mentoring experiences and broadening participation in the conference to include
more members of groups historically underrepresented in STEM fields. Doing this
will serve both societal goals around broadening participation, enrich the
intellectual diversity of the conference, improve dissemination of the latest
results around digital health to a wider population, and further the training of
the next generation of researchers interested in digital health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mentoring will be structured around two main
activities. The first is a research project-based competition targeting
biomedical engineering and healthcare projects in the domains of diabetes, blood
pressure management, cancer management, and independent living for older adults.
Graduate students (and postdocs, on a case-by-case basis) will apply to conduct
projects of their choice in the competition as either individuals or small
teams, with the competition advertised widely including to minority-serving
institutions. Accepted project proposals will be chosen by a panel of judges;
these proposers will participate in a one day research workshop and presentation
competition where they will receive feedback and mentoring from the panel of
judges. Participating students will also have half-day virtual mentoring
sessions guided by distinguished faculty speakers with expertise in the focal
areas of the competition, in which students and mentors will collaboratively
explore research challenges in the areas above. The funding will also support
participation from experts that will broaden the ICDH in two conference-wide
panels on the topics of AI-supported cancer and cardiology
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.