* 2135414
* I-Corps:  Advanced traffic systems and traffic analysis using light detection and ranging (LiDAR) sensors on the roadside
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Hao Xu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
behavior-level data with roadside LiDAR (light detection and ranging)
technologies to fill today's traffic data gap and meet data requirements for
advanced traffic systems. Advanced traffic engineering requires behavior-level
traffic analyses to improve traffic safety, reduce traffic delay, and enhance
energy efficiency in transportation. However, existing traffic sensing
technologies often cannot provide sufficient data. Potential customers of the
envisioned platform, with hardware for data collection and online service for
data processing, will primarily be traffic data collection companies that
collect and provide required data to government agencies or engineering
projects. Larger traffic agencies with in-house data collection teams may also
be users of the technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project further
develops a roadside LiDAR (light detection and ranging) traffic sensing system
which integrates LiDAR sensing hardware, artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms
for data processing, and trajectory analysis services for road traffic. The
LiDAR sensor hardware is customizable for both permanent or portable deployment
by integrating appropriate power supplies, LiDAR sensors, edge computation
units, and data communication devices. The roadside LiDAR sensing platform is
significantly different from on-vehicle sensing systems. The AI algorithms are
specifically developed for roadside sensing by including background object
filtering, object clustering, object classification, object tracking, and geo-
referencing of object trajectories for roadside sensing. The geographic
information system (GIS) traffic analysis services utilize geo-analysis
functions to provide traffic engineering knowledge and/or real-time traffic
control input. This project is based on successful demonstration of proof-of-
concept applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.