* 2135257
* EAGER: Chronological context of species loss in a Caribbean vertebrate community
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Julio Soto-Centeno, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,839.00

Today’s biodiversity crisis is underscored by species loss at a rate many times
higher than expected based on the fossil record. It is estimated that since 1500
CE about 61% of species extinctions and 37% of all critically endangered species
have been confined to islands. Factors such as environmental variability and
direct human impacts, such as habitat destruction and overhunting, are among the
top threats to insular species. Species losses caused by these increased
pressures may disrupt biotic communities and affect their function in the long
term. Understanding how these factors affect biodiversity and why some species
survive while others become extinct is important to devise strong policies for
biodiversity conservation in the face of environmental change. The aim of this
research is to examine past and present changes in the island vertebrate
communities of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico to investigate how species responded
to different factors before and after the arrival of humans. By combining data
from well-preserved fossils and modern communities, this study will target the
following questions: What is the timeline of change in each island community?
Does species loss vary with the characteristics of each island? What members of
each island community persist or were lost over time? What factors contributed
to species loss? The answers to these questions will provide an opportunity to
contextualize losses and community change across time and learn from these
processes to help mitigate biodiversity loss today. This research will train
undergraduate students, many of whom are from underrepresented groups in
science; promote local scientific literacy via outreach; and benefit society by
providing information about biodiversity change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
detailed chronological study of the changes in vertebrate communities, this
project will provide a basis for predicting species responses to factors related
to past environmental variability, human colonization history, and island and
species characteristics. The primary focus will be on a comparative analysis of
bat communities between islands, however fossilized remains of other vertebrates
will also be quantified, in light of theoretical expectations of island
biogeography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.