* 2135784
* RAPID: Fast COVID-19 Scenario Projections in Presence of Vaccines and Competing Variants
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Ajitesh Srivastava, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2023
* USD 186,835.00

After more than a year, COVID-19 remains a concern worldwide. While the United
States is moving towards a fast reopening of economic activities, it is crucial
to ensure that it can be done without an increased burden on the healthcare
system. As a result, there is an urgency to produce reliable long-term scenario
projections of cases, hospitalizations, and deaths to inform policymakers. New
challenges in modeling and estimations are emerging due to emerging competing
variants with transmissibility advantage, possible waning immunity and immune
escape, vaccine hesitancy, and changes in non-pharmaceutical interventions. The
project will address these emerging challenges in scenario projections at the
state-level in the US. A key advantage of the modeling technique is that it can
incorporate various complexities and learn from a changing epidemiological and
social environment, and yet it can produce fast projections. The techniques
developed in the project will not only be applicable to the US locations but
also locations around the world where COVID-19 is still a severe disaster. The
scenario modeling framework developed during the project will also set the
foundations for quick scenario generation for better preparedness during future
epidemics. This project provides training opportunities for a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops a discrete-time
heterogeneous rate model that can incorporate various complexities of COVID-19
and yet produce long-term scenario projections quickly on commodity hardware
(2-3 mins/scenario for all US states). The fast projections of cases,
hospitalizations, and deaths are enabled by decoupling of the parameter
estimations so that they can be learned independently using simple regression
techniques. This also results in the elimination of over-fitting arising from
simultaneously learning complex interdependent parameters and from high-
dimensional machine learning approaches. Projections are generated as
probabilistic quantiles for a given scenario, health outcome, week, and
location; the quantiles are predicted based on an ensemble of projections
resulting from the uncertainties in data inputs and estimations. The project
will also develop a novel constrained optimization-based learning approach to
estimate the temporal dynamics of competing variants from genomics
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.