* 2135878
* Advancing AI and Data Science Education in the US through Collaborative Coordination
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,03/31/2022
* Leigh DeLyser, The New York City Foundation for Computer Science Education
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 03/31/2022
* USD 47,412.00

CSforALL will convene a workshop of Computer Science (CS) education, Artificial
Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), and Data Science (DS) leaders to
explore education pathways to careers in AI and AI-related fields. The workshop
will be followed by a report with guidance for decision makers regarding
implementation of these important topics, and recommendations for policy that
will ensure equitable implementation across the landscape. An emerging movement
has centered the related computational disciplines of artificial intelligence,
machine learning, and data science, and numerous organizations and curriculum
projects are advocating specifically for these flavors of CS education in
classrooms. The workshop seeks to leverage the current moment in time to create
coordinated community efforts to significantly impact trajectories for learners
through the US education system with an outcome of (1) better preparation of all
students to live in a digital world where AI and Data Science significantly
impact everyday life, (2) strengthen pathways for computing professionals with
appropriate preparation to use AI and data science in their careers, (3) excite
the next generation of AI and Data Science researchers to contribute to the
landscape of technology in the world, and (4) broaden the participation of
women, Black, hispanic, indigenous, and other underrepresented populations in
the educational pathways that result in the outcomes
listed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning
(ML), and data science (DS) are key to innovation, today and into the future.
There is a national need to create a more diverse and inclusive workforce of AI
innovators, and create fundamental understanding of AI in all. The workshop aims
to (1) create clarity around the CS education movement and mechanisms for
equitable change resulting in broadening participation in CS and AI, ML, and DS
pathways; (2) review of current movement goals and national CS standards to
update guidance; and (3) inform movement trajectories that align with promising
practices for equity and broadening participation in AI, ML, and DS
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.