* 2135479
* EAGER: Climatic influences on migratory fidelity
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2021,06/30/2024
* Joshua Miller, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

How animals may respond to climate change is a central and controversial issue
in ecology. This project will examine how antlers shed by caribou in northern
Alaska can reveal how much females have changed the location of where they give
birth (their “calving grounds”) as climate has shifted over decades and
centuries. This is made possible by the simple facts that females grow antlers
every year and shed them within days of giving birth and that the shed antlers
do not break down. Lasting for centuries, they can be found, collected and
analyzed to reveal when they were shed. The researcher will link that
information with separate records of climate at the time each female gave birth.
The antlers can also reveal patterns of migration. The key point is that this
simple approach allows one to measure the influence of climate across time
scales that match those of natural climate cycles. Complicated models with many
assumptions are unnecessary. This work benefits society by providing data to
help manage caribou populations. The researcher will foster communication
between scientists, managers, and policy makers in the USA and Canada. Finally,
the project will support outreach and training activities for school-aged
students in a village of the Gwich'in Indigenous Nation near the Arctic Refuge,
as well as primary school, college, and graduate students in Cincinnati,
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses shed female caribou antlers sampled
from the Coastal Plain calving grounds of the Porcupine Caribou Herd (Arctic
Refuge) to identify how the geographic distribution of calving grounds has
changed through time. The central hypothesis is that variability in
reproductively-tied landscape use (i.e., calving grounds) is strongly influenced
by climate. For each antler, date-of-shed will be estimated using a combination
of radiocarbon dating and time-calibrated states of bone decay. Changes in the
geographic distribution of calving grounds across decadal- to centennial-
timescales will be paired with records of the Arctic Oscillation to test the
roles of climate on migratory fidelity and to evaluate impacts of current
climate trajectories on future long-distance (caribou) migration. The aims of
this research are to (1) establish a whole-antler model for determining sex of
unknown caribou antlers, (2) establish the stages and rates of arctic bone
weathering, and (3) quantify the climatic influences on the geographic
variability of caribou calving grounds. More broadly, this work will highlight
bone accumulations as sources of decadal- to centennial-scale data on population
biology -- a resource with potential to dramatically expand the timescales with
which many aspects of population and community ecology are
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.