* 2135333
* Workshop: 2021 CSCW Doctoral Consortium at the 2021 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work &amp; Social Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Anne Marie Piper, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 3,900.00

This is funding to support a doctoral research consortium (workshop) to take
place in conjunction with the Association for Computing Machinery's 2021
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW),
to be held virtually from October 23-27, 2021, and which is sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human Computer
Interaction (SIGCHI). The CSCW conferences are the premier venue for the
presentation of research relating to the design and use of technologies that
affect groups, organizations, communities, and networks. The development and
application of new technologies continues to enable new ways of working together
and coordinating activities. While work is an important area of focus for the
conference, technology is increasingly supporting a wide range of recreational
and social activities. CSCW has also embraced an increasing range of devices, as
we collaborate from different contexts and situations. Research published at
CSCW is heavily refereed and widely cited; the conference annually attracts over
700 top researchers from academia and industry around the world. The CSCW
doctoral consortia, which began in 1992, have been highly successful in
providing a forum for the initial socialization into the field of young doctoral
scholars, and many of today's leading CSCW researchers participated as students
in earlier consortia. These doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the
best of the next generation of CSCW researchers, allowing them both to sharpen
the research skills and to create a social network among themselves and with
senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional development.
Maintaining and fostering research dialog among the diverse disciplines that are
present in the CSCW community results in synergistic and transformative research
collaborations. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group
across a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral Consortium at CSCW 2021 will be a full-
day event taking place the day before the main conference on October 24. Goals
of the doctoral consortium include building a cohort group of new researchers
who will then have a network of colleagues spread out across the world, guiding
the work of new researchers by having experts in the research field mentor them
and provide constructive advice, and making it possible for promising new
entrants to the field to attend their research conference. Students will give
brief presentations about their research, followed by discussion and
constructive feedback both from members of the faculty panel and other student
participants. The feedback will be geared to helping students understand and
articulate how their work is positioned relative to other CSCW research, whether
their topics are adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their
methods are correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are
appropriately analyzed and presented. Additionally, the mentors will discuss
different aspects of research life, including career paths, funding, work-life
balance, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.