* 2135428
* BRITE Pivot: Molecular Basis of Mechanotransduction Probed Using Soft Materials Science
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Darren Lipomi, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 12/31/2024
* USD 599,999.00

Deformation of tissue is fundamental to the senses of touch, and pain, the
amount of food in the stomach, and to how the intestines work. Detecting
deformation also is important to the healthy function of other organs and
tissues such as how blood vessel diameter controls blood pressure. All these
functions depend upon how deformation of cells changes their behavior. The
normal functioning of touch and internal deformation are the basis of our
moment-to-moment experience and quality of life, and disruption of touch or
deformation sensation causes disease. In this project, we will use nearly atomic
sized force sensors to understand the behavior of a type of cells that respond
to deformation. These cells use a type of protein, called a PIEZO, which
converts deformation into a biological signal for the cell. The goal of this
Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering
(BRITE) Pivot project is to understand human touch and dysfunctions associated
with the internal sensation of deformation. The project includes a strong
commitment to broadening access to STEM education. The principal investigator is
the Faculty Director of the IDEA Engineering Student Center at UC San Diego,
which serves approximately 8000 students through more than twenty
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This BRITE Pivot project will leverage previous
work in the electromechanical properties of nanostructured thin films toward a
new area of research. That is, the application of electromechanically active
materials in engineered constructs to probe questions in molecular and cellular
mechanotransduction. To make progress in this interdisciplinary area, the
principal investigator will conduct an annual 3-month sabbatical-in-residence in
the laboratory of Prof. Patapoutian, who discovered the ubiquitous PIEZO family
of mechanically responsive pore-forming proteins. In three interrelated but
independent tasks that combine this new skill in molecular biology with existing
skills, his laboratory will build novel microfluidic and nanomaterial-based
sensors to measure (1) the mechanical properties of PIEZO-containing cells, (2)
the activation thresholds of cells as a function of PIEZO expression and extent
of activation, and to understand (3) cellular mechanisms for tactile sensation
in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.