* 2135720
* BRITE Fellow: Intelligent Nanoscale 3D Biomanufacturing for Human-on-a-Chip
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2027
* Shaochen Chen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,032,000.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Fellow grant will provide a transformative nanoscale
biomanufacturing platform powered by artificial intelligence. At the convergence
of advanced additive manufacturing, stem cell biology, biomaterials, and
biomechanics, biomanufacturing has the potential for creating three-dimensional
biomimetic tissue constructs that can not only redefine the clinical
capabilities of regenerative medicine but also transform the toolsets available
for various applications such as disease modeling, pre-clinical drug screening,
space exploratory and deep ocean studies with human-like tissues, and
environmental health and safety studies using engineered human tissues. However,
current biomanufacturing technologies have critical bottlenecks: a) they lack
the resolution to resolve single cells and are too slow for fabricating a
functional three-dimensional human tissues and organs, b) they are often
conducted by trial and error, resulting in wasting expensive cells,
biomaterials, and time, and c) the lack of systemic interactions with other
tissues or organs at the human systemic level. This project aims to address
fundamental research issues related to these bottlenecks. On the education side,
a comprehensive equity, diversity, and inclusion plan will be developed.
Graduate student researchers, undergraduate interns, and K-12 students from
diverse backgrounds will have the opportunity to participate in this exciting
research project and other outreach programs. As an eminent leader, the
principal investigator is poised to make long lasting societal, educational, and
commercial impacts on advanced manufacturing and nanoengineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of the project are to investigate
ultrafast, near-field optics for nanoscale control of photo-polymerization in
three-dimensional bioprinting, to investigate the machine learning methods for
three-dimensional bioprinting, and to study the biomechanics and tissue
functions of the bioprinted human-on-a-chip. To achieve these objectives, both
theoretical and experimental investigations will be carried out to understand
the nanoscale light control for bioprinting. Machine learning methods will be
investigated for optimal control of the three-dimensional bioprinting process.
The biomechanics issues and tissue functions in the human-on-a-chip will be
studied. This will be the first attempt in the field to explore ultrafast near-
field optics for bioprinting with nanoscale resolution. This research on machine
learning methods is also quite novel, particularly for bioprinting so that
traditional trial and error optimization will no longer be needed. Furthermore,
the human-on-a-chip integrating major tissues such as heart, liver, lung, kidney
in the microfluidic system will be an enabling platform for various
applications. By integrating the emerging disruptive technologies in the
multidisciplinary domains of biomanufacturing, artificial intelligence, and
nanophotonics, this research supports exceptionally innovative, high risk,
original, and unconventional research projects that have the potential to create
new paradigms in advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.