* 2135908
* SBIR Phase II:  Regenerative Tissue Filler for Breast Conserving Surgery and Other Soft Tissue Restoration Needs
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Theodore Puls, GENIPHYS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 974,349.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is its potential to lower healthcare costs and
enhance the quality of life for breast cancer survivors, along with those
suffering from traumatic injuries, skin ulcers, and other surgical wounds. For
breast conserving surgery (BCS), which represents the standard of care for
early-stage breast cancer, the most assured way of achieving satisfactory
outcomes is complete tumor removal and preservation of breast cosmesis in a
single surgery. Unfortunately, the rates of BCS-related complications,
deformities, and secondary surgeries remain high (20-40%), which increases
healthcare costs and negatively impacts patient quality of life. To address
these problems, this project furthers development of an in-situ, scaffold-
forming collagen designed as a conformable and regenerative filler for soft
tissue defects and voids. This soft-tissue filler has the potential to improve
breast surgeons’ ability to provide predictable and pleasing outcomes to their
patients. Further, the versatility of this collagen polymer means that it can be
used for a variety of other clinical applications (e.g., vocal fold
medialization, therapeutic cells, and drug delivery) and to create regenerative
tissue products for other areas of major unmet clinical need (e.g., cartilage,
skeletal muscle). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project seeks to complete the final technical hurdles to
commercialize the novel collagen polymer referred to above. Recognizing the
significance of collagen as the body’s primary tissue building material, this
patented biomaterial platform was designed to be highly purified and to retain
collagen’s natural fibril-forming (polymerization) capacity. While this
technology offers a broad range of customization potential, this project focuses
on development of an in-situ, scaffold-forming collagen to accelerate and
improve healing outcomes of complex cavity, tunneling, and deep penetrating
tissue defects. The collagen is applied as a conformable liquid, which rapidly
transitions to a fibrillar scaffold with soft tissue consistency. Preclinical
studies evaluating this product as a breast tissue filler following lumpectomy
have documented the following: 1) ease of use, 2) conformability to patient-
specific voids, 3) noninflammatory regenerative healing, and 4) compatibility
with standard clinical procedures. This SBIR project seeks to achieve key
commercialization milestones associated with establishing pilot-scale
manufacturing and achieving relevant product regulatory clearance and approval.
Specifically, work will include development and validation of scalable
processing steps for collagen purification, sterilization, and viral
inactivation. This project will also complete most of the non-clinical bench
performance and biocompatibility testing necessary for regulatory
filings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.