* 2135306
* Collaborative Research: Genetic Architecture of Exploration in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Yuan Yuan Kang, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2025
* USD 238,681.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neophilia is the attraction to
novel stimuli, and it varies strongly within and between species. Higher levels
of neophilia are believed to lead to greater behavioral flexibility, effecting
an animal’s ability to adapt to changes in their environments and to invade new
ecosystems successfully. The proposed work will focus on identifying genes and
neurons responsible for neophilia. This work will use novel arena exploration
assays with varied and integrated genetic approaches. In Drosophila
melanogaster, mutant and transgenic lines will be used to determine the
requirements of dopamine signaling within the brain to initiate neophilic
exploration. A new genetic mapping population generated from the sister species
of Drosophila will also be used to map genetic variants involved in the
differences in exploratory behaviors found between these two closely related
species. These two approaches will help explain why enormous differences in
neophilic exploration are found in insect species. This understanding will
likely transcend insects and shed light on neophilia in other species. The work
will further generate several lasting societal benefits, including the
generation of a novel mapping population that can be used to identify important
genetic variants controlling many complex physiology and behavior responses.
These lineages will be broadly distributed to investigators. The proposed
experiments are highly accessible to undergraduate researchers and will be used
to train students at both the University of Mississippi and the University of
Houston Downtown, many from underserved groups, in scientific inquiry and in the
genetic approaches to neuroscience and behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the molecular and neural basis for neophilia
is required to explain the broad inter- and intraspecific variation in this
behavioral trait. The goal of this proposal is to understand how neophilia is
encoded in the Drosophila nervous system, including an identification of the
molecules and neural circuits responsible for recognizing novel stimuli and
inducing arousal in the animal. Our central hypothesis is that during the
evolution of food specialization in Drosophila species, genetic variants that
reduced neophilia were selected for, resulting in a loss of specific
exploration; dopamine signaling is also likely involved. Novel open field
exploration of Drosophila species combined with varied genetic approaches will
be used to identify the genetic variants responsible for differences in novelty-
seeking behavior. Novel open field arenas have long been used to measure trait
and state-dependent changes in exploration in various laboratory species.
Interestingly, Drosophila simulans, an ecological generalist, actively explores
novel arenas, while its sister species and ecological specialist, Drosophila
sechellia, does not. A population of recombinant inbred lineages generated from
these Drosophila sister species will be used to identify the quantitative trait
loci responsible for the evolved differences in neophilia found between these
species. Moreover, a reverse genetic/transgenic approach will be used to dissect
the role of specific dopaminergic circuits in novelty arousal using Drosophila
melanogaster. In this approach, the function of dopamine neural circuits and
participating receptors required for the initiation of exploration will be
identified. These approaches will provide unprecedented detail on the
neurobiology of neophilia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.