* 2135725
* BRITE Relaunch: Manufacturing Multilayers of Molecularly-Bonded Inorganic Nanointerfaces for Accessing and Tuning Novel Properties
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Ganpati Ramanath, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 08/31/2024
* USD 627,998.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocomposites – which combine two
or more distinct materials where at least one of the materials has dimensions of
100 nm or less – are everywhere and are crucial for a wide variety of
applications, ranging from automobiles, aircrafts and spacecrafts, buildings,
sports equipment, travel packaging, to energy devices and electronics. The
proportion of each material in a nanocomposite can be controlled to produce a
composite material with properties that differ from each of the original
components. A prominent goal is a combination that produces a material that is
both lightweight and has high mechanical strength. Nanocomposites can also lead
to extraordinary electrical or hardness properties that are not seen in the
individual constituents. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and
Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Relaunch project aims to expand the
boundaries of nanocomposite design and synthesis with a focus on these
electrical and hardness properties. This project will advance the manufacturing
process for these nanocomposites, expand knowledge and techniques related to the
characterization of these materials, and develop models for the relationship
between the structural variations and the properties so that they can be
predicted and controlled through the manufacturing process. The knowledge gained
will support the design and manufacturing of a new group of nanocomposites with
properties that cannot be obtained from either conventional nanocomposites or
natural biomaterials. This research will directly expose graduate and
undergraduate students to multiple enriching collaborations with theorists and
experimentalists in the USA and Sweden. Results from this work will enhance
existing undergraduate and graduate courses on electronic properties, materials
characterization and advanced structure. K-12 outreach efforts will include:
engaging with high-school students and teachers; and supporting students from
underrepresented sections of the society to encourage them to build careers in
STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mixing component materials in specific
configurations allows access to property combinations that are not realized in
individual materials, and the property enhancements are generally governed by
the simple rules of mixtures. The researched work involves a merger of interface
science, molecularly-engineered materials discovery, and nanomanufacturing. The
overarching goal is to establish a platform for the manufacture of a completely
new class of high-interface-fraction multilayered nanomaterials with inorganic
nanolayers glued with organic nanolayers to realize unusual properties beyond
the rules of mixtures. This includes materials with giant magnetoresistance and
superhardness. Such structures offer new possibilities to access, amplify and
tune novel properties from superposition of effects from multiple nanoglued
interfaces, and even realize a scenario wherein the interface properties become
the materials’ properties. Manufacturing such nanocomposites with unprecedented
interface-dominated properties is anticipated to transformatively impact and
expand the frontiers of a diversity of emergent technologies. Specifically, this
project will: synthesize nanoglued inorganic multilayers by hybrid
atomic/molecular layer deposition techniques for different nanoglue structures
and chemistries; characterize the thermal, chemical, and microstructural
stability of the hybrid multilayers; unearth the effects of different facets of
nanoglue structure and chemistry, and inorganic layer features, on mechanical
and electrical properties; and develop models of nanoglue-induced property-
enhancements to enable the realization of novel property combinations. The
results are anticipated to open up new vistas for materials design and
manufacturing beyond rule of mixtures, transcend crystallographically-
constrained inorganic-organic hybrid materials, and facilitate synthetic
materials and properties that are not accessible in current
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.