* 2135502
* BEE: IMEMEBA Workshop: Insights from Macro-Ecology and Macro-Evolution for Biodiversity Assessment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Rosemary Gillespie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 08/31/2024
* USD 98,860.00

The Earthâ€™s ecosystems are under serious threat due to ongoing stressors of the
Anthropocene. Presently, we have no reliable way to assess the overall health of
an ecosystem, and the biodiversity therein, let alone to identify thresholds of
change beyond which a complex ecosystem cannot recover. Much needed are insights
into how patterns of species diversity that we understand to emerge at small
scales are propagated up to shape entire ecosystems: What are the drivers, and
what aspects impart resilience to perturbations such as those from invasive
species or climate change? Three rather disparate research areas have started to
examine how large scale ecological and evolutionary patterns emerge through
time, notably in the context of fossils, where changes in communities can be
studied through the geological record; remote archipelagoes in which different
ages of component islands can be used as snapshots of community composition
through geological time; and microbial systems, where large scale patterns
emerge relatively quickly. This project brings researchers from these different
disciplines together, along with others who are developing theory focused on
emergent patterns that can apply to any or all of these systems. The primary
goal is to identify commonalities across systems and build a unified theory that
describes large scale patterns of ecosystems and attributes that promote
resiliency to change. The outcomes will have broad societal impact for
understanding ecosystem response to changing climate. In addition, the workshop
will contribute to the training and scholarly advancement of diverse early
career investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three organizers and
an additional six core participants. There will be a preliminary planning
workshop held for the core participants. This small workshop will be short and
focused, based at Blue Oak Field Station, California in Fall 2021, and geared
towards expanding on concepts at the intersection of the different disciplines
and planning for the main workshop. The primary workshop will be held at
Schoodic, Maine and will be longer, larger, and more integrative, tentatively
scheduled for June 7-13, 2022. For the main workshop the organizers have
identified 30 key participants who are active in developing insights into large
scale ecological and evolutionary properties within each of the fields of
paleoecology, island community ecology, and microbial systems, as well as
researchers who are developing theory at the intersection of these disciplines.
Participants have been targeted with an eye to gender equality and diversity of
career stages. For the primary workshop, eight slots have been reserved for
applications from graduate students and early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop was funded through the Bridging
Ecology and Evolution category in the Biological Sciences Directorate, Division
of Environmental Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.