* 2135662
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the Role of Interfaces in Liquid Separation Membranes based on Carbon Molecular Sieves
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2025
* USD 272,735.00

Fuels, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, water, and many other daily-use consumer
products are manufactured from natural resources by a series of refining
processes. The desired chemical compounds must then be separated and purified
from the raw materials, which represents a significant technological challenge.
Liquid-phase separations are particularly challenging and, as a result, have a
large environmental and energy footprint that continues to grow. For instance,
more than 1 trillion gallons of organic-loaded water are treated each year in
produced water applications alone. This volume is expected to increase along
with global energy production and continues to include growing contributions
from biorefineries and biochemical plants. Carbon molecular sieves (CMS) are
rigid solid materials with holes that are comparable in size to molecules of
liquid compounds. The CMS materials can be used as sieves to separate and purify
liquid compounds in an energy-efficient way to address these new challenges.
However, the performance of CMS in separations can be less than desirable. CMS
separation performance limitations are often attributed to various effects
related to molecular transport at the CMS surfaces and interfaces. In this
research project, the investigators will combine advanced experimental
techniques to measure and understand the motion of liquid molecules within the
CMS materials at different relevant length scales. The fundamental knowledge
created during this project will enable the design of CMS materials for targeted
chemical separations. The research program is integrated with an educational and
outreach plan that focuses on increasing interest among and retention of
underrepresented students in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to quantify and understand deviations from the desired separation
performance often exhibited by freestanding CMS membranes and hybrid CMS
membranes formed by dispersing CMS particles in a polymer. These deviations are
often attributed to various non-ideal effects related to small molecule
transport at CMS surfaces and interfaces. The investigators will combine
advanced diffusion nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and macroscopic
transport measurements to quantify transport at interfaces, including transport
through CMS surface barriers and along low-density defects at the polymer-CMS
interfaces in hybrid membranes. These findings will be used to create verifiable
structure-transport relations, leading to new design principles of CMS-based
membranes for liquid separations. The project will develop important fundamental
knowledge of the role of interfaces in CMS-based membranes on liquid transport
across an entire range of relevant length scales below and above one
micrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.