* 2135914
* NSF-sponsored workshop: The cross-disciplinary study of post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications: Finding the commonalities of interests, approaches, and future di
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Sixue Chen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2023
* USD 52,707.00

Every organism on earth relies on its DNA content (i.e., genome) to direct its
life, growth, and development. However, the genome is not the destiny of the
organism. For example, caterpillars and butterflies have exactly the same
genome, but distinct forms. The difference can be largely attributed to the
other important biomolecules that are encoded by the genome. These biomolecules
are RNA and proteins, which can be modified in hundreds of different ways after
their synthesis. Recognition of the diversity and complexity of modifications of
RNA and proteins has changed how we think about their different functions of
these molecules in fundamental ways in both large and small organisms, ranging
from microbes to plants and humans. Understanding how RNA and proteins are
modified, and their biological implications is very important in many areas of
basic and applied biological and medical research. Improving our understanding
will require building community resources, technical breakthroughs, and cross-
disciplinary research efforts to achieve cross-cutting advances in RNA and
protein biology. This project will support a virtual national workshop that will
bring together 100-150 diverse participants that are actively involved in both
the meeting and discussion sessions. In addition, all research talks, and
discussion sessions will be open for anyone interested to watch through Zoom.
The participants are from many different disciplines and areas, including plant,
animal, and human biology, and cover research areas such as chemistry,
engineering, computer science, artificial intelligence, and systems and
synthetic biology. Keynote talks from leaders, small-group and interactive
sessions will facilitate and stimulate researchers to address the following key
topics: 1) Successes and failures in RNA and protein modification research in a
variety of research organisms; 2) Experimental systems as well as research
approaches that leverage all RNA and protein–related scientific disciplines; 3)
Possible “rules of life” to guide baseline and comparative questions across the
different realms of organisms; 4) Advantages and disadvantages of currently
available tools, consortia, and databases; 5) Training needs for researchers
capable of contributing to future advancement in RNA and protein biology; and 6)
Short- and medium-term research and knowledge goals, noting potential strategies
to reach these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the framework of our current
understanding of genetic information flow, post-transcriptional modifications
(PRMs) of RNA molecules and post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins
are extremely important cellular regulatory moieties. Yet significant gaps
remain in the integrated understanding of these two regulatory moieties and
their effects on overall cellular metabolism in different biological organisms.
Fragmentated research efforts in different systems (e.g., microbe, plant,
animal, and human) and using different approaches and standards, has prevented
integrative analyses of different datasets and identification of common
principles of PRMs and PTMs. This workshop aims to fill these gaps and advance
research from descriptive and specific mechanistic focus towards integration,
general theory, modeling and prediction, and global understanding. Moreover,
this workshop will promote studying the functions and mechanisms of the key
regulatory modifications, of their roles in cellular signaling and metabolism,
as well as their impact on organisms. The workshop will provide significant
opportunities for cross-disciplinary interactions to advance the field of RNA
and protein biology by identifying: 1) core questions driving/motivating PRM and
PTM studies; 2) conceptual and theoretical foundations that provide a useful
lens for hypothesis testing; 3) big ideas to drive advances in these areas and
increased understanding of the rules of life; and 4) a path forward for
collaborative research and synthetic analyses that will further integrate the
two closely-related areas of research through multidisciplinary approaches.
Early-career post-doctoral scientists and graduate students will participate in
the workshop organization and serve as virtual discussion leaders, providing
them the opportunity to network with many of the leaders in these cutting-edge
fields. The workshop aims to increase broad participation of underrepresented
groups in RNA and protein modification research, and serves as a model for
integration of inclusive and interactive online conference opportunities
allowing participation from broader audiences. Collectively, this workshop will
identify critical gaps in resources and understanding of PRMs and PTMs across
disciplines, and importantly draft a path forward for community-wide
collaborative research to advance these important areas of research that affect
our understanding of human, plant, animal, and ecosystem biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this workshop was provided by the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster, Plant Genome Research Program, and
Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the BIO Directorate and the Cellular and
Biochemical Engineering Program in the ENG
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.