* 2135438
* Collaborative Research: Improving Student Learning Outcomes in Computer Science Theory Courses Using Conceptual Models
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Christopher Homan, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 06/30/2025
* USD 136,123.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving college students’
understanding of concepts in computer science theory courses. These foundational
courses are designed to help students learn how to formalize computational
problems, build efficient algorithms to solve problems, and argue convincingly,
when a problem is so complex that efficient algorithms are unlikely to exist.
However, students have difficulty in trying to understand the theoretical
concepts in these courses, which can create a significant barrier to student
success. While conceptual models have been widely adopted in primary and
secondary STEM education to help students make sense of important concepts,
their use in computer science education has not been well explored. This project
will study the impact of teaching students how to create their own conceptual
models of theories. It is expected that the project will result in measurable
improvements in student understanding of theoretical concepts and ability to
create well-conceived conceptual models. This project will also provide insights
for instructors on how to effectively integrate conceptual models in existing
computer science theory courses. Students who understand the theoretical
concepts will be better prepared to address the complex computational problems
that they will encounter in the computing workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to improve student learning outcomes related to the
theory of computing, particularly with respect to understanding, skill sets, and
ability to apply theory to new situations. This study is grounded in
constructivist theories of learning and previous work on the use of modeling in
STEM education. After presenting a theoretical concept in a class, a set of
open-ended questions will be posed to students who will be asked to draw a
conceptual model and then iteratively revise it as they address the open-ended
questions. The research questions that will be addressed by this study are: (1)
What is the quality of models produced by students? (2) How do the models impact
student understanding of theoretical concepts? (3) How do the models affect
instructors’ teaching? To answer these questions, the project team will use
mixed research methods to analyze qualitative and quantitative data including
student survey responses, assessments of student models, student performance on
exams, and weekly discussions with instructors. Educational materials will be
made available to the STEM education community through a public online
repository and project results will be presented at computer science education
conferences. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.