* 2135468
* EAGER:  Coupling of Gas-Liquid Plasma Chemical Reactors with Bioengineered Microbes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2023
* Cesar Rodriguez, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 149,768.00

Non-thermal plasmas are low-temperature, atmospheric-pressure ionized gases that
are generated by high-voltage electric discharges. When these plasmas are in
contact with liquid water, free radical species are formed that effectively
decompose toxic compounds or transform organic waste into value-added products.
While non-thermal plasmas alone can be used to completely degrade target
pollutants into mineralized products, the total electrical power required may
make the process economically nonviable. Biological treatment processes, on the
other hand, can completely transform some chemical waste species with greatly
reduced power demands. However, these processes are limited to biodegradable
compounds and may require lengthy processing times. Previous work by this
research team demonstrated that the sequential combination of using a plasma
reactor to initiate the breakdown of waste compounds followed by a bioreactor to
complete the process can lead to significant energy savings. It was also found,
however, that the slower bioreactor dynamics results in a mismatch in time
scales that ultimately led to very large reactor systems. To overcome this
problem, in this study microbial cells will be genetically engineered to: a)
survive in the liquid water contacting the non-thermal plasma, and b) increase
enzyme production so that the rates of the biological reaction pathways compare
to those of the plasma. This matching of the two process time scales will make
possible the design and operation of integrated, compact, and energy efficient
plasma-bioreactor systems for degrading hazardous and toxic compounds from
wastewater streams or to produce useful compounds from waste materials.
Fundamental knowledge on coupling a non-biological (abiotic) system such as the
non-thermal plasma reactor with the cellular metabolism of a bacterium also will
be generated by this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop
non-thermal plasma gas-liquid bioreactors, research that couples plasma
chemistry and chemical reaction engineering with bioengineering. Plasma
reactions occur over time scales of less than 1 second while conventional
bioreactors often operate on time scales of hours to days to weeks. These large
differences in time scales suggest that it may be possible to attain greater
efficiency and reaction process synergy by coupling non-thermal plasma to
bioreactors containing microbes bioengineered for both plasma resistance and
specific metabolic tasks. The overall goal of the proposed work is to test the
hypothesis that microbes resistant to the plasma-produced oxidizing compounds
can be genetically engineered to perform other useful biochemical
transformations within the reactive environment of gas-liquid non-thermal plasma
reactors. Plasma resistant E. coli will be engineered to enhance their inherent
capacity to metabolize carboxylic acids, specifically glycolic, formic and
oxalic acids. Likewise, the plasma reactor will be engineered to promote
effective contact between the cells and the gas-liquid plasma environment. The
specific hypotheses of this proposal are: 1) that the newly developed cells will
be able to function while exposed to the plasma, and 2) the incorporation of
these cells in the plasma reactor will lead to a faster overall mineralization
of a target organic compound. The first practical applications to be
investigated in this work involve treatment of toxic and difficult to biodegrade
organic compounds. The demonstration that microbes can be created to perform
useful chemical transformation within the highly oxidizing plasma environment
will constitute a novel example of the effective use of electrical energy in
chemical processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.