* 2135791
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Population Games for Cyber-Physical Systems: New Theory with Tools for Transportation Management under Extreme Demand
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Alex Kurzhanskiy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2024
* USD 809,738.00

A sudden surge in demand in traffic networks disrupts the equilibrium conditions
upon which these networks are planned and operated. Lack of understanding of the
population's strategic choices under extreme demand may result in paradoxical
outcomes, such as evacuations aiming to save lives instead resulting in mass
casualties on the road or opening up of new roads increasing rather than
decreasing travel time. This project will devise systems and procedures for
managing the strategic choices of populations (e.g., whether to evacuate or
shelter in place, which escape routes to take) and the actions of the
authorities (e.g., which zones to evacuate and in which sequence, where to route
the traffic, whether to close some roads or open extra lanes in a given
direction). The tools resulting from this project will enable better response
systems to assist local authorities in managing extreme demand, such as when
entire counties have to be evacuated to protect the residents from a wildfire.
The project will develop a modeling and simulation tool chain to predict traffic
bottleneck locations and their severity together with expected travel times and
delays, thus determining the spectrum of outcomes, identifying worst cases, and
enabling the authorities to make informed decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
technical approach is rooted in population games, which model the dynamics of
strategic noncooperative interactions among large populations of agents
competing for resources. The project, however, will depart from the equilibrium
focus of the existing theory and will offer transient analysis tools that
account for not only the strategy revisions of the agents, but also a host of
cyber and physical dynamics, such as queueing dynamics in traffic flow,
responsive signal control at intersections, information dissemination to agents,
and evolution of hazards, such as fire propagation. The research tasks to enable
the project's vision of a "cyber-physical population game theory" include
characterizing transient behavior with system-theoretic methods, accounting for
uncertainty in strategy revision models, extending the theory to a continuum of
user preferences, rethinking the stochastic processes underlying the dynamical
models, modifying the theory for short-term horizons for time-critical
operations, learning dynamical models from data, and formulating extensive form
games between a population and a single agent, motivated by the population
response to evacuation orders. In addition, the project will identify control
actions (such as responsive signal policies, road closures, disabling certain
turns) to close the data-decision-action loop and steer the dynamics towards
desirable outcomes and avoiding unsafe ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.