* 2135526
* BRITE Synergy: Additive Manufacturing of Composite Materials with Transverse Thermoelectricity
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Fei Ren, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Synergy project will study additive manufacturing of
thermoelectric materials, which are semiconductors that can achieve direct
conversion between thermal energy and electricity. Thermoelectric devices can be
used to improve energy efficiency by recovering waste heat from thermal
processes. Thermoelectric coolers can achieve solid-state cooling that
eliminates the usage of refrigerants. Current manufacturing practices for
thermoelectrics rely on conventional technologies such as machining and
soldering, which are not only costly but also limit device designs. This work
will investigate thermoelectric materials with transverse electrical and thermal
properties, so heat transfer occurs in a direction perpendicular to the electric
field in the material. This transverse property can enable design and
manufacturing of new thermoelectric devices. Transverse thermoelectric
technologies can provide new solutions to improve energy efficiency, utilization
of unconventional thermal energy, and solid-state cooling and refrigeration.
This work will also advance knowledge of additive manufacturing of novel
thermoelectric materials. The outcome of this work will help promote additive
manufacturing technologies in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transverse
thermoelectric materials are capable of decoupling electrical and thermal
transport, which in turn enables design of unique thermoelectric devices such as
those with large aspect ratios and complex shapes. Although theory has predicted
that significant transverse thermoelectricity can be achieved in composite
materials with engineered anisotropy, fabrication of such structures is
difficult using conventional manufacturing methods. This work will use additive
manufacturing to construct composite thermoelectric materials. The research team
will examine the microstructures of additively manufactured samples, including
textures and porosities, and correlate these microstructural features to the
material properties. Mathematical modeling will be used to understand the effect
of material anisotropy and defects on the transverse thermoelectricity. It is
expected that this research effort will lead to establishment of a quantitative
relationship between the manufacturing parameters, the microstructure, and the
properties of composite transverse thermoelectric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.