* 2135203
* BRITE Pivot: Machine Learning Accelerated Optimization of Flash Lamp Processed Thin-films for Flexible Optoelectronic Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Julia Hsu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2025
* USD 498,831.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award supports research to develop a new approach to
the manufacturing of flexible optoelectronics -- solar cells, light-emitting
diodes, and sensors for health and wellness monitoring. The innovative technique
uses a flash lamp to deliver short pulses of energy to sinter ultrafine
particles, initiate chemical reactions, and form new materials. Replacing
traditional heat sources such as ovens with light can greatly reduce time and
energy, accelerating manufacturing output and decreasing costs. But finding the
processing conditions that optimize materials properties has mostly been done by
trial and error, an expensive, inefficient method. By contrast, cutting-edge
machine learning approaches guide this project's search for the best processing
conditions in fabricating thin films for flexible devices. Today, Pacific Rim
nations dominate flexible optoelectronic manufacturing; this project makes the
U.S. more competitive. The research involves many technical disciplines,
including materials processing and characterization, device fabrication and
testing, data analytics and machine learning, and advanced manufacturing. The
project provides undergraduates with hands-on research experience. It also
develops a diverse Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics workforce
by including at all levels women and other under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making high-quality materials often requires a
high-temperature annealing process, which takes many iterations to optimize.
This project investigates the use of light from a flash lamp instead of furnace
heating for thin film processing and adopts machine learning approaches to
accelerate process optimization. Photonic curing uses millisecond pulses of
intense broadband light to sinter particles, initiate chemical reactions, and
transform materials. The energy from the light pulses is preferentially absorbed
by the thin film, leading to selective heating, while the underlying substrate
remains below its working temperature. Hence, this approach enables processing
on plastic substrates which cannot withstand high temperatures, and, therefore,
is particularly useful in flexible optoelectronics fabrication. Because photonic
curing involves many processing parameters that are intimately coupled with
starting material properties, achieving desired quality outcomes is a
challenging optimization problem. Traditional varying-one-variable-at-a-time
methods are inefficient in exploring the entire parameter space and are thus
time-consuming and expensive. The research teamâ€™s approach is to collect initial
experimental results based on the judicious sampling of input space and apply
advanced data analytic techniques that balance between exploring untested phase
space and fine-tuning conditions to achieve global optimization. The
relationships between input parameters and output improvements for photonic
curing are revealed, and physics-based models for thin film processing
optimization are developed from the machine learning
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.