* 2135830
* Identifying Assets and Collaborative Activities to Support Student Success in Environmental Data Science at Minority Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Krystal Tsosie, Ronin Institute for Independent Scholarship Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2023
* USD 99,909.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing capacity in
environmental data science through improved access to training and workforce
development resources for diverse student populations. Racial and ethnic
minority groups in the United States are under-supported and under-represented
in data science programs and careers. Multiple challenges, including the
affordability, access to new technologies and the lack of educational
opportunities for diverse students, have led to a digital divide that
demonstrates inequities in access to data, technology and educational
opportunities. Data science education at Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs)
can narrow this divide by engaging diverse student and faculty populations who
have the knowledge and skills required to address issues of social and cultural
relevance. MSIs have proven to be effective at recruiting, retaining, and
preparing under-represented students for the STEM workforce. This project seeks
to bring together representatives from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), and professional
organizations to build resource networks, identify barriers to data science
education, and co-create a set of recommendations focusing specifically on
environmental sciences, thus empowering and supporting equitable data science
education and training opportunities that ameliorate the digital
divide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus on environmental data science springs
from two factors that indicate strong workforce needs nationwide: a significant
increase in large ecological datasets and environmental synthesis projects over
the last decade and the growing national awareness of critical environmental
challenges. The project team includes representatives from the Academic Data
Science Alliance, Native BioData Consortium, Atlanta University Center Data
Science Initiative, the SCORE-UBE Network, The Carpentries and the National
Environmental Observation Network and the project will engage a broad collection
of additional academic and community partners. This project will organize
monthly HBCU and TCU working group meetings and a series of mini-workshops to
meet the following goals: 1) identify the unique assets that HBCUs and TCUs
bring to environmental data science education; 2) analyze barriers to adoption
of data science in teaching relevant courses; 3) identify and raise awareness of
resources available to support equitable data science education; 4) promote
relationship-building among faculty and partner organizations, forming the basis
of a network for future resource sharing and curriculum development with peer
support; and, 5) collaboratively develop a living document with recommendations
that will enhance student success in environmental data science. Project
activities will allow participants, with support from a Leadership Committee and
community partners, to identify institutional assets and challenges, and how to
best leverage partnerships to enhance data science capacity at HBCUs and TCUs.
The project will build relationships and concentrate activities on identifying
shared solutions that can be adopted within a variety of contexts and scales.
Information gathered during all workshops and the project evaluation will be
incorporated in a living document with recommendations that will be disseminated
to all network partners and to the wider data science community. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.