* 2135539
* CNS Core: Small: Efficient Interoperability Testing of Heterogeneous Network Protocol Implementations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2024
* Witawas Srisa-an, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 515,998.00

There has been an increasing interest in using hardware to implement network
protocols, such as in ultra-high-speed networks (e.g., 40Gbps, 100Gbps) for
scientific data movement. This is mainly because the processor overhead caused
by the current software network protocol implementations increases considerably
as the network speeds increase. However, there are usually big differences
between software and hardware implementations for the same network protocol due
to the unique hardware design constraints. Therefore, it is critical to test the
interoperability between heterogeneous network protocol implementations to make
sure that they can correctly interact with each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes a new class of testing methods to efficiently and
systematically check the interoperability of emerging heterogeneous network
protocol implementations under two types of packet parameters: packet dynamic
parameters (e.g., packet delay and loss), and packet semantics parameters (e.g.,
formats and meanings of packet fields), as different network protocol
implementations communicate and interact with one another using packets. There
are three research thrusts. The first research thrust focuses on
interoperability testing with the packet dynamic parameters, the second focuses
on the packet semantics parameters, and the third focuses on the mixed
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will improve not only the
performance but also the stability of networks, especially ultra-high-speed
networks where hardware implementations play critical roles. This project will
benefit a large group of ultra-high-speed network users, such as scientific
users who often need to move a huge amount of data over ultra-high-speed
networks. In addition, the research problems identified in this project are
related to three communities: networking, hardware, and software engineering;
this may stimulate more possible collaborations among these three
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project documents, source code, and
related data will be available on website https://hinterop.github.io, which will
be maintained for at least three years after the end of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.