* 2135270
* LTREB Renewal: Evolutionary and Demographic Responses to Climate in Natural Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2027
* Diane Campbell, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2027
* USD 536,699.00

The purpose of this study is to understand how a rapidly changing environment
influences natural selection and population size. Many species of plants and
animals can be threatened by rapid environmental change, such as an increase in
frequency or severity of drought. This research will test the conditions
required for a population to avoid collapse due to climate change, through a
process of adapting to the new environmental conditions. It will add to the
longest-running data set on how selection in plants responds to changes in
annual snowpack and pollinator availability, and to model for the first time how
adaptation to these conditions allows populations to recover. It will determine
how selective pressures change in response to water availability, how genetic
variation in leaf and flower traits interact with climate change to affect birth
and death rates, and how changes in pollination interacts with the physical
environment to influence evolutionary change. Responses of population size to
climate change will be projected over the next century and provide a case study
of how other species might respond. The project will include the training of
diverse undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral associates. Field
science tours at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory (RMBL) will be led for
outreach to the general public. In addition, a citizen science project will
allow the public to contribute to the building of maps of pollinator abundance
across the western US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will continue a long-
term field study near the RMBL to measure natural selection on, and the extent
of genetic variance in, vegetative and floral traits of Ipomopsis aggregata
subspp. aggregata and Ipomopsis tenuituba (Polemoniaceae). By the end of the
grant period there will be 16 to 23 years of data on selection (depending on the
trait) to examine associations between selection and snowmelt date. In
combination with unique data on how absolute fitness is altered by snowmelt
date, models for evolutionary rescue will be fully parameterized in nature. The
project will examine the dependence of evolutionary and demographic responses on
genetic variance in traits, as measured from common gardens with a full-sib
breeding design. The extent of adaptive phenotypic plasticity in response to
annual snowmelt date and summer precipitation will also be incorporated into
projections of population size. Although prior studies of plant adaptation to
climate have emphasized vegetative traits, floral traits (shape, color, rewards,
volatiles) will be modeled as well, as selection on them depends on water
availability and pollinator abundance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.