* 2135077
* Sensor aided millimeter wave communication for connected vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2021,06/30/2022
* Robert Heath, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 188,120.00

Automotive and aerial vehicles are being equipped with more sensors to enhance
automated driving/flying as well as to perform general sensing tasks. Despite
increasing data rates from cameras, LIDAR, and RADAR, along with higher levels
of onboard computation, such vehicles do not have the means to share such high
rate sensor data to enhance their situational awareness or improve cooperation.
Millimeter-wave communication is one solution for high data rate vehicular
communications. Achieving the highest rates with millimeter-wave, though,
requires frequent link reconfiguration in mobile environments. This research is
aimed at using the information derived from sensors that operate in some band
other than the communication band, to help configure the communication link. The
emphasis is placed on theoretical development and experimental validation of
frameworks of using sensor information to permit link reconfiguration in mobile
environments. Broader impacts include teaching, mentoring, participation of
underrepresented groups, community outreach through demos and videos, and
technology transfer through collaborations with industry partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project addresses the fundamentals of
communication using side information derived from various sensing techniques.
The project leverages mathematical tools from array signal processing and
machine learning and will focus on the applications related to beam
configuration. On the theoretical side, this project develops mathematical tools
for understanding the frequency of beam realignment, a framework for relating
radar and communication paths, and fundamental limits for sensor-aided beam
alignment in millimeter-wave communication. On the practical side, this project
tests critical hypothesis about statistical correlations between sensor
measurements and communication link performance in a series of testbeds. The
testbeds support low-cost radar derived from WiFi signals and higher cost
automotive radars, coupled with custom developed millimeter-wave communication
link capability. Outcomes of this research include (i) an understanding of how
much overhead can be reduced by using information derived from potentially very
different communication bands, and (ii) rapidly reconfigurable and robust
millimeter-wave communication links.