* 2135581
* Collaborative Research: III: Small: Robust Learning and Inference Protocols for Mitigating Information Pollution
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Daniel Hopkins, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2025
* USD 250,000.00

Social computing platforms, in which every user is a potential information
source, have revolutionized the way content is generated and disseminated in
multiple fields, such as news, healthcare and online education, to name a few.
In these open settings, users often access information without awareness of its
source and its level of expertise making them more susceptible to manipulation
and exposure to biased or even deceptive content. This project is designed to
help users navigate the information space, by defining and operationalizing the
concept of Information Pollution, the contamination of information supply with
irrelevant, redundant, unsolicited, incorrect, and otherwise low-value
information, and suggest principled methods for combating its adverse effects by
augmenting it with the relevant context. The framework will identify the
spectrum of perspectives that could exist around topics of public interest,
identify relevant expertise, and thus improve public access to diverse and
trustworthy information&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
address some of the key research questions in support of mitigating information
pollution. The project’s approach decomposes the problem into its core
components – from key natural language processing problems that arise when
attempting to identify and present the multiple perspectives a claim might have,
along with its supporting evidence, to understanding information sources, the
claims they make and evidence they provide, to an algorithmic inference
framework for trustworthiness. The investigators will define novel learning and
inference tasks that would provide important building blocks for addressing the
information pollution problem. These include a holistic framework for assessing
trustworthiness of information by consolidating information about sources from
multiple documents and their interactions with other sources. In addition, the
project will define novel language understanding tasks which provide new
abstractions supporting the characterization of the similarities and differences
between claims, the intent behind them, perspectives they express, and their
implications. The research goals will be complemented by a comprehensive
evaluation plan, consisting of both intrinsic evaluation of each capability, as
well as extrinsic evaluation measuring the impact the full system will have on
information consumed by users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.