* 2135018
* EAGER: Extending Greenland glacier observations using newly-discovered aerial photographs
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2023
* Leigh Stearns, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 12/31/2023
* USD 334,282.00

Three military airborne campaigns (USAF: 1940s-1960s, USCG: 1970s, USN:
1970s-1980s) acquired tens of thousands of aerial photographs of Greenland.
These recently-located photographs can yield insight into ice-sheet wide glacier
behavior prior to satellite observations but have not yet been digitized or used
for science. Currently, lack of ice sheet-wide observations prior to the 1980s
limits our ability to model the long-term evolution of outlet glacier dynamics.
The research team will digitize historic images from the 1940s to 1980s, render
glacier surface elevations and terminus positions for the perimeter of
Greenland, and estimate surface velocities where the data permits. By providing
glacier information further back in time, this new historical dataset can be
used to improve constraints needed to model glacier dynamics which will further
advance accuracy in predictive models of glacier response to climate change. The
workflow and products will be available in a public repository for the community
to access and a tutorial will be designed to help researchers repeat the process
for other historical images. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The earliest ice sheet-wide
surface elevation maps were produced using data from the 1980s. This project
will extend the historical record by including Greenland-wide glacier images
from the 1940s and 1970s and from the 1950s and 1960s for a large number of
outlet glaciers. The methodology includes: digitizing the air photo film
negatives, geolocating the photo centers using a combination of military flight
index maps and field notes, and processing the images using structure-from-
motion (SfM) photogrammetry techniques to generate surface elevations. The real-
world coordinates are manually extracted localized peaks from present-day
elevations of stable terrain (e.g., exposed bedrock). This methodology has been
successfully carried out using historical air photos from Antarctica. Upon the
completion of this project, the raw digital data and rendered products with
accuracy estimates will be made accessible for public distribution. By extending
the temporal scale of Greenland outlet glacier dynamics, this new historical
dataset can improve constraints used in modeling glacier dynamics which will
further advance accuracy in predictive models of glacier response to climate
change. Raw data and derived products, including surface elevation,
orthorectified images, and velocities, will be archived at the Arctic Data
Center and results will be shared with QGreenland and GHub to expand the
audience. A tutorial will also be designed to allow others to reproduce the
results and apply the methodology to other historical
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.