* 2135666
* BRITE Synergy: Transforming Electron Beam Lithography with Reactive Gases
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Hastings, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 12/31/2023
* USD 407,998.00

This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and Equitable Advances in
Engineering (BRITE) Synergy award will support research which seeks to transform
the way manufacturers perform electron-beam lithography by introducing a
reactive gas that modifies the process chemistry. Electron-beam lithography is
critical for nearly all manufacturing at nanometer length scales and is often
the first step in fabricating devices in semiconductor electronics, digital
imaging, communications, and healthcare. This innovation will enable patterning
of new functional materials while also improving the performance of conventional
materials. The research program seeks to understand the fundamental physical and
chemical mechanisms underlying the effects of reactive gases on the lithographic
process, and to use this knowledge to advance lithographic performance. A broad
range of industries now relies on nanoscale manufacturing, and thus on electron-
beam lithography. This award could thus impact multiple sectors of the U.S.
economy while accelerating product development and increasing access to
nanotechnology-enabled products. This effort will also expand diversity, equity,
and inclusion in advanced manufacturing through workshops for middle-school
teachers primarily serving underrepresented groups and multi-disciplinary
training for graduate students recruited from underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electron-beam lithography is the primary pattern
generation technology for nearly all nanomanufacturing, from integrated circuit
mask making to direct-writing of quantum devices. Focused electron-beam induced
processing in gases and liquids provides nanoscale rapid prototyping with
functional materials as well as nanoscale repair and editing capabilities. This
effort synthesizes research outcomes in these two areas with established
knowledge in radiation chemistry and electron-material interactions to enhance
understanding of the influence of reactive gases on electron-beam lithography.
Specifically, the research seeks to understand how reactive gases can alter
radiation chemical processes to expand the range of materials that can be
patterned and to improve lithographic performance for conventional electron-beam
resists. A rigorous research synthesis program, Hybrid Monte Carlo-continuum
simulations, and carefully designed nanopatterning experiments will build
knowledge of the relationships between process conditions, such as gas
composition and pressure, and lithographic performance metrics, such as
sensitivity, contrast, and resolution. Success could transform electron-beam
lithography because functional materials could be patterned with resolution and
throughput comparable to conventional resists while the performance of
conventional resists could be tuned by the reactive
gas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.