* 2135080
* STEM Excellence in Engineering Equity (SEEE)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Taryn Bayles, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 11/30/2023
* USD 378,869.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While rural students are now
graduating from high school at rates comparable to their urban and suburban
peers, they continue to fall behind in pursuing postsecondary education,
including engineering courses and programs. In accordance with the National
Science Foundation’s Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) program’s
goal to support the development of innovative methods and projects to
significantly impact the recruitment and retention of engineering students from
underrepresented groups, the STEM Excellence in Engineering Equity (SEEE)
project will develop and pilot a model for recruiting and retaining rural high
school students that can be replicated in other contexts. The project partners,
the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt), the STEM Equity Initiative (a nonprofit),
and RTI International will design, implement, and evaluate a secondary
professional development program and faculty learning communities that guide
educators in integrating evidence-based engineering content, pedagogical
practice, and educational equity indicators with demonstrated application in
high school science, technology engineering or math (STEM)
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEEE program will integrate a hands-on,
high school engineering curriculum (INSPIRES – INcreasing Student Participation,
Interest &amp; Recruitment in Engineering and Science) with research-based and
practitioner-tested equity content to improve educators’ ability to create
Equitable Learning Environments (ELE) that better serve the social, emotional,
and cultural needs of every student. The N.E.I.R. (Normalizing, Empowering,
Inclusive, and Relevant) constructs will provide criteria and indicators that
can be tailored and prioritized to address the root causes impacting
underrepresented (UR) populations in rural schools, which may include gender
biases, low family income, and shifting race/ethnicity in communities. Through
the seamless integration of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
content with N.E.I.R. constructs, teachers can help UR students develop an
interest in engineering in high school and the resilience to pursue courses,
programs, or postsecondary engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working
with an advisory board of experts in rural and engineering education, this
project will further the design and development of the N.E.I.R. constructs and
their integration into STEM content. The research design will examine (1)
implementation usability and feasibility and (2) SEEE’s potential to influence
the capacity of educators to build and sustain ELEs to improve rural students’
engagement and interest in engineering. The specific objectives
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Create the SEEE professional development
program by integrating the four research-based and practitioner-tested
educational equity constructs for the classroom into the INSPIRES Engineering
Energy Solutions professional development curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;2. Train 30
school STEM teachers, leaders and community members from two rural PA high
schools from Beaver County, PA through a 3.5-day training to prepare them for
pilot implementation.&lt;br/&gt;3. Pilot the SEEE professional development
training workshops, followed by the launch of Faculty Learning Communities to
providing ongoing support as the teachers implement the equitable, hands-on STEM
content.&lt;br/&gt;4. Identify and train four Pitt engineering students from
rural backgrounds to co-facilitate the Faculty Learning Communities, serve as
role models/mentors for high school students, and provide coaching for teachers
who are delivering the program.&lt;br/&gt;5. Assess participating educators’
perceptions of the usability and feasibility of the SEEE professional
development program for developing ELEs.&lt;br/&gt;6. Develop a SEEE
professional development manual and materials for sustaining and scaling the
program for future iterations and further research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.