* 2135512
* Symposium on Defects and Strain Potential Enabled Emergent Behavior in 2-D Materials; Materials Research Society Fall Meeting; Boston, MA; Nov 28-Dec 3, 2021
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2021,10/31/2022
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 10/31/2022
* USD 3,000.00

The grant provides registration, travel, and/or childcare support for 10
students to attend and present at the Symposium on Defects and Strain Potential
Enabled Emergent Behavior in Two-Dimensional Materials, being held as part of
the Materials Research Society (MRS) Fall Meeting in Boston, MA, November 28th –
December 3rd, 2021. The symposium will focus on the mechanics of emergent
behavior in two-dimensional materials due to mechanical straining and defect
engineering. The awardees will be selected based on application including a
brief resume, a statement of why they want to attend the conference, and
conference abstract. While the selection will be open to all groups, members of
underrepresented groups will be especially encouraged to apply. This award will
benefit the nation through the education of a skilled and diverse engineering
workforce better prepared to provide transformative solutions the challenges of
their chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This participation support is
expected to benefit students' professional, scientific, and technical
development as they present their research projects to the broader mechanics and
material science community. Attendance at the wider conference will also provide
the students an opportunity to learn about the engineering profession and state-
of-the-art research in the wider fields. Students will have an opportunity to
attend technical presentations, join the keynote and plenary sessions, and
network with potential mentors, colleagues, and employers. This interactive
experience will significantly broaden their education, increase their enthusiasm
for their research topic, acquaint them with expectations for scientific
careers, and expose them to new avenues for innovative
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.