* 2135669
* BRITE Synergy: Engineering More Resilient Housing through Inclusion  of Women's Knowledge, Priorities and Perceptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Abbie Liel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 04/30/2024
* USD 399,521.00

Engineers have studied disaster resilience of housing as structures, but with
less attention to housing as homes that embody family, hopes and dreams, and
financial security. This Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and
Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Synergy project conceptualizes a novel
direction in engineering resilient housing to explore how women’s and other
residents’ knowledge, priorities and perceptions can shape engineering problem
solving for resilient housing at the individual, community and building code
level. It focuses in particular on women because of their traditional bond with
and responsibilities for home in our society, and their continued
underrepresentation in engineering, architecture, and construction professions.
This project will explore the sources of expertise that are missed when women
residents, women students and women building industry professionals in
engineering resilient housing are not included. Due to the large number of homes
being built, remodeled or rebuilt after disasters in this country, there is a
major opportunity to address vulnerabilities in future disasters, with a
potentially significant payoff in reducing community disruption. The project
also attends to the need to diversify the talent ecosystem in engineering,
showing how a more diverse ecosystem enhances engineering outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s hypothesis is that the inclusion of women’s
knowledge, priorities and perceptions yields changes, for housing, in both the
agenda set for engineering research and technology development, and the
engineering solutions developed. This hypothesis will be tested by examining
engineering problem solving in two research thrusts. The study of liquefaction
remediation (Thrust 1) will develop new probabilistic engineering assessments of
the risks of liquefaction-induced building damage at the home and community
level, considering both repair costs (i.e., the threat to owners’ and
households’ financial security) and habitability (i.e., the threat of losing the
home). It will also quantify how the currently available liquefaction
remediation techniques alter these risks. The project will produce a housing-
driven engineering research and technology development agenda for liquefaction
remediation techniques that incorporates community knowledge, co-created through
a series of facilitated focus groups with community members from communities
along the Los Angeles River. The study of retrofit in Thrust 2 will engage with
the unique opportunity presented by the ongoing evaluation and mitigation of
vulnerable reinforced concrete buildings in response to the City of Los Angeles’
mandatory seismic retrofit ordinance. The engineering assessment will quantify
the risk posed by the existing (unretrofit) buildings, in terms of probable
repair costs and loss of housing, and the positive and negative impacts of
retrofit (and demolition) engineering solutions. The process and design space of
engineering solutions will be developed through solicitation of women’s and
residents’ knowledge, priorities and perceptions, through semi-structured
interviews and surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.