* 2135175
* Preserving rare and endemic Hawaiian specimens in the Joseph F. Rock herbarium through digitization
* BIO,DBI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2025
* Karolina Heyduk, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 01/31/2025
* USD 148,882.00

This project will preserve and improve access to the Joseph F. Rock Herbarium at
the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa through digitization of its 55,000 specimens.
Hawaiʻi has some of the greatest biodiversity in the United States, particularly
when it comes to its native plants: 90% are found nowhere else in the world. A
high proportion of these plants are listed as threatened or endangered, and many
have gone extinct in the last century. Natural history collections serve as
invaluable records of biodiversity and are important references for species that
are threatened, endangered, or otherwise difficult to access. The Joseph F. Rock
herbarium is one of the oldest herbaria in the Pacific and is home to rare and
endemic species of the Hawaiian and Pacific islands. The newly digitized
specimens will be available to researchers across the globe, greatly increasing
the utility of the collection. Digitization will be conducted by undergraduates
at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa to provide meaningful research experiences
for students. The herbarium will host volunteer digitization events, increase
collaboration with the campus arboretum, and engage with the public via events
at a local botanical garden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rare and endemic Hawaiian
and Pacific island plant specimens in the Rock herbarium will be preserved
through overall modernization of the collection. Specifically, this project will
digitize the 55,000 specimens in the collection, remove the backlog of specimens
that need to be accessioned, and disseminate specimen data to a broader research
community through a dedicated Consortium of Pacific Herbaria web portal and
iDigBio.org. Modernization will also include expanded pest management and
expanding the throughput of specimen digitization. The project additionally
serves to maintain and strengthen collaborations across Pacific herbaria and
promote digitization of other, smaller collections. The project will employ nine
students each year, emphasizing the training and retention of students from
historically excluded groups, including Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders.
Outreach efforts will focus on connecting preserved specimens to living
collections on the University of Hawaiʻi Campus Arboretum and Lyon Arboretum and
continuing efforts to connect the herbarium to Hawaiian culture and
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Capacity:
Biological Collections Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.