* 2135567
* RAPID: Building Partnerships: Documenting the Goals and Outcomes of PEEC and PAGE
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Paul Boyer, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 11/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the discipline-based research and
instructional collaborations among these institutions and non-TCUP partners
expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging, rewarding
careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that may be
culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational appreciation
for science and mathematics education. This project supports that goal by
disseminating the achievements and findings of the colleges that have
collaborated in STEM instructional and research capacity-building in two major
TCUP strands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics now represent the largest and most dynamic parts of the curriculum
within most of the nation's tribally controlled colleges and universities and
other TCUP institutions. Although small and with limited resources, these
colleges are graduating students ready to work or earn graduate degrees in
fields across the STEM universe. However, few people working outside of the TCUP
community are aware of these accomplishments. The purpose of this work is to
document and disseminate the significant impacts, as well as the model design,
of two strands of TCUP support: the Pre-Engineering Education Collaboratives
(PEEC) and the Partnerships for Geoscience Education (PAGE). Dissemination of
the knowledge gained through these collaborative efforts will encourage more,
and more balanced, collaborations between and among minority- and majority-
serving institutions of higher education. The project aim is to produce a
"partnership" video modeled on recent TCUP videos by conducting on-site
interviews and videography, followed by professional editing and finalizing.
Dissemination will occur via the Native Science Report, an online journal
focusing on STEM education within tribal and Native-serving colleges and
universities (nativesciencereport.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.