* 2135052
* I-Corps:  Drug delivery systems for treating degenerative brain diseases
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2021,04/30/2023
* Ruben Dagda, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement of the current standard of care for treating Parkinson's disease
(PD), benefiting PD patients and healthcare practitioners. To date, there is no
cure to reverse the course of PD and the current standard of care often focuses
on managing motor symptoms (tremors, rigidity and loss of gait). A new drug
delivery platform is developed to efficiently deliver nootropic agents to the
brain in PD patients to alleviate symptoms and potentially reverse the course of
disease. This new drug delivery platform was designed to reverse symptoms and
cognitive decline while enhancing patient compliance though a non-invasive
device that could complement or replace the current standard methods in an
affordable manner without causing side effects. Beyond PD, the new drug delivery
platform may be used to treat Alzheimer's disease and Lewy Body
Dementia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a platform for
reformulating oral forms of nootropic agents for intranasal delivery and use by
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. One of the major limitations of consuming
oral versions of these nootropic agents is that these compounds do not
efficiently reach the blood brain barrier and are extensively metabolized in the
liver and gastrointestinal compartments. This inability to reach the target
organs limits the drug's potential cognitive and brain-protective abilities in
humans and limits drug efficacy in managing brain degenerative disorders such as
PD. Prior preclinical research endeavors showed that the new intranasal
formulations can deliver nootropic agents in high concentration in the brain in
order to efficiently activate brain-protective signaling pathways and elevate
energy output which can lead to better management of PD symptoms. For efficient
and safe delivery to the brain via the nasal route, the intranasal formulations
are compatible with a range of intranasal devices including nasal sprays,
applicators, and atomizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.