* 2135081
* Strategic Initiatives on Animal Welfare Challenges in Research and Education on Wildlife, Non-Model Species and Biodiversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Teresa Sylvina, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The responsible and thoughtful care and use of animal in research, testing,
training, and education is important from a moral and ethical point of view, as
well as for the collection of high-quality, replicable data. The mission of ILAR
is to identify, develop, promote, and disseminate strategies and practices that
provide for excellence in the welfare of animals in academic or industry
research, training, and education. This award serves to provide renewed support
for core mechanisms through which ILAR accomplishes its mission. ILAR developed
and continues to update the "Guide to the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals", a
document that is the basis for governmental regulations on animal care and use
in research and education, and that sets performances standards and best
practices in animal care and use worldwide. ILAR also produces reports that
provide the basis of guidelines and policy development for the care and use of
animals in specific research domains. Further, ILAR oversees the content of the
ILAR Journal, and ILAR is responsible for the ILAR Roundtable on Science and
Welfare in Laboratory Animal Use, which organizes workshops on timely animal
welfare-related issues of interest to research communities as well as
government, industry, and professional societies, and whose outcomes ILAR
disseminates worldwide. Additionally, through its role as a collaborating center
for laboratory animal science and welfare of the World Animal Health
Organization, ILAR influences animal welfare awareness and best practices in
laboratory animal medicine and science worldwide. ILAR operations are carried
out by ILAR staff working under the oversight of ILAR Council, which includes
representatives from academia, industry, biomedical and wildlife research,
veterinarian medicine, and safety and regulatory
affairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific ILAR activities supported through
this award include listening sessions, workshops, and similar activities in
preparation for revision of the “Guide”, so that the next edition of this
crucial document covers a broader scope, one that also includes informed
guidelines, standards, and ethical and welfare concerns for non-traditional
research animals, wildlife, research in the field and other non-laboratory
settings, and research using a wider range of approaches than traditionally
employed in laboratory settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.