* 2135596
* Creating Data Science Pathways for STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Annie Han, CUNY Borough of Manhattan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2024
* USD 744,061.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
developing and implementing a data science program through a multilayered
approach that can be used as a model for other postsecondary institutions. The
model will contextualize mathematics course content, reduce attrition in lower-
division gateway courses, and facilitate senior college transfer. The resulting
data science program will address the educational achievement gap among groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The new data science program will
promote structural systemic reforms through the integration of support services
within a sustainable, institutional framework. An additional focus will be on
curricular reforms through the development of data science content. Curriculum
development will involve the infusion of data science concepts into five
existing mathematics courses and the creation of two new/redesigned data science
courses. These efforts aim to contribute to the development of students’ data
literacy by enhancing their conceptual understanding, integrating the use of
real-life data, and fostering active learning. This project will address the
problems of loss of interest, culturally unresponsive instruction, insufficient
career information, and anxiety about mathematics and related subjects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will generate evidence that will improve the
understanding of how the use of a guided pathways model can help students
successfully transition from lower-division to upper-division coursework in data
science. Qualitative and quantitative data will be collected from multiple
sources to respond to the evaluation questions. A review of relevant program
documentation will provide detailed information regarding the fidelity of the
implementation of programmatic activities. In addition to program records,
observations of course sessions and interviews with program staff will provide
insight into the quality of the project activities. Descriptive statistics, such
as frequencies and means, will be reported for various demographic and
participant profile data. Cross-tabulations and inferential statistics will be
used to analyze program perception data. An external evaluator will provide an
ongoing formative evaluation that will enable the project team to monitor and
improve project activities. The NSF program description on Advancing Innovation
and Impact in Undergraduate STEM Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher
Education supports projects that advance STEM education initiatives at two-year
colleges. The program description promotes innovative and evidence-based
practices in undergraduate STEM education at two-year
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.