* 2135767
* Creating inclusive workspaces that foster and support BAJEDI leaders in the Big Ten Academic Alliance of geoscientists
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Lower, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,806.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
knowledge of the barriers within geoscience academia that prevent the
development of diversity champions, and help identify strategies to create and
sustain cohorts of diversity leaders in geoscience at The Ohio State University
and the wider Big Ten Academic Alliance (BTAA). The PI will organize a set of
convenings of geoscientists with strong engagement from social and behavioral
science experts to create and administer institutional climate surveys with an
eye towards results-based action plans, developing BAJED1 faculty leaders in the
geosciences, and providing professional development training in BAJED1 for
graduate students and postdocs who will soon be on the job
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies have demonstrated that diversity sparks
innovation with underrepresented groups producing higher rates of scientific
novelty. Yet, there is an innovation-diversity paradox because the
underrepresented groups that diversify scientific organizations have less
successful careers within academia (Hofstra et al. 2020). Geoscience in
particular continues to lag behind other STEM fields in creating an inclusive
community of diverse scholars. The main objective of this project is the
creation of results-based implementation that focuses on training and support of
BAJEDI (Belonging Access Justice Equity Diversity Inclusion) leaders at Ohio
State and the broader Big Ten Academic Alliance (BTAA). The activities outlined
in this project will address two key questions. (1) What barriers exist within
geoscience academia that prevent the development of diversity champions? (2)
What strategies could be employed to create and sustain cohorts of diversity
leaders to maximize collective impact?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.