* 2135735
* BRITE Pivot: Enabling Efficient Fuel Cell Control Using Data-Driven Modeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Carrie Hall, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 648,022.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Boosting Research Ideas for
Transformative and Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Pivot award will
fund research that makes the use of fuel cells as vehicle power sources a viable
strategy for reducing carbon emissions from the transportation sector, thereby
promoting the progress of science, advancing the national prosperity and
welfare, and increasing the reliance on secure and environmentally friendly
sources of energy. Fuel cells provide a method of electrifying vehicles that is
well suited to medium and heavy-duty vehicles, since they can be refueled and
provide a long driving range but can operate with a much higher efficiency and
reduced or negligible emissions compared to petroleum-based engines. The highly
variable power demands typical of automotive applications make proper control of
the dynamics of a fuel cell stack challenging. New tools are needed to ensure
that internal variations in fuel or air flow, temperature, or humidity can be
understood, modeled, and regulated to ensure sustained performance and optimized
longevity. This project will address this need by infusing the study of fuel
cell dynamics with data-driven modeling techniques that enable real-time control
of the internal state of a fuel cell stack. The principal investigator will
leverage past research experience in conventional engine modeling and control to
achieve a critical leap forward of a complex technology of significant
sociotechnical importance. New online courses on the hydrogen energy economy
will help broaden participation in STEM of students from currently
underrepresented groups and the institutions that serve them. A pilot mentoring
program will connect students with disciplinary experts in automotive and
transportation systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research aims to make
fundamental contributions to the modeling and control of internal fuel cell
stack dynamics with emphasis on the impact, detection, and mitigation of fuel
impurities. It will achieve this outcome by developing data-driven, physics-
based, reduced-order models that bridge the gap between calibration-intensive,
lumped-parameter models and computationally demanding gas dynamics models,
neither of which allow for real-time control of the fuel cell state. The project
will combine foundational experiments with theoretical advances in the
integration of multi-dimensional models with artificial neural networks that
significantly lower the computational cost while capturing important
nonlinearities, reaction rates, and aging effects. Nonlinear model-predictive
control techniques that leverage this model structure will be explored and
paired with a model-based fuel impurity detection methodology. The capabilities
of the final control approach will be demonstrated experimentally at steady-
state and transient conditions illustrative of those encountered in automotive
drive cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.