* 2135032
* Collaborative Research: RECODE: Organoid model of growth plate development
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Karin Payne, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2025
* USD 744,733.00

The growth plate is a cartilage tissue located at the end of childrenâ€™s long
bones that is responsible for bone growth. It begins as a cluster of stem cells
that become specialized and organize themselves into columns to form a
functioning growth plate. This process is driven by both chemical cues and
mechanical forces, although it is unclear how they work together to form the
structure and function of the growth plate. This Reproducible Cells and
Organoids via Directed-Differentiation Encoding (RECODE) project will develop a
reproducible growth plate organoid that will allow one to study how stem cells
form a mature growth plate, which can lead to novel approaches for bone and
cartilage regeneration particularly in children. This project will train a
diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
mathematical modeling, biomaterial development, and stem cell and developmental
biology and will provide opportunities to the broader community through outreach
activities and events open to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal for this RECODE project is to gain fundamental insight into the link
between biophysical cues, cellular differentiation, and cellular organization
that leads to the development of a functioning growth plate. This project
combines experimental and computational approaches to gain insight into the
local cues that govern directional cell division (Task 1), chondrogenic
differentiation followed by columnar organization (Task 2), and hypertrophic
differentiation, the characteristic phenotype of the growth plate (Task 3). This
project will uncover how biophysical cues combined with spatially localized
biochemical cues dovetail to drive the self-assembly of stem cells into a growth
plate organ with the appropriate structure and function. By utilizing novel
tools in biology, advanced biomaterials in 3D printing, and physics-based
mathematical modeling, this project will create the first growth plate organoid
to date. This organoid will provide a model system for deeper study of stem cell
and chondrocyte differentiation, in normal and abnormal bone growth.
Understanding the mechanisms that direct the differentiation of MSCs into a
mature growth plate organoid will help guide the design of novel biomaterials
for regenerative medicine approaches to treat growth plate injury, an area that
currently lacks a viable and clinically accepted
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RECODE award is co-funded by the
Physiological and Structural Systems Cluster in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems, the Mechanics and Engineering Materials Cluster in the
Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation, and the Engineering
Biology and Health Cluster in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.