* 2135440
* Collaborative Research: Place Attachment in Mitigation and Recovery: A Mixed Methods Study of Residential Adjustment Following Wildfires
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Ronald Schumann, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 77,122.00

After a major disaster, such as a wildfire, affected homeowners must make a
difficult decision: do they rebuild their home as it was before the disaster,
rebuild but in a way that better protects them from future disasters, or
relocate to a new home elsewhere? These are complicated decisions that impact
homeowners and communities for many years. Such decisions are influenced by many
factors, including household income, access to insurance, location of
employment, the need for local services such as medical care or schools, and
connections to family and friends. One underlying factor that affects all these
others is place attachment, or the emotional and functional ties that people
have to the place where they live. This study focuses on understanding how place
attachment influences the decisions people make after disasters, specifically
decisions about where they live and whether they invest in measures that reduce
their risk to future disasters. Focused on three California counties that have
been affected by recent, major wildfires, findings from this study will help
local governments and practitioners develop programs that better support
households that are affected by disasters and inform community planning for
hazards associated with climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
investigates the role of place attachment in residential adjustment after
wildfires. Households affected by wildfires face a critical decision point: do
they rebuild in the same way, rebuild with new mitigation efforts, or relocate?
Relatively few studies have examined the factors that influence these
residential decision-making processes, particularly the role of intangible
factors like place attachment. This study addresses these critical gaps in our
understanding, with the goals of: (1) investigating residential adjustment among
homeowners affected by recent California wildfires, (2) examining the role of
place attachment in post-disaster residential adjustment, and (3) assessing the
extent to which current place attachment measures capture the observed dynamics
of place attachment in disaster contexts. Using three California counties as
study sites, and building on a pilot study in these same, fire-affected
communities, the research team will use photovoice method and phenomenological
analyses to develop a deep, contextually grounded understanding of the role of
place attachment in residential decisions. Additionally, the team will use
qualitative comparative analysis to examine commonalities in household
adjustment pathways after disaster. Study findings will advance both the
theoretical and practical understanding of place attachment in mitigation and
recovery. Given that place attachment is a foundational construct tied to many
other aspects of recovery decision-making, this will be a critical contribution
for US communities given the increasing losses to wildfire and other climate-
induced disasters. Furthermore, study findings will contribute meaningfully to
housing recovery policy, adaptation policy, and recovery and relocation
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.