* 2136333
* SBE-UKRI: Collaborative Research: The Role of Environment in Social Transformation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Jaime Awe, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 24,948.00

Archaeologists have studied societal collapse, working to unravel the multiple
social, political, and environmental factors that contributed to the breakdown
of long term political systems. Yet, major questions remain unanswered.
Interdisciplinary research has postulated that potentially severe drought
episodes may play an important role in this process. Despite the strong patterns
in the paleoclimate record, it is less clear how elite and non-elite populations
responded to the impacts of drought. Research has demonstrated that the collapse
can be varied with the timing of abandonment different across geographic regions
likely representing distinct decision-making processes of populations for each
site. In some cases settlements are able to persist through several droughts
although the mechanisms of that survival are not well-understood. These issues
are relevant to current climate challenges, as past patterns may serve as
lessons from past societies that successfully or unsuccessfully adapted to the
impacts of climate. This award will further international collaboration and
further training of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will identify
the human responses to climatic challenges in a way that moves beyond the simple
narrative of 'drought caused collapse' to determine what adaptation strategies
were adopted as a population faced climate instability. To get at the human
responses to climate variation, the reseachers ask: How did a population change
their land use strategies in the event of extreme drought? How did they continue
occupation following a collapse? Did they change how they farmed and lived?
These questions will be addressed by examining the numbers and timing of burials
to gauge how population sizes changed through time. Artifacts and monumental
construction will be assessed to understand how people decided to use their
resources with respect to trade and construction episodes and how these changed
with climate pressures. Environments will be reconstructed using geochemical and
microfossil (pollen, charcoal and algal remains) signatures in lake sediments
that archive the nature of the surrounding environments at the time they were
deposited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.