* 2136692
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrafast Charge and Extended Life Batteries for Electric Transportation
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Gerardo Jose La O', TYFAST ENERGY CORP.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/28/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will advance a new class of batteries for transportation. The proposed
battery design will maximize the rate of charge and battery lifetime while
maintaining high energy density, in contrast with current battery research that
primarily focuses on maximizing energy density. This new operating parameter
will open the design space for smaller batteries that result in lighter weight,
lower cost and longer life vehicle platforms to enable all-electric
transportation. In addition, the new operating parameters enable the widespread
adoption of two new applications, (i) vehicle to grid and (ii) mobility as a
service. The associated reduction of greenhouse gases will be 1+ gigaton
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project develops a lithium battery
coin cell that demonstrates 3 minutes ultrafast charge and 20,000 extended cycle
life performance, using the novel disordered rock salt Li3V2O5 anode. This
project explores ultrafast charge lithium ion battery platforms. Technical
objectives include: 1) charging times comparable to filling up today's gas
tanks; 2) batteries with a higher safety profile that last the entire service
life of the vehicle; 3) vehicles that can connect to the electric grid for
renewables integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.