* 2136719
* SBIR Phase II:  Cost-effective manufacturing of a novel nutrient-dense chickpea dough platform for mass-market processed foods
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Ashton Yoon, Antithesis Foods Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 998,717.00

The broader impact of this SBIR Phase II project is in providing an alternative
to the calorically dense and nutritionally poor processed foods that have
proliferated in the American diet due to their price, convenience, palatability,
and shelf-stability. This project advances a nutrient-dense crunchy ingredient
platform based on legumes and having the ability to customize shape, texture,
and nutritional profile to meet a broad variety of crunchy applications in
disparate categories. Due to their neutral flavor, these crunchy ingredients can
be flavored with various flavor systems, providing a low-calorie, high-fiber,
and high-protein alternative to consumer favorites such as graham crackers,
cereals, chips, granola, and cookies. Providing healthier alternatives to
traditionally unhealthy consumer products has the potential to beneficially
impact public health, preventing diet-related chronic diseases such as obesity,
type II diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and other related co-
morbidities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project focuses on the
formulation and processing development necessary to expand a legume-based
ingredient platform and overcome the significant technical hurdles in scaled
manufacturing. The primary innovation lies in a novel method of structuring
fibers and proteins into a crunchy and aerated matrix through both formulation
and downstream processing. This project addresses the variation in product
behavior and quality caused by batch size and manufacturing line configuration.
The dough on which these ingredients are based differs highly in its rheological
properties in comparison to the gluten-based doughs for which most manufacturing
lines are configured. To compete with commodities, a variety of manufacturing
lines with different drying technologies must be evaluated in their ability to
maximize throughput while minimizing input costs and meeting product quality
requirements. The major technical objectives of this Phase II project are: 1)
Expand ingredient platform variants to achieve specific product characteristics
to support customer claims, ingredient labeling, physiological impact, and
costs; 2) Evaluate various manufacturing lines and their technoeconomic
potential to scale ingredient production; 3) Develop ingredients to meet
requirements necessary to respond to physical and environmental stressors in the
supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.