* 2136680
* SBIR Phase I:  Unmanned Aerial Payload Systems for Live-line Access
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Michael Beiro, BEIROBOTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Phase I project is the potential
use of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS) applications in performing inspections and
repairs on a variety of live transmission equipment without the need for manned
helicopter or bucket truck crews, reducing the time linemen are in harm’s way.
The cost of transmission grid inspections and maintenance may decrease, leading
to more frequent routine inspection and more timely and proactive inspections of
infrastructure with potential for failure. Transmission grid operators may have
a more resilient grids with lower losses thanks to increased and improved data
from frequent inspections. The American people can potentially benefit from a
more resilient grid with fewer outages and more consistent delivery of
electricity. Fewer line losses conserve energy and reduce the amount of fossil
fuels burned to generate electricity locally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop Unmanned
Aerial Systems (UAS) inspection capabilities enabling access to utility
infrastructure unreachable and/or difficult to reach by current methods.
Inspection, maintenance, repair, and auditing processes for electrical utility
infrastructure are costly and hazardous to personnel. Current UAS-mounted
payload technology has demonstrated initial success with inspecting connectors
by approaching horizontally-arranged transmission conductor sets from above.
Vertically-arranged conductors that cannot be approached from above represent a
significant portion of transmission infrastructure. The project’s research seeks
develop UAS payload system technology that delivers linemen’s tools to
vertically-arranged, high voltage transmission infrastructure by approaching
from the side and from below. To accomplish this research, new approach methods
will be designed, engineered, constructed, and rigorously tested in de-energized
and live environments to prove viability. Completing the research objectives of
the project may establish commercial feasibility for the next generation of UAS
payload technology in the electrical utility sector, paving the way for a safer
and more efficient national electrical grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.