* 2136197
* Collaborative Research: CPS: Medium: Enabling DER Integration via Redesign of Information Flows
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Steven Low, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This NSF CPS project aims to redesign the information structure utilized by
system operators in today's electricity markets to accommodate technological
advances in energy generation and consumption. The project will bring
transformative change to power systems by incentivizing and facilitating the
integration of non-conventional energy resources via a principled design of
bidding, aggregation, and market mechanisms. Such integration will provide
operators with the necessary flexibility to operate a network with high levels
of renewable penetration. This will be achieved by a comprehensive bottom-down
approach that will first identify the intrinsic cost of utilizing novel
renewable resources and accommodate the operational ecosystem accordingly. The
intellectual merits of the project include novel theories and algorithms for
operating a vast number of distributed resources and testbed implementations of
markets and controls. The project's broader impacts include K-12 and
undergraduate programs, including in-class and extra-curricular STEM activities
through, e.g., Hopkins in-class and extra-curricular STEM activities, and the
Caltech WAVE summer research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Introducing
distributed energy resources (DERs) at a large scale requires rethinking power
grid operations to account for increased uncertainty and new operational
constraints. The proposed research undertakes this task by overhauling the
information structure that markets and grid controls utilize. We seek to
characterize and shape how information is exchanged and used to manage the grid
to improve efficiency, stability, and incentive alignment. The research is
organized into three thrusts. Thrust 1 emphasizes the role of information in
coordination. It seeks to characterize DER costs and constraints, designing
bidding strategies tailored to convey information about the atypical
characteristics of DER costs. Thrust 2 aims to develop aggregation strategies
that efficiently manage resources by accounting for their cost and constraints,
integrating DERs via an aggregate bid that protects sensitive user information
and is robust to market manipulation. Finally, Thrust 3 characterizes the
overall impact of DERs on operations. We will examine how user incentives that
span across markets implicitly couple market outcomes and develop design
mechanisms to mitigate inter-market price manipulation. We will also design
pricing schemes that provide efficient DER allocation while preserving real-time
operational constraints such as frequency regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.