* 2136461
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Novel Miniature Spray Mechanism for Nasal Drug Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Adam Gold, NASUS MEDICAL INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,977.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will improve patient outcomes through non-
invasive nasal drug delivery. The nasal cavity is a non-invasive drug delivery
conduit that is rapid-acting and inexpensive. Topical intranasal medications
treat sinus-nasal, neurologic, and systemic diseases. The proposed innovation
will significantly improve nasal drug delivery and patient outcomes by getting
medication exactly where it needs to go. It will be the first miniaturized
atomization technology and can be broadly applied to other fields. The initial
envisioned application is chronic sinusitis, which affects 10% of the population
and costs US healthcare $12 billion/year. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project advances a new nasal drug
delivery system. Current topical drug deliveries have limited effectiveness
because they rely on distant particle atomization through complex nasal anatomy.
To overcome this, a self-administered, catheter-based atomization drug delivery
device that delivers drug directly to the anatomic target will be developed.
However, atomization only exists in larger, rigid form factors. The objective of
this research is to develop an novel atomizer that maintains a small, flexible
form factor to be incorporated into the catheter tip. A new system like this is
crucial for effective, tolerable nasal drug delivery. Computational Fluid
Dynamics simulations will be performed to determine prototype design and
construction. Designs will be manufactured through micromolding, extrusion
manipulation, and overmolding with micro-3D printing. Designs will be tested
using laser diffraction to evaluate spray characteristics (droplet size
distribution, spray angle, velocity, and plume geometry) and anatomic models to
evaluate fluid deposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.