* 2136339
* Laboratory Experiments to Understand Post-Wildfire Processes on Soil Sealing  for Hydrologic Fluxes in Complex Terrain
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Mark Stone, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2025
* USD 307,500.00

It is well understood that floods and erosion following a wildfire can be costly
to local communities. However, the specific processes that alter soil
characteristics to increase flooding and erosion are not well understood. Soil
sealing is one of the less studied post-wildfire processes because the peak
impact of soil sealing occurs immediately after a wildfire when it can be
difficult and dangerous to make field observations. However, this time period
immediately after a wildfire also holds the highest risk for high damage
flooding due to the lack of vegetation. To investigate the soil sealing
processes that occur immediately after a wildfire, the investigators in this
project will conduct laboratory experiments to simulate rainfall on burned soils
and ash materials. The outcomes will provide new information about post-wildfire
soil sealing processes with implications for forest management and disaster
mitigation. Additionally, this project will support the development of technical
skills for four college students and the development of a 4th and 5th grade
science lesson on soil erosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
question of this project is: how does the slope angle of a land surface affect
soil sealing processes immediately after a wildfire, and how does this impact
infiltration for consequent rain events? As slope angle increases, surface ash
erosion rates will increase. As a result, it is hypothesized that soil surfaces
that experience increased storage of ash will promote soil sealing processes
that decrease infiltration during later rain events, thereby increasing runoff.
To test this hypothesis, laboratory scale rainfall simulations will be conducted
at a range of slope angles on simulated burned soil conditions. Investigators
will observe the effect of slope angle by (1) quantifying the effect of slope
angle on surface ash erosion and surface storage through rainfall experiments,
and (2) determining the effect of ash retention, if any, on soil properties
after rainfall experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by Hydrologic Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.