* 2136010
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Scaling Necessary Change, Coalitions and Community (SNC): brave leadership for better geoscience"
* GEO,RISE
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Rachel Bernard, Amherst College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 09/30/2023
* USD 41,819.00

In 1972, geoscientist Dr. Randolph Bromery chaired the ‘First National
Conference on Minority Participation in Earth Science and Mineral Engineering’,
a gathering of more than 300 representatives of academia, industry, government,
and civil rights organizations. The goal of the conference was to broaden
participation and support the success of Black, Native, and Latinx
geoscientists. Despite this goal, the geoscience community remains a long way
from achieving the level of diversity needed to tackle some of the nation’s most
pressing environmental challenges. This project will develop a scholarly,
community-driven, forward-looking roadmap that institutions, funding agencies,
industry, and the public can use to contribute to the universally beneficial
goal of broadening participation in the geosciences over the next half century.
Training a diverse cohort of geoscientists is essential to meeting the growing
demands for a robust geoscience workforce that can address the societal
challenges posed by natural hazards, global change, and energy in the 21st
century. However, historical efforts to advance this goal have been ignored or
forgotten among most geoscientists, the scientific community, and the broader
public. To make substantive and lasting demographic change in the geosciences,
the research community must understand past efforts to advance justice and use
them to inform new ways forward and to establish mechanisms for accountability
over the next fifty years. To develop the roadmap report, this project will
first convene the geoscience community at a ‘Second National Conference’ to
examine the past fifty years of efforts to advance broadening participation in
the geosciences. Following the convening, the project will form a group of
twenty early-career geoscientists that will co-author and deliver the roadmap
report. This project has a novel approach as early-career scholars usually are
not in the leading role of such large community-wide efforts. The project leads
and the twenty-person writing team will be early career professionals. If
successful, this project will provide the new and innovative ways forward
towards achieving more justice, equity, diversity, and inclusion in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances a radically new
strategy, centered on brave leadership, to achieve broadening participation
goals in the geoscience community. By drawing on tenets of Black studies and
other frameworks from social science and humanities, this project will take a
novel, interdisciplinary approach and establish evidence and experience-based
strategies for broadening participation that expand the understanding of the
history, current state, and future of geoscience. To ensure that progress is
made on reaching the goals for broadening participation in the coming decades,
the geoscience community needs a roadmap that will provide checkpoints,
strategies, and accountability. To create this roadmap, principal investigators
(PIs) will (1) convene a conference with participation from stakeholders,
representatives, and leaders across academia, industry, professional
organizations, and government agencies. Participants will reflect on past
efforts to advance JEDI goals and cultivate partnerships to support new
institutional and community goals. Then, PIs will (2) identify a team of twenty
early-career leaders to develop ‘The 2072 Report’. Developing the report will be
a unique professional development experience that will equip the next generation
of geoscience leaders with tools, frameworks, and partnerships necessary for
making lasting change in the field. This project has a novel approach as early-
career scholars usually are not in the leading role of such large community-wide
efforts. The project leads and the twenty-person writing team will be early
career professionals. If successful, this project will provide the new and
innovative ways forward towards achieving more justice, equity, diversity, and
inclusion in the geosciences. A primary outcome of this work will be the co-
creation of a community-driven framework for achieving a just, diverse, and
equitable geoscience community. It will include best practices, tools, and ideas
for broadening participation; checkpoints and goals that will keep the community
on track; and strategies for ensuring accountability over the next fifty years.
This roadmap will provide the geoscience community with direct opportunities for
reflection on what can be achieved in two years, what is feasible in a five- or
ten-year strategic plan, and how those components can provide building blocks
towards fundamental, sustainable, systemic change. Another outcome will be the
establishment of a cohort of early-career geoscientists who are committed to
dedicating their careers to transforming the geoscience landscape while they
pursue academic positions. This will encourage novel and interdisciplinary
research directions across geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.