* 2136081
* SBIR Phase I:  A simple, rapid field culture test to quantify Vibrio cholerae in drinking water
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Rebecca Wong, AQUAGENX, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 246,500.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop a new water quality test that detects and measures Vibrio
cholerae bacteria in drinking water samples. The test is an easy-to-use, field-
deployable, and selective without requiring a lab, electricity or complex,
expensive testing equipment and methods. The technology generates rapid test
results in about 24 hours. Cholera is a waterborne disease that people contract
when they drink water contaminated by the fecal bacteria Vibrio cholerae. The
disease is an international public health burden prevalent in countries with
unsafe drinking water and poor sanitation. The water quality test is a
surveillance tool that monitors drinking water supplies and sources for Vibrio
cholerae, helps prevent cholera outbreaks before they occur, track sources of
cholera outbreaks, and evaluates the necessity and effectiveness of water
sanitation. This environmental technology will help impact domestic and
international environmental testing, water, sanitation and hygiene, and public
health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase 1 project will develop novel
growth media for the detection of Vibrio cholerae in drinking water. Currently
available media do not differentiate between Vibrio cholerae and other Vibrio
species. The technical challenge is to develop a field-deployable, direct,
quantitative, single-step, culture-based testing method. The project will
develop new growth media for two testing methods that generate different types
of test results: Most Probable Number quantification and Colony Forming Unit
quantification. Technical hurdles include: refining the composition of the
media, optimizing the application of the media for both testing methods,
validating both methods with challenging test waters, evaluating media stability
and shelf life, and evaluating the media against standard, competing
technologies. Successful media will meet all requirements for sensitivity,
specificity, positive predictive value and negative predictive value. Successful
media also will have a one to two-year shelf life. The test will be easy for
anyone to use in the field without needing a lab or
electricity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.