* 2136818
* RAPID: Geomorphic controls on sediment age, ice preservation, and carbon storage in arctic permafrost systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2021,07/31/2023
* Jean Dixon, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2023
* USD 32,737.00

The investigators will obtain permafrost cores to be collected in central Alaska
by a local mining company for exploration purposes, allowing study of the
physical and geochemical stability of permafrost and associated stored carbon as
a function of sediment deposition and erosion. These cores will capture repeated
hillslope transects in loess mantled bedrock with variable loess depth and
underlying colluvium character. They could enable quantification of feedbacks
among carbon, sediment and ice dynamics using novel geochemical tracers of
erosion rates and ice and sediment age in stratigraphic context. The
investigators aim to inform the distribution of carbon in permafrost landscapes
whose fate will contribute to the potential warming feedback with carbon release
upon permafrost thaw. The project will support investigators from historically
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study of these cores will provide
novel insight on geomorphic controls in permafrost environments. Understanding
geomorphic and geochemical landscape legacies will inform us of the trajectory
of permafrost change and its resilience to environmental perturbations. Until
downslope trends and permafrost hillslope stratigraphy are linked to rates and
processes of sediment transport, the provenance and fate of stored carbon in
these environments cannot be fully understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.