* 2136371
* ERI: Formation Mechanisms and Modeling of Wake Meandering in Wind Farms
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Daniel Foti, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 198,766.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interactions between stochastic
fluctuations in the atmospheric surface layer and turbulent features produced by
wind turbines drive major challenges to explain and model turbulence mechanisms
in wind farms. Understanding the underlying behaviors can reduce power
production variability, which adversely influences the levelized cost of
electricity, and enhance wind energyâ€™s competitiveness compared to other forms
of power production. Specifically, large atmospheric fluctuations and the small
turbine-scale dynamics are separately hypothesized to initiate the wake
meandering phenomenon, a coherent oscillation of the far wake of wind turbines.
Wake meandering affects the unsteady dynamics of wake recovery, wake
interactions, and uncertainty of power production in wind farms. This project
will elucidate its underlying formation behavior, which is crucial to enable
designs and models to lower the levelized cost of wind energy. The project will
also include significant educational activities including outreach programs with
Memphis non-profit organizations and increased public science awareness and
education through art and its intersection with turbulence.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances fundamental insights into
dominant instabilities in wind turbines. The project will develop a series of
high-fidelity large-eddy simulations to measure the spectra and evolution of
kinetic energy and vorticity in the upwind atmospheric boundary layer and wind
turbine wake. An approach to investigate and model the transfer and transport of
kinetic energy of large coherent structure scales will be developed using data-
driven analysis and computational-enabled discovery from the simulated wake
flows. The methodology and simulations will be employed to investigate the
formation mechanism of meandering of a wind turbine wake and leveraged to
develop multi-resolution wind farm models. The project proposes to (1) develop
and evaluate wake meandering genesis mechanisms by quantifying the energy
transfer between upwind features in the atmospheric surface layer and wake
meandering; and (2) develop wind farm models to capture disparate length scales
of the wind turbine, wind farm, and atmosphere. Expected outcomes of this
research include fundamental understanding of the spatio-temporal evolution of
wake meandering and multi-resolution, multi-scale wind farm modeling. By
addressing the uncertainty of the formation and persistence of large coherent
structures in wind turbine wakes, the uncertainty and model inadequacy of time-
accurate wind farm models can be mitigated, and designs to modify the role of
wake meandering in power fluctuations can be
introduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.