* 2136943
* RAPID: The effects of wildfire on salmonid olfaction and behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2021,07/31/2024
* Eric Palkovacs, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,983.00

Olfaction, the sense of smell, is critical for aquatic animals to sense their
surroundings. Toxic compounds in the environment may interfere with this
ability. Wildfire has become a dominant feature of Western landscapes. When
forests burn, they can release toxic heavy metals, which ultimately end up in
streams. These compounds may interfere with the ability of animals to smell
their surroundings, thereby changing behavior. This research examines the
effects of recent California wildfires on the olfaction and behavior of Pacific
salmon. Salmon use their sense of smell to detect predators. If this ability is
disrupted, they may quickly become a predatorâ€™s lunch. Salmon also use smell to
find their way back to their home streams to reproduce after years at sea. This
process, called olfactory imprinting, is a specialized form of learning that
juvenile salmon experience in streams. If this imprinting is disrupted, they are
unable to find their way back to their home stream as adults. This research uses
behavioral experiments to test whether fish from fire-impacted streams are less
able to smell predators. It uses behavioral experiments and cellular studies of
olfactory function to test whether fish from fire-impacted streams are less able
to recognize and imprint on their home watersheds. This project will train
students, broaden participation in science, advance a general understanding of
the effects of sensory pollutants on wild populations, and contribute critical
information to inform salmon management in a drier, more fire-prone
landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In aquatic environments, olfactory cues provide
important information that animals use to make behavioral decisions. Wildfires
may cause large-scale disturbance to aquatic chemical environments that may
impact olfaction and behavior at the scale of entire ecosystems. Fires release
organic and inorganic compounds into streams. Some of these compounds, including
heavy metals, may disrupt olfaction and alter behavior. This proposed research
combines behavioral experiments with gene expression assays to ask: How does
wildfire impact juvenile salmonid olfaction and behavior in natural streams?
Recent wildfires that occurred in August 2020 along the Central California Coast
have generated a mosaic of burned and unburned watersheds. This project uses a
paired sampling design, pairing burned and unburned streams within four
watersheds. Spatially isolated sites within each watershed have been selected to
ensure juvenile salmonids cannot move between the burned and unburned sites.
This project will measure the concentrations of heavy metals in stream water and
in fish muscle tissue from burned and unburned streams within each watershed.
The behavior of juvenile salmonids from burned and unburned streams will be
compared in terms of predator avoidance and recognition of natal stream water.
The expression of genes associated with normal olfactory function and natal
homing will be compared between fish from burned versus unburned streams. If the
release of heavy metals by fire disrupts juvenile salmonid olfaction, then fish
from burned streams are expected to exhibit weaker predator avoidance, impaired
recognition of natal stream water, and reduced expression of genes associated
with olfactory imprinting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.