* 2136645
* STTR Phase I: Advanced compatibilization for mixed plastic recycling
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Ting-Wei Lin, INTERMIX PERFORMANCE MATERIALS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
to promote increased recycling and to enable the upcycling of two of the most
common polymers found in mixed waste streams: polyethylene (PE) and isotactic
polypropylene (iPP). While plastic recycling can assist in mitigating the vast
and continuously growing volume of plastic waste, mixed plastic streams—notably
those with PE and iPP—introduce many challenges. These polymers are immiscible
but of similar density, making them unsuitable for simple melt-blending yet
difficult to separate. Although additives have been developed to overcome the
immiscibility issue, these additives typically need to be added at high loadings
and produce resins with poor mechanical properties. This project focuses on the
development of advanced additives (compatibilizers) that can be introduced in
low concentrations to produce PE/iPP resins with superior durability, ductility,
and industrial utility that rivals or outperforms homopolymers. Such a
technology has the potential to bring superior efficiency to the mixed recycling
process, advancing the field toward a more circular plastics economy. By
delivering high-value products from waste streams, widespread adoption of this
technology would drive improvements in plastic waste collection, recycling, and
re-manufacturing, supporting jobs in these and adjacent
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the creation of non-reactive,
multi-graft copolymers capable of supporting high-quality iPP/PE blends with
superior tensile strength characteristics, impact resistance, and rigidity
compared to current resins. The proposed approach leverages interlocked
molecular entanglements and co-crystallization to provide stronger adhesion to
iPP and PE. This technology seeks capability of up to 30% iPP contamination in
PE using as little as 1 wt% additive to generate high-value blended materials.
Phase I development will involve: 1) optimization of polyethylene-graft-iPP
copolymer compatibilization additives, 2) scale-up of optimized polyethylene-
graft-iPP copolymers, 3) testing of larger scale batches for end polymer
qualities, and 4) testing of compatibilizers with combinations of different
grades of actual post-consumer plastic waste. The technology may contribute to
an enhanced understanding of how specific copolymer architectures influence
compatibilization efficiency, while also meeting the need for technologies to
support compatibilization of PE and iPP for blended recycling
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.