* 2136104
* SBIR Phase I:  An artificial intelligence system for autonomous numerical control programming for advanced manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2022
* Tanmay Aggarwal, LAMBDA FUNCTION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 11/30/2022
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to address the challenge of reshoring manufacturing given the
technical skills gap crisis in the U.S. by helping increase the productivity of
precision machinists and sparking greater interest in the field of precision
manufacturing among new workforce entrants. Computer Numerical Control (CNC),
the computer-automated management of machining toolsâ€™ operations, is a key
process in precision manufacturing. Programming CNC machines requires
professionals with vast and specialized technical skills. With fewer graduates
of trade schools, CNC programming know-how has become a bottleneck to
manufacturing operations, creating an urgent unmet need for a radically
simplified and automated CNC programming workflow to improve accessibility to
precision manufacturing. This project aims to develop an artificial intelligence
tool to automate the CNC programming process, thereby helping ease the CNC
programming bottleneck and fill the skills gap at reduced manufacturing time and
costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand research on the use of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) for generative CNC programming in precision
manufacturing. AI has the potential to automate various steps in the CNC
programming workflow; however, this research has been limited to constrained
machining conditions and has not focused on optimization procedures, thereby
limiting its real-world applicability. This project expands this research to
develop a commercially viable solution for the optimal cutting tool and
machining parameter selection stage of CNC programming. Briefly, this project
will address technical challenges of algorithm development and optimization to
improve accurate selection of tool and machining parameters. The results will be
validated on CNC machines. At the end of Phase I, a proof-of-concept solution
will be developed to automate the optimal cutting tool and machining parameters
selection for CNC drilling and milling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.