* 2136605
* SBIR Phase I:  The integration of smart wearables in the telehealth management workflow
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Nicholas Constant, ECHOWEAR LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,719.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to design a care-centered digital health
platform for remote symptom monitoring of Parkinson’s Disease patients.
Parkinson’s is a progressive neurological disorder affecting various movement
and mobility, sleep quality, emotional and behavioral health, and other factors,
with symptoms manifesting individually. Approximately 10 million people around
the world currently live with Parkinson’s Disease. The total economic burden of
Parkinson’s is roughly $51.9 Billion in the U.S. alone. Patient-provider
communication is a significant challenge. This project proposes a digital health
platform offering a patient-friendly mechanism for reporting symptoms and
experiences in daily-life settings to the care team. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will design and pilot
an interoperable digital health framework with an overarching objective to
address the challenges of remote symptom monitoring. Neurologists have
insufficient confidence in the patient-generated self-reports (paper-based logs)
as they can be prone to biases and over-/under-reporting. This research will
explore integrating commonly used smart wearables (such as smartwatches and
smart finger rings) into a digital health platform to offer symptom monitoring
services. A key technical challenge is to make the integration of wearables
interoperable within the standards of electronic health records (EHR). Another
focus is to identify appropriate data reporting and presentation for clinical
oversight and decision-making. The project will pilot the digital health
platform on patients with Parkinson’s and clinicians to measure feasibility and
performance and to evaluate its potential to scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.