* 2136787
* STTR Phase II: Development of Safety Accessory for Improving Performance and Minimizing Complications of Manual Ventilation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Prathamesh Prabhudesai, SAFEBVM CORP.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,736.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will be to reduce the risk of complications and
associated costs caused by standard bag valve mask (BVM) resuscitators, which
are widely used in emergency resuscitation and airway management. In the United
States, about 13.1 million BVMs are used annually. Medical providers frequently
deliver unsafe manual ventilation with BVMs, regardless of the qualifications
and experience of the provider. Dangerously high pressures, flow rates, and
volumes of air flow can result in complications such as gastric insufflation,
and less frequently, aspiration pneumonia, acute lung injury, acute respiratory
distress syndrome, barotrauma, volutrauma, and pneumothorax. There is an urgent
need for an intervention to improve patient safety during manual ventilation
with the resuscitator bag. This project involves the development of a safety
device to be used with all standard BVMs on the market to regulate air flow and
pressure. The device that will offer safe, affordable, and optimized ventilation
while minimizing gastric insufflation. The technology should have broad
applications across the entire care continuum, but especially in emergency and
battlefield medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project seeks to further develop and optimize the BVM
safety. This effort optimizes the haptic and auditory feedback the provider
receives when using the device and optimizes the design and manufacturability of
the product. In addition, biocompatibility studies and animal studies of the
device in anesthetized pigs and in pigs undergoing cardiac arrest will provide
data necessary for FDA clearance. This Phase II work will ensure that patients
will receive the most optimal evidence-based treatment and will help establish
the safety device as the standard of care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.