* 2136396
* I-Corps:  Video Based Interface for the Live Labelling of Emotional Responses
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,12/31/2022
* Pablo Ripolles, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
affordable, wearable device capable of detecting emotional states in real time.
Currently, there are few methods to objectively evaluate emotional states in
real time and in real-life settings. The proposed software and hardware platform
can potentially be used by entertainment venues to enhance the customer
experience to increase sales, improve venue management and safety, and support
decision making in scheduling. The system can also be used to provide real time
measurements of audience emotion and assess content preferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project develops a software and hardware
platform centered on a wearable device for the unconstrained, contactless and
live detection of physiological correlates of peak emotion. The technology uses
individualized signals along with video-sourced data to provide real-time
measures of consumers' emotional state. The project develops an approach
combining innovative data collection and analysis strategies with cutting-edge
software and affordable, scalable hardware for contactless, image-based
detection of emotional states in real-time. The technology provides a wireless,
easy-to-deploy, and wearable device capable of intelligent processing with
limited power, well-suited for large scale data acquisition in real-world
environments. Finally, this project also innovates in data science by combining
real-time physiological signals from individual consumers with aggregate video-
recordings in order to model group engagement and predict
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.