* 2136683
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Point-of-Care System for Rapid Pathogen Identification in Urinary Tract Infections
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Amogha Tadimety, Nanopath Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,874.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is improved access to state-of-the-art molecular
diagnostic technologies in areas of significant unmet clinical need, such as
womenâ€™s health. Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are a pressing problem due to
the lengthy clinical workflows and large disease incidence. UTIs are one the
most common prompts for women to seek health care in the United States and
represent a major driver of antibiotic prescriptions. Untreated UTIs can lead to
severe complications for the patient, such as systemic bacterial infections.
Despite the severity and prevalence of UTIs, diagnostic methodologies remain
extremely time-consuming and rely on antiquated culture-based detection, leaving
women in pain for up to three days before they are prescribed the appropriate
antibiotic therapy. The proposed project will accelerate UTI diagnosis and can
be used for other infections as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project integrates microfluidic methods for
cell enrichment with a novel nanostructured substrate for ultrasensitive
detection of target nucleic acid sequences. The reader contains software and
optical hardware to detect and analyze the test result at the point-of-care.
This technology eliminates the need for bacterial culture and nucleic acid
amplification through an ultrasensitive detection modality, providing species-
level information and genotypic antibiotic resistance data within minutes. The
applications of this proposed platform translate beyond UTIs and have utility in
other clinical scenarios that currently employ lengthy culture-based steps and
molecular testing workflows, such as respiratory infections, bloodstream
infections, and prosthetic joint infections. The project goal is to increase
sample throughput through microfluidics optimization and automation and to
improve sensitivity through novel sensor geometry
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.