* 2136375
* NSF ADVANCE Catalyst: A Data Driven Critical Needs Assessment of STEM Faculty Recruitment, Retention, and Promotion for George Mason University
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Leigh McCue-Weil, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 298,713.00

The diversity of George Mason University (Mason) faculty, including science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty, lags well behind that
of the student body, both in terms of the representation of women and of people
from underrepresented racial/ethnic minority (URM) groups. The Mason ADVANCE
Catalyst team will undertake a significant, systematic collection and evaluation
of quantitative and qualitative data for STEM tenure-track and full-time term
(contingent) faculty with attention to intersectional analyses to pinpoint where
change efforts are needed. The focus will be on recruitment and hiring, and
renewal/reappointment, promotion, and tenure (RPT). This systematic analysis
will inform meaningful, sustained institutional change. Moreover, it will lay
the foundation for significant, generalizable results for peer institutions
striving for demographic diversity amongst their faculty on par with that of the
undergraduate student body those faculty educate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific
goals of this project are to (1) explore whether there are racial/ethnic and
gender disparities across STEM faculty types and ranks with respect to
recruitment, retention, promotion, and tenure; (2) learn about the reasons why
these disparities may exist, including any policies, practices, and cultural
norms that may contribute to these outcomes; and (3) identify successful
strategies from prior ADVANCE work to create a STEM Equity Strategic Plan to
improve recruitment and retention of diverse faculty at Mason. To accomplish
these goals, the team will analyze College of Engineering and Computing and
College of Science data sets that capture themes related to institutional
culture; recruitment and hiring; retention; and equity. The team will utilize an
intersectionality lens to better understand the particularities of why certain
demographics are over- or underrepresented among Mason faculty. Through this
project, Mason will be able to identify and make plans to mitigate
organizational barriers that impede the full participation and advancement of
diverse faculty. It will lay the foundation for an equity assessment and the
development of a STEM Equity Strategic Plan that will foster a more inclusive
culture and climate for faculty success. Thus, the project will contribute to
broader conversations about success for faculty underrepresented in STEM, as
defined by NCSES. The Catalyst Team will produce: (i) a comprehensive report,
(ii) a communication plan to educate our campus community on any identified
racial/gender disparities, and (iii) a virtual conference with relevant experts
to share findings and knowledge of effective practices for planning of specific
interventions to address project findings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF ADVANCE
program is designed to foster gender equity through a focus on the
identification and elimination of organizational barriers that impede the full
participation and advancement of diverse faculty in academic institutions.
Organizational barriers that inhibit equity may exist in policies, processes,
practices, and the organizational culture and climate. ADVANCE "Catalyst" awards
provide support for institutional equity assessments and the development of
five-year faculty equity strategic plans at academic, non-profit institutions of
higher education&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.