* 2136036
* RAISE: Creation of an Advanced Public Binary Neutron Star Initial Data Code for the Einstein Toolkit
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2024
* Wolfgang Tichy, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The first direct detection of gravitational waves emitted from merging black
holes by the NSF's LIGO detectors was a historic breakthrough in gravitational
physics and led to the Noble prize in physics in 2017. Equally stunning was the
detection of both gravitational waves and signals across the electromagnetic
spectrum from gamma rays to radio waves from the inspiral and merger of two
neutron stars. With these and numerous subsequent similar detections a new
window to the universe has been opened. Observations of neutron star mergers
provide a vast amount of data that allows the study of both strong gravity and
matter at extreme densities. As the two stars get close, fully non-linear
numerical simulations of the Einstein equations are required to interpret the
observational data. This project is aimed at providing public computer codes to
simulate such systems. These codes will become part of the computational
infrastructure that enables progress in science. By comparing to observations,
predictions from these codes can be used to infer information about the stars,
including the equation of state at supra nuclear density. Public codes of this
kind will benefit the global numerical relativity community, and may foster new
collaborations. This research will also lead to the publication of simulation
results (e.g. gravitational waveforms) which will be useful for the emerging
field of gravitational wave and multimessenger astronomy. Part of this research
will be carried out in close collaboration with Roland Haas and his group at
UIUC. Visits by faculty, postdocs or students are planned. This exchange will
have educational benefits for students and postdocs at Florida Atlantic
University (FAU). In addition, the award will support the numerical relativity
group at FAU, which currently consists of one faculty member, one postdoc, and
two graduate students. Through regular meetings and seminars this group helps to
train students and postdocs in a wide range of topics ranging from general
relativity and astrophysics to computer science and large scale computing. This
will give them valuable skills that will help build a globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The large amounts data collected in the
observations of neutron star mergers can only be fully analyzed by comparing
them to theoretical predictions. For the late inspiral and merger phases this
requires large scale numerical relativity simulations. In order to even start
such simulations realistic initial data are needed that accurately encode the
state of both stars in orbit prior to merger. The project plan is to enhance and
make public the SGRID code that has been developed by the numerical relativity
group at FAU. This code can be used to construct binary neutron star initial
data where the stars can have arbitrary masses and spins and orbital
eccentricities. In addition, an initial data reader for the public Einstein
Toolkit will be provided, so that these initial data can be used by anyone to
perform simulations of generic neutron star binaries with the Einstein Toolkit.
Further, Python scripts will be provided to fine tune the stars' orbital
parameters to allow for low eccentricity orbits that are expected if the two
stars have been spiraling toward each other for a long time before merger. All
codes will be accompanied by ample documentation so that any interested
numerical relativity group can use these codes. In this way these public codes
will become part of the computational infrastructure that enables science in
numerical relativity. This kind of infrastructure will enhance the capabilities
and the output of the global numerical relativity
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.