* 2136350
* I-Corps: Device for on-demand manufacturing of large volume parenteral solutions
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Natasha Wright, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is improved
accessibility to dialysis solutions in low resource settings through local,
decentralized dialysis fluid production. Due, in part, to lack of local
production of dialysis fluids in some countries, limited access to dialysis
fluid results in millions of deaths globally. Importation of dialysis solution
can lead to high costs that can often make the vital solutions unaffordable to
kidney failure patients. The proposed technology has the potential to help
reduce costs and increase access for more patients, while also improving
profitability for providers. Beyond global kidney care, the technology has
commercial potential in other essential, large volume parenteral solutions,
including infusion solutions (plasma expanders, rehydration fluids, nutritional
and electrolyte solutions) and irrigation solutions. This project may help in
the rapid generation of vital medical solutions in disaster situations, during
shortages, and in conflict zones. The technology may also help support the
supply chains for large volume parenteral solutions and prevent the shortages
that can result from supply chain disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project develops a biopharmaceutical device for rapidly producing large
volumes of parenteral solutions on-demand or at the point of care. The device
works by generating water for injection, combining water for injection with
solute concentrates to form the parenteral solution of interest, and bagging the
solution. The device can generate parenteral solutions at commercially relevant
rates in a process consistent with existing guidelines for compounded sterile
preparations. Unlike traditional compounding processes, sterility is ensured
without the use of a clean room, allowing production to take place near the
point of care. This technology decentralizes production and supply, allowing
parenteral solution manufacturing to be available for low resource
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.