* 2136511
* SBIR Phase I: Development of Dry Manufacturing for High Energy Density and Low Cost Lithium Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Omri Flaisher, AM BATTERIES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase 1
project is to improve the energy density, decrease the cost, and reduce the
energy footprint required to produce lithium-ion batteries. The global lithium-
ion battery industry is growing at a tremendous rate due to the accelerated
adoption of electric vehicles, robotics, and consumer electronics. Currently, a
significant portion of innovation in the field of lithium-ion batteries and
electrochemical energy storage solutions in general is focused around novel
material chemistries and product designs. With the massive growth being
witnessed in the industry, efforts to innovate production techniques must be
undertaken to improve the entire supply chain. By applying the targeted novel
manufacturing method, the ability to fabricate higher energy density lithium-ion
batteries at lower cost will improve the competitiveness of manufacturers,
increase the competitiveness of advanced battery manufacturing in the global
context, and open up new energy storage applications. This technology
development seeks to promote a solution that advances the capability and
sustainability of battery energy storage solutions, benefitting the lives of
U.S. citizens and society globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A solvent-free
manufacturing technology to produce electrodes for lithium-ion batteries is
being developed. This technology provides the capability to fabricate thicker
electrodes with finely tuned architecture and performance characteristics. The
conventional methods for electrode manufacturing utilize slurry casting which
requires energy intensive drying, hazardous solvents, and may leave a
considerable environmental footprint. A continuous feed dry spraying system will
be designed, manufactured, installed, and operated to optimize the process and
product. The technology provides a method to fabricate thick electrodes which
will increase the capacity and energy density of the lithium-ion batteries. In
this project, ultra-high area capacity electrodes (cathode: ~5mAh/cm2, anode:
~5.5mAh/cm2) will be fabricated with the solvent-free manufacturing process. The
high area capacity electrodes will enable high energy density (&gt;300Wh/kg) by
reducing the quantity of inactive materials (current collectors, separator, and
casing). The knowledge gained through this program may bring a novel dry
electrode manufacturing technology to commercial
readiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.