* 2136086
* SBIR Phase I:  Patient Digital Twin and Performance Capture System for Scoliosis Physiotherapy
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Zhiqing Cheng, INNOVISION, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2022
* USD 255,735.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on scoliosis physiotherepy.
Physiotherapy Scoliosis Specific Exercises (PSSEs) have been proved effective in
treating scoliosis patients; However, PSSE effectiveness can be significantly
reduced due to inappropriate planning, unclear requirements, and poor
compliance. This project seeks to develop a hardware-software integrated system
which employs a synthetic, immersive environment for physiotherapists and
patients to conduct PSSEs effectively. The technology may save costs for
patients, expand services for clinics, and improve the outcomes of scoliosis
physiotherapy. The commercialization of the technology will be conducted via
business to business and business to customer
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project focuses on the development a hardware-software integrated system
which employs a patient digital twin (PDT) and a performance capture system to
create a synthetic, immersive environment for physiotherapists and patients to
utilize telehealth communication between physiotherapists and scoliosis
patients. The technology seeks to improve the accuracy and completeness of
diagnosis and assessment, optimize physiotherapy design and planning, facilitate
effective patient communication and education, and help patients to perform
physiotherapeutic exercises according to instructions and compliance
requirements. By using PDT, the diagnosis of scoliosis and assessment of spine
deformity can be performed in 3D space thus improving the completeness of
assessment and the design of PSSEs. By building a light-weight performance
capture system, body shape, pose, and motion can be captured in 3D space in real
time. The teams seeks to represent the prescribed PSSEs in 3D games by animating
the PDT with motion captured during clinic practice. In this way, the actual
poses and motions of a patient during home exercise can be monitored, evaluated,
and used to instruct with adjusted 3D games as reference. The goal of Phase I is
to demonstrate the technical and commercial feasibility of the proposed
innovation, which will be accomplished through a technical feasibility study,
initial prototyping, and a commercial feasibility
demonstration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.