* 2136214
* SBIR Phase I:  A Cost-Effective Per- and Polyfluoroalkyl Substance (PFAS_ Electrolyzer for Groundwater Remediation
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,02/28/2023
* Colleen Legzdins, OXBYEL TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2023
* USD 274,927.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is in providing safe, cost-effective elimination of per- and
polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) from groundwater in order to protect human
health and the environment while reducing the cost and complexity of
remediation. PFAS are some of the world’s most intractable pollutants and have
contaminated groundwater and drinking water sources across the US and the world.
The toxicity, mobility, and bioaccumulation of PFAS pose a need for remediation
as they cause an array of adverse impacts on human health. PFAS in groundwater
cannot be broken down through traditional chemical processes; Hence, current
PFAS treatment options are non-destructive, expensive, and simply transfer the
PFAS to a solid or concentrated waste stream where the efficacy and safety of
disposal are still uncertain. This project focuses on the development of a low
cost, sustainable treatment method that eliminates PFAS with no secondary waste
generation and no costly consumables. This technology removes the liability and
environmental and health risks associated with incomplete elimination and
secondary waste disposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this SBIR Phase
1 project is to develop a safe, chemical-free and low cost PFAS electrolyzer for
groundwater remediation. The electrolyzer consists of a divided radial-field
unit cell architecture with a de-polarized cathode and a high surface area and
low-cost anode electrocatalyst material. The electrocatalyst is designed to
provide direct oxidation at high voltage and the treatment process will
mineralize PFAS in a single step, in minutes, with no breakdown byproducts or
secondary waste. A scalable, single unit cell bench-top electrolyzer will be
designed and built for treatability testing of PFAS-contaminated groundwater.
The anode electrocatalyst material composition will be optimized and coated onto
high surface area substrates. A de-polarized cathode will be developed to
eliminate the catholyte loop and hydrogen generation, and lower energy
consumption. The PFAS mineralization effectiveness will be measured as a
function of operating parameters and water quality. The electrocatalytic
performance and the degradation mechanism of the new anode material will be
determined. Using the experimental results, the capital and operating cost of a
groundwater remediation system will be estimated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.