* 2136230
* 8th Annual HBCU Climate Education Conference
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2021,08/31/2022
* Beverly Wright, SOUTHERN CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE INC., DEEP SOUTH CENTE
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,500.00

The Deep South Center for Environmental Justice will partner with the Barbara
Jordan-Mickey Leland School of Public Affairs at Texas Southern University, in
collaboration with thirty-two (32) Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) and fifteen (15) community-based organizations, to host the 8th Annual
HBCU Climate Education Conference in New Orleans, Louisiana on October 6 â€“ 10,
2021. The Conference addresses the significant need for climate education for
HBCU students who are largely under-represented in scholarship on climate
science, but over-represented as members of communities most vulnerable to
climate impacts. Conference sessions will explore the dynamics of racial,
social, public health and economic disparities in the wake of climate-related
disasters, serving as a call to action for students at HBCUs to become engaged
in the conversation around climate impacts and equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
aim of the Conference is to bridge the gap between theory and the experiential
realities of climate impacts by bringing together HBCU faculty and students,
researchers, climate scientists, and environmental justice and coastal community
residents impacted by toxic facilities and severe weather events. The major
purpose of the Conference is four-fold: (1) introduce HBCU students to climate
science; (2) engage students with Gulf Coast communities experiencing climate
impacts; (3) engage students in the practice of the profession through the
presentation of research findings; and (4) interact with and learn from
professional experts in the field. The Conference is a one-of-a-kind national
meeting that strives to create synergy between academia and vulnerable
communities; contribute to addressing chronic or emerging challenges related to
climate impacts in coastal regions and port cities that can be exacerbated by
offshore oil and gas operations and natural disasters; and foster the
development of leadership and communication skills, competencies in science
literacy, and capabilities of participating HBCU
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.