* 2136665
* SBIR Phase I:  Within-test measurement of learning progress: unbiased assessment towards bridging the educational opportunity gap
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Ramnath Selagamsetty, MAXWELL COGNITIVE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 255,989.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project &lt;br/&gt;is to help underprivileged students
obtain higher education, leading to more than 150,000 highly-qualified
specialists by 2035. In a rapidly changing civilization, one cannot predict
which professions and skills will disappear in the next decades and which new
ones will emerge. This makes an individual’s existing skill level less
informative than their potential to acquire new skills. Unlike existing
assessment methods, which focus on finding already skilled individuals, this
project will help identify those better at obtaining new
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will create an assessment algorithm as well as an online testing
platform to address the current lack of fairness and equity in high-stakes
cognitive and educational assessments. This will be accomplished by combining
two innovations: (i) measuring the growth of learning capabilities directly
during an educational intervention without separation into pre-test, post-test,
and training phases; and (ii) maximizing the rate of change of a student’s
cognitive capabilities by applying adaptive item selection and personalized
feedback. These two innovations will maximize both the effect of intervention
and the accuracy of its measurement. As a result, learning capability can be
measured in a single relatively short session comparable to the time typically
allocated for standardized testing. The Phase I goals of this proposal are (i)
demonstration of feasibility of extracting learning capabilities, (ii) increased
signal-to-noise ratio, and (iii) elimination of the imbalance in initial
proficiency levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.