* 2136735
* STTR Phase I:  Bio-optical Sensor for the Direct Detection of Sinking Marine Particles
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Wayne Slade, Sequoia Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2022
* USD 254,110.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of this Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a stronger understanding
of how living things absorb carbon in the ocean. It is important to have an
accurate measure of the natural carbon uptake by the ocean because this affects
ocean and fishery health, as well as future efforts to intentionally sequester
carbon in the ocean to mitigate climate change. This goal will be achieved by
developing a low-cost sensor that can be widely deployed on ocean robots, which
are already being used to measure processes like ocean heat uptake. The sensor
will use light to detect sinking debris in the ocean. This debris is a major way
that carbon is naturally sequestered in the ocean. Distributed, robotic
platforms in the ocean allow observations to be made in locations and seasons
that are not accessible with research ships. Such platforms are generally lower
cost than sensors associated with research ships. Development and sale of
sensors for robotic platforms are areas of growth because of the increasing
reliance on these platforms for scientific observations. This project may also
enhance academic and industry partnerships and help to train upcoming scientists
and engineers in instrument development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a
significant desire to expand measurements of ocean biological carbon pump
processes to better understand climate change, in particular the flux of carbon
by particles settling out of the surface ocean. This project will create a
sensor that is designed to be carried aboard globally distributed, autonomous
profiling floats. The sensors/floats may help distinguish among the different
modes of biological carbon uptake in the ocean. The sensor will be designed from
the ground up to meet the challenges of sampling floats, which have stringent
power consumption, cost, and data quality-control requirements. The sensor will
also have specific optical and housing geometry characteristics tailored for
measurement of sinking particle fluxes. The development stages will consist of
optical modeling of proposed sensor geometries, modeling of particle collection
efficiencies of different housing geometries, laboratory testing of model
particles, and dissemination of results to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.