* 2136724
* EAGER: Adaptive Digital Twinning: An Immersive Visualization Framework for Structural Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Devin Harris, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Infrastructure systems in the United States include a diverse series of assets,
systems, and networks that are vital to the nationâ€™s economy, security, and
integrity. Members of every community, ranging from individual families to
global corporations, rely on these infrastructure systems to thrive and maintain
a high quality of life. This infrastructure is complex, interdependent,
interconnected, and diverse, encompassing the water that we drink, the power
that we use, the transportation services that move us, and the communication
systems that connect us. Many of these infrastructure systems that serve society
today were built during the second industrial age, and in many cases are in a
state of disrepair with decreasing resources to preserve them. While we have
continued to improve design approaches and implement more sustainable
preservation strategies, modern infrastructure systems still follow many of the
historical approaches used in their early development and have not been
modernized. As societal dependence on technology continues to grow, the
underlying physical infrastructure systems must be preserved, but also
modernized to ensure that these systems are equipped to serve as the smart and
agile cyber-physical systems (CPS) the future demands. This project will explore
a high-risk/high reward approach to modernizing infrastructure systems using
artificial intelligence-informed digital twins. The digital twinning of an
infrastructure system will form a collaborative feedback loop between the
measurable data of the physical world and simulated processes in the virtual
world, providing a domain-specific adaptation of the broader CPS framework
necessary to inform decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applied to the domain
of large-scale structural systems, this project will test the hypothesis that
immersive engagement using a digital twin representation of these structural
systems will enable participants to observe, interact, and contextualize the
complex behavior mechanisms associated with these systems in their operational
environment. To test the hypothesis, the research design will explore a series
of technology innovations including the formulation of artificial intelligence
models to emulate both simulation-based results and experiment-based
measurements. Leveraging these technology innovations, we will be able to 1)
understand to what extent can artificial intelligence formulated models
effectively emulate the complex mechanical behaviors of simulation and
experimentation of large-scale structural system; 2) evaluate to what extent
does the development of artificial intelligence formulated models enable the
real-time, bi-directional interaction between simulation and experimentation
required of a digital twin; and 3) characterize how the deployment of artificial
intelligence formulated models within an immersive environment allow end users
to observe and characterize operational states of an in-service structural
system. Success of this work will be realized through the fusion of experimental
and numerical descriptions of these complex cyber physical systems and the
creation of novel processes necessary to overcome the knowledge gap that exists
between the theoretical descriptions of behavior and real-life structural
response, forming a foundation for real-time decision-making for structural
systems in their operational environments. Results from this project will be
disseminated to the broader research community through refereed journals,
conference proceedings, and student dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.