* 2136729
* SBIR Phase I: Developing the First Flow-Through Sensor for Real Time Microplastics Measurements
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2021,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Brandon, APPLIED OCEAN SCIENCES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2023
* USD 255,633.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the increased ability to gain knowledge about microplastic
concentrations in bodies of water rapidly, easily, and relatively cheaply
through the first real-time sensor. Microplastics are a worldwide pollution
problem that have devastating impacts on ecosystem services, human health, and
fishery economics. Interest in microplastics is surging, with many academics,
nonprofits, and government agencies all beginning microplastic research and
monitoring programs. However, the limiting factor in studying and monitoring
microplastics is that all current methods for collecting and analyzing them are
extremely time-consuming. There are many current knowledge gaps about
microplastic abundance due to bottlenecks in analyzing samples. This technology,
in creating the first real-time flow-through sensor to analyze microplastic
concentration, would begin to close those gaps. The benefits to the customer of
this sensor include reduced labor costs, and reproducible and accurate data.
These benefits may inform remediation strategies and policy decisions that could
lead to a subsequent reduction of microplastics globally. Reducing microplastics
in the environment can have ecological and human health benefits for the
American people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build the first
flow-through, real-time sensor for microplastics. The technology could reduce
the sampling time of microplastic abundances by measuring ultrasonic
frequencies. Using very large bandwidth ultrasound energy, the sensor will
record different resonant and scattering responses of the suspended plastic
particles based on size, shape, and material properties which will vary by
plastic composition and weathering state. All of these factors will inform
scientists about the concentration and composition of the sample. This
technology is differentiated from current measurement methods of microplastic
concentration by its novel combination of ultrasound technologies that have
already been proven in both the medical and non-destructive inspection
communities for in-liquid microparticle classification. This project will allow
microplastics measurements to be taken quickly and easily for the first time,
allowing for a rapid expansion of microplastics measurements, not only in
America’s oceans, lakes, and streams, but also in wastewater and drinking water
treatment plants, desalination plants, agriculture irrigation lines, and factory
runoff streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.