* 2136727
* SBIR Phase I:  Rapid and scalable production of high-performance 3-dimensional foam cores
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,11/30/2023
* Jules Thiery, GENCORES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to reduce the weight and increase the
efficiency of today's ground vehicles. Replacing steel with structural
composites, a foam core wrapped in carbon fiber and resin, is a key strategy to
reduce vehicular structural weight and to increase efficiency and safety.
Current foam cores often exhibit low performance and are costly to produce for
non-planar designs. As a result, three-dimensional cored composites remain cost-
prohibitive for mass-manufactured automobiles and relegated to niche, high-
performance vehicles. Improving core performance and fabrication processes will
unlock high volume manufacturing of structural composites and enable
manufacturers to increase the efficiency of their fleet by up to 40% throughout
the next decade. Such a step-improvement in manufacturability can also
accelerate urban air mobility vehicles and electric aircraft development and
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will support the development of a novel, high throughput
additive manufacturing technology for three-dimensional, thermosetting polymer
foam parts featuring unique, specific mechanical properties (strength-to-weight
or stiffness-to-weight ratios). Combining a unique 3D printing nozzle for
thermosetting polymers, material science, and robotics enables unlocking on-
demand and the rapid production of net shape, complex foam parts to be
incorporated into existing supply chains. The project will develop and test
novel resin formulations, optimize material synthesis and deposition, and enable
the control of foam microstructure in situ. Using this latter feature, coupled
with topology-optimization software, the project will produce the first foam
metamaterials. These unique metamaterials will be mechanically and thermally
tested using American Society for Testing and Materials standards to ensure the
processing meets industry standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.