* 2136934
* EAR-Climate: Geomorphic controls on soil organic carbon in fire-prone erosional landscapes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2022,02/28/2025
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,802.00

Soil carbon from organic material constitutes a substantial component of the
global carbon cycle and is a resource of increasing management interest. In non-
agricultural settings, such as hilly and mountainous terrain that dominates the
western United States, accurate data showing how soil organic carbon is
distributed and changes following wildfire is lacking. This project will collect
data on the extent, depth, and age of soil organic carbon at recently-burned
mountainous study sites in southwest Oregon, and it will examine the factors
that affect soil organic carbon changes in such landscapes. This research will
help to inform soil management schemes, including efforts to sequester carbon in
soils to combat climate change. The project team will also actively contribute
to experiential learning initiatives at the University of Oregon, which seek to
empower students from historically underrepresented groups toward pursuing
interests in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), and it
will support training for a female graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will quantify the functional relationships between topography, soil
properties, and soil organic carbon, which can be applied to an array of
eroding, soil-mantled landscapes across the world. Through the coupling of
geomorphic theory for soil production and transport, high-resolution topography
generated from airborne lidar, and field-derived ecological and biogeochemical
data, this project will track changes in soil organic carbon pools on hillslopes
that span a range of erosion rates and morphologic characteristics. In addition,
using data from study sites in southwest Oregon, this project will determine how
disturbance and forest succession affect soil organic carbon amounts and
permanence, assessed through the quantification of carbon stocks combined with
radiometric dating, and thus determine the legacy of past and future wildfires.
The project's integrative framework can be calibrated and applied in different
ecoregions to map soil carbon in a fashion that allows for rapid and accurate
upscaling. This project will advance the potential of critical zone science to
improve carbon cycling predictions under global environmental change. Improved
understanding of soil organic carbon will contribute to practical applications
in land management and global climate model development. In addition, the
project will help to advance three initiatives at the University of Oregon
toward broadening participation in STEM, and it will support training for a
female graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.