* 2136341
* STTR Phase I:  Scaling and Optimizing Manufacturing Methods for Germicidal Optical Fibers (GOF) to prevent disease-causing biofilms in tight channels
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Mariana Lopes, OPTICAL WATERS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2023
* USD 255,492.00

The broader impact of this Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase 1
project is to advance the development of germicidal optical fibers (GOF). GOFs
side emit ultraviolet-C (UV-C) radiation along their entire length like a
glowstick. Their use in tight channels of homes, businesses, and hospitals can
eliminate pathogenic bacteria and viruses that cause operational issues,
infections and even deaths. The ability to distribute ultraviolet radiation into
tight channels outranks the current biofilm prevention approach of using
chemical management or surface modification that works for a short duration
(days), damage surfaces and produces harmful by-products. This technology holds
promise for extension to other industries in biomedical devices, home
appliances, air purification and water systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance the manufacturability of GOFs from a non-scalable dip
coating process to a draw tower. GOFs consist of two parts: a) a light engine
that houses a UV-C LED and b) a UV side emitting optical fiber. UV-C light (265
nm wavelength) is sent from the LED through the glass core and scattered by a
nanoparticle coating, resulting in emission of UV-C light into the surrounding
environment (air/water). Currently, the specific material needed for the
manufacturing of GOFs are not suitable for manufacturing in a draw tower, and
the technology is limited to 1 m rigid fibers. Therefore, the specific
objectives in this project are to (i) innovate the chemistry of the external
nano-enabled polymer able to distribute UV-C radiation for draw tower
application, (ii) modify the manufacturing steps in a draw tower to enable large
scale manufacturing of &lt; 300 Âµm diameter for increased flexibility and &gt;
50 m length GOFs and (iii) control nanoparticle positioning in large scale
manufacturing to enhance uniform light scattering profile through the length of
the fiber.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.