* 2136991
* Collaborative Research: Freshwater flocculation and its impact on sustaining floodplains and deltaic wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Michael Lamb, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Yuretich
* 05/31/2025
* USD 421,138.00

Most sediment transported from continents to the oceans is mud that consists of
very fine-grained particles. The fate of muddy sediment is important in many
ways. Mud transport governs the fate of riverine pollutants, heavy metals and
organic carbon; mud also is a key resource that can restore coastal areas and
make flat, low-lying landscapes habitable. Growing evidence indicates that mud
and organic matter in rivers are often bound together into large aggregates
through a process called flocculation. This project will develop a predictive
mathematical model for the transport of flocculated mud in rivers and apply the
model to real-world coastal restoration problems in the Mississippi Delta
wetlands. The project brings together a team from the California Institute of
Technology (Caltech), the University of New Orleans (UNO), and the Water
Institute of the Gulf, to solve environmental and societal challenges in the
Gulf of Mexico region. The results will be shared with scientists in the Gulf
Region from local, state, and federal agencies, academia, and environmental NGOs
to influence coastal wetlands management decisions in the Mississippi Delta. The
project will engage students from the University of New Orleans, who are
directly affected by Mississippi Delta land loss, in a summer research program
at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compared to sand, far less is known about the
basic mechanics of mud transport and deposition in river systems. This is a
major knowledge gap because mud adsorbs pollutants, nutrients and organic
carbon, and the fate of this material directly impacts environmental quality and
the global carbon cycle. Mud also is the primary building block of terrestrial
and coastal landscapes: it builds floodplains, coastal wetlands and deltas,
affects bank erosion rates and levee stability, and sets the depositional
architecture of fluvial strata. In rivers, mud is typically considered as
“washload,” particles with settling velocities so small that they act as passive
water tracers. However, growing evidence indicates that mud and organic matter
in fluvial systems are often flocculated together into aggregates with settling
velocities equivalent to sand. This project will develop a mechanistic model for
freshwater flocculation using theory and semi-empirical relations from new flume
experiments. A database of floc settling velocities from rivers will be compiled
by inversion from concentration-depth profiles, to test the freshwater floc
model using field data. The mud transport theory will be integrated into
numerical models used for wetland restoration in the Mississippi Delta. A series
of numerical experiments will evaluate the impact of flocculation on wetland
accretion rates for engineered diversions that are needed to rebuild sinking
wetlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.