* 2136505
* SBIR Phase I:  No-code electric grid analytics platform for predictive maintenance planning and emergency response
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2021,04/30/2022
* Sayonsom Chanda, SYNC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2022
* USD 255,988.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in helping in the design of a cost-effective
resiliency strategy for defense against the impacts of climate change. Today,
the U.S. experiences significantly more weather events imposing substantially
more financial burden compared to 40 years ago. As climate change accelerates,
communities will be forced to endure increased financial burdens protecting
against and mitigating its impacts. Research carried out in this SBIR project is
intended to help reduce these expenses. Utilities, cities, insurance companies,
and municipalities are stakeholders in these resiliency efforts and will be
looking for new tools to help mitigate the effects and reduce the costs of
climate change. The research in this project will enable utilities to reduce
resilience-related costs and reduce impact on businesses and local economies due
to power outages. Such actions may benefit all communities, particularly poorer
and marginal communities that often endure the worst impacts of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project aims to develop predictive analytics for tropical storms and wildfires
and to integrate this functionality into a power grid analytics software
platform. Three artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) tools will be
implemented, qualitatively expanding on early prototypes: (1) in the satellite
imagery (SI) domain, an optimized combination of deep-learning neural network
(DLNN) techniques will be trained on large-scale satellite images, resulting in
the world's first tree growth tracking and species identification tool; (2) a
"Virtual Wind Tunnel" (VWT) will be augmented with computational fluid dynamics
(CFD) and empirical physics modeling to estimate the probability of trees
damaging power transmission assets during weather events forecast; and (3)
towards a no-code user interface, existing natural language processing (NLP)
will be expanded, with the goal of processing queries from engineers unfamiliar
with AI/ML. Key questions addressed by the research include whether the software
platform will be able to adapt to new utility customers and service areas
without sacrificing performance, whether increased data resolution can be
effectively leveraged to better predictive power, and whether the platform can
continuously improve event prediction over time by learning from historical grid
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.