* 2136707
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of biocompatible and biodegradable UV filters based on food-grade protein sources
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Micah Nelp, SOLIOME LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,899.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of novel sunscreens and UV-protective
products that are safer for both humans and the environment. Sunscreen protects
the skin by absorbing or reflecting the sun’s harmful UV rays,preventing
premature skin aging, painful burns, and skin cancer, which is the most common
form of cancer in the U.S., and results in treatment costs reaching $3.3 billion
annually. UV-filtering active ingredients in sunscreens have been under scrutiny
because of the safety risks they pose to humans and the environment. Current UV
filters can be absorbed by the skin, cause hormone disruption, and persist and
accumulate in the environment, where they can harm wildlife and disrupt marine
ecosystems. This project will advance the development of novel sunscreens and UV
filters composed of naturally occurring, food-safe peptides containing UV-
absorbing amino acids. These compounds are photo-stable, biodegradable, non-
absorbing, and safe for both humans and the environment, and they will have high
impact in the fields of skin care and biosafe food packaging. Because they can
be produced at relatively low cost, they also have the potential to take a
considerable share of the $13 billion sunscreen
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to complete
the following objectives: 1) Develop sunscreen peptides from widely available
food-grade sources and scale to 100 g to show cost-competitiveness with current
xenobiotic sunscreen compounds and reproducibility; 2) Optimize peptides to
improve their UVabsorbance and investigate heterologous expression in bacteria;
and 3) Evaluate peptide chemical &lt;br/&gt;stability, photo-stability, and
confirm non-absorption. This will achieve the overall Phase I goal of
reproducibly generating safe and biodegradable UV-absorbing peptides at the 100
g scale, with initial stability studies conducted. This work will lay the
foundation for future efforts including independent safety studies, kg-scale
production, and clinical trials to result in the first new over-the-counter
sunscreen active ingredient introduced in over 35
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.