* 2136055
* Collaborative Research: Testing the controls on eruption size and style at intermediate arc volcanoes: Evidence from the Holocene record at Augustine Volcano, USA
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2021,05/31/2024
* Kristina Walowski, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 164,497.00

This project is jointly funded by the Petrology and Geochemistry and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.
Augustine Volcano in Alaska is one of the most frequently active volcanoes in
the US and is considered a very high threat by the U.S. Geological Survey. The
hazards posed by a volcano depend on the size and style of an eruption, and many
questions remain as to what controls these eruption characteristics at
intermediate arc volcanoes like Augustine. For example, are large and explosive
eruptions driven by larger volumes of magma supply at shallow depths in the
crust, or by faster ascent rates, or both? Prehistoric tephras (named Tephra B
and Tephra M) that erupted from Augustine Volcano can provide insight into how
eruptive behavior changes through time. This project has as a goal to
investigate the links between magma plumbing systems and eruption explosivity.
It will target two of the primary factors that determine eruption style: magma
composition and the rate at which the magma ascends through the crust. Important
societal benefits will emerge from this work, specifically related to volcanic
hazards in the US, and that are broadly applicable to other intermediate arc
volcanoes globally. Finally, this project initiates new volcano observatory-
academic partnerships between the Alaska Volcano Observatory, Colgate
University, and Middlebury College. This partnership will accelerate the
translation of basic science to applications and monitoring that will provide
active research-based curricula at two undergraduate institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to: 1) use whole rock
(pumice), phenocryst, glass, and melt inclusion geochemical data to identify the
number, geometry, and relationships between the subsurface magmatic reservoirs
that fed the eruptions that produced units Tephra M and Tephra B at Augustine,
2) investigate indicators of magmatic ascent rate such as volatile
concentrations, crystal textures, and bubble textures within the erupted
material, 3) characterize how volcanic plumbing systems evolve through time by
comparing tephras B and M to historic and older prehistoric and Pleistocene
deposits, and 4) investigate small-scale variability in eruption style through
detailed sampling within the stratigraphy of Tephras M and B, with a targeted
effort to characterize both microlite-poor and microlite-rich samples. This will
resolve some of the observational bias that exists in Augustineâ€™s record, and
will help characterize the potential magnitude and importance of this bias at
intermediate arc volcanoes. Data from this project will provide new constraints
on the physical and chemical processes that drive ascent and explosivity and
determine how magma storage reservoirs evolve over
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.