* 2136709
* SBIR Phase I:  A Portable Oxygen Concentrator with High Flow Rates for In-home Therapy (COVID-19)
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Luke Lutkus, AIROMATIX INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 12/31/2023
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable easy oxygen delivery to patients
with respiratory conditions. Currently, patients requiring high flow-rates of
oxygen above 4 L/min require oxygen tanks that are large, heavy and can be
hazardous, limiting mobility and transportation options. The proposed system
produces breathable oxygen at higher flow rates and lower energy compared to
current portable oxygen concentrators, enabling sustained patient use. This
enables sustained oxygen production in a portable manner to manage medical
conditions causing oxygen deprivation, including Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease (COPD) and Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
portable system that utilizes a novel photocatalytic (light activated) reaction
to separate oxygen from ambient air, trapped in a chemical solution, then
released as needed through a temperature-controlled reaction. This project will
monitor the capture and release reactions using absorption spectroscopy to
determine the ideal conditions of oxygen production. Several photosensitizer
chemical compounds (fullerene C70 and C60, rubrene, and methylene blue with
urea) will be evaluated on system longevity by continuously cycling the systems
under higher temperatures and light exposure, and monitoring their effects on
oxygen production. A prototype will then be developed that generates targeted
oxygen flow rates at the desired rate of energy consumption, and the oxygen
produced validated as safe for inhalation using bench
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.