* 2136679
* SBIR Phase I:  A Hardware-Aware AutoML Platform for Resource-Constrained Devices
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Alfredo Costilla Reyes, AI POW LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 275,889.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to automate manufacturing inspection, reducing the cost of
certain highly engineered projects. This project will develop a system to
automatically create machine learning models for resource-constrained industrial
hardware. This project enables the fast, affordable, and easy creation of on-
device artificial intelligence with significant industrial applications. This
will improve robust vision-inspection tools to improve product quality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an efficient solution to create
advanced industrial internet of things applications that reduce network stress,
minimize latency, and increase security at the edge. While the internet of
things has many applications in the manufacturing industry, the vision
inspection market can benefit due to its low-latency needs and the high stress
it produces in the supporting infrastructure. This project is a flexible and
modular hardware-aware machine learning model generation system that reduces
manual efforts by automatically generating complex machine learning models for
resource-constrained devices. Technical hurdles include the generation of neural
networks that consider hardware speed and capacity constraints without human
intervention. Technical milestones involve creating an automated model discovery
platform tailored for edge devices, new resource-constrained neural architecture
search algorithms, and hardware-aware model compression. This research aims to
produce a prototype that domain experts with limited computer science training
can use to create advanced industrial internet of things
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.