* 2136056
* Inclusive Research-based Interdisciplinary Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2021,11/30/2025
* Ann Murkowski, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,199,422.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). This project aims to serve the national interest by
significantly improving the recruitment, retention, and success of diverse
students pursuing science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) degrees and
careers. The Inclusive Research-based Interdisciplinary Science Education
(iRISE) project aims to decrease the racial and gender equity gap in students
pursuing STEM education and careers. The project intends to address this need by
ensuring that students who start their journeys on community college campuses
benefit from proven effective pedagogy that engages community college students
in research experiences in their first STEM courses. Additionally, these
community college students will benefit from engagement strategies that enable
them to identify as scientists and make connections between their STEM education
and real-world problems impacting their communities. The iRISE project will meet
these needs by utilizing the Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience
(CURE) model at the earliest point in students’ STEM educational journeys. These
initial points of entry—or “gateway” courses—are where many students—especially
underrepresented minority and first-generation students—both start and end their
STEM studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Inclusive Research-based
Interdisciplinary Science Education (iRISE) project will create and study the
impact of modified mini course-based research experiences called Pre-CURE
Launchpads (PCLs) on community college students. These research modules will
engage over 1,200 students at the earliest point possible within their post-
secondary journeys, with a focus on six gateway courses in pre-college and
college level mathematics, biology, chemistry, computer science, and
engineering. The PCLs will draw on students’ interests in how their STEM
education impacts their communities, with the particular focus on the theme of
air quality, social justice, and public health. To study air quality, students
will utilize portable instrumentation to engage in authentic undergraduate
research experiences that will help them make direct connections between their
STEM education and tackling real-world problems. A culturally responsive
teaching framework will guide curriculum design with an emphasis on enabling
students to identify as scientists and to engage students in community-based
projects. The iRISE project is supported by an experienced educational
researcher who will design and deploy a research study to investigate the
development of STEM identity in community college students in their first post-
secondary STEM course. The project uses a peer mentoring model among faculty to
disseminate the curriculum both within and across other community colleges. The
curriculum and the results of the research will also be shared broadly through
both conventional presentations at meetings and in scientific publications as
well as virtually through the Canvas Commons and CUREnet. In this way, the iRISE
project will advance knowledge about how to improve STEM education and build
capacity to carry out educational research at community colleges. The NSF
program description on Advancing Innovation and Impact in Undergraduate STEM
Education at Two-year Institutions of Higher Education supports projects that
advance STEM education initiatives at two-year colleges. The program description
promotes innovative and evidence-based practices in undergraduate STEM education
at two-year colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.