* 2136775
* SBIR Phase I:  Artificial intelligence platform for secure, collaborative learning across medical institutions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Bharat Rao, SOAR ANALYTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 08/31/2023
* USD 276,000.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a collaborative-learning platform
that generates accurate population health models from secure access to patient
records. The proposed system will overcome privacy concerns to enable AI methods
to securely access hundreds of millions of patient records from multiple
institutions across the US to learn high-performing predictive models. Models
learned from this platform are differentiated due to their training data and
help payors, providers, and pharma companies that benefit from early diagnosis
and treatment of patients that may have remained undiagnosed. This system will
improve patient outcomes and health care system performance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will address fundamental limitations that can deter medical institutions
from sharing patient data to support learning clinical-grade models. Unlike
federated learning (FL), neither local data nor local model parameters are
shared; rather, local classifiers predict labels for an unlabeled global
dataset. Sharing model parameters in FL can violate privacy requirements and
expose patient data used for local training. This novel platform is designed to
be immune to the “white box” attacks of FL, and its main privacy risk for
membership inference is significantly lower. This platform will accurately
include information from all subpopulations and will support collaborative
learning for multiple ML algorithms, including human-interpretable algorithms
that cannot be learned with FL. Accuracy will be evaluated via sensitivity and
specificity, privacy via membership vulnerability. Methods compared include
federated learning and differential privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.