* 2136490
* SBIR Phase I:  Comprehensive Blockchain Transaction Monitoring for Illicit Funds and Actors
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Daniel Goldsmith, HEIGHTS LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 255,946.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is that it will result in powerful technology for
detecting illicit cryptocurrency accounts and funds in close to real time. The
commercial and market impact of the technology will be substantial with its
ability to trace illicit accounts and funds to a depth and breadth never before
possible and to accomplish this in seconds to minutes, as compared to the long
to indefinite time it would take conventional network tracing technology. For
society at large, the ability to uncover the most complex money laundering and
fraud schemes will help cut the flow of funds to the worst actors using
cryptocurrency: organized crime, narcotics dealers, child pornographers, human
traffickers, terrorists, and rogue nations. With the platform created in this
project, governments in conjunction with the private sector will have tools that
can effectively address the sophistication of the criminal schemes. This will in
turn result in greater growth of the cryptocurrency-based economy as businesses
and individuals gain greater confidence that they are dealing with legitimate
entities that are not seeking to defraud them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project will bring to light the most sophisticated illicit schemes
involving cryptocurrencies. In doing so, it will secure cryptocurrency systems
and advance the fields of network analysis and visualization, which will be
needed to understand the schemes. There are three major technical hurdles in the
Phase I project. First, the proposed implementation and infrastructure for the
network tracing algorithms need to be scaled up to trace the entire Bitcoin and
Ethereum blockchains in real-time. Second, to be able to trace addresses to
known illicit accounts, a sufficient number of these accounts need to be
identified. The proposed project will develop software for cross referencing
account addresses with both on-chain and clear and dark web activity to build
the lists of known bad actor addresses. Third, for customers to believe the
results of the analysis, a network visualization tool to show the chains of
custody linking a suspect account to a known illicit account must be created.
Because the algorithms can detect the schemes involving thousands of fund
transfers between accounts, visualizing the links in a clear manner presents
unique challenges. The project will therefore also build the foundation for its
novel visualization tool in Phase I.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.