* 2136802
* SBIR Phase I:  Fabrication of Exotic Skin Mimics Using Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,12/31/2022
* Stephanie Downs, UNCAGED INNOVATIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2022
* USD 274,767.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to provide cruelty-free, safe and sustainable solutions to replace
animal-sourced exotic leathers by leveraging new advances in biotechnology and
additive manufacturing. The proposed project will demonstrate the feasibility of
employing natural as well as synthetic components for the fabrication of exotic
skins as a precursor raw material for further processing into consumer goods.
Specifically, formulations composed of chemical building blocks of native animal
skin will be designed, formulated, produced, and subsequently fabricated into
composite leather mimics using advanced additive manufacturing platforms. If
successful, the proposed efforts will lead to prototypes of engineered composite
materials that reproduce the aesthetic, physical, mechanical, and performance
properties of exotic leathers. Providing animal-free, sustainable, and
environmentally friendly options to conventional exotic leathers can have a
significant societal and environmental impact, while opening a new market and
supporting growth in the leather processing and tanning
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will replace conventional exotic
leathers with alternatives that mimic the native structure and biochemical
composition of exotic skins; recapitulate the mechanical and physical properties
of the exotic leathers; and able to be manufactured using environmentally
friendly, sustainable and xenofree technologies. Two critical technical
challenges addressed as part of the proposed research will include engineering
the architecture of exotic leathers in a bottoms-up approach by combining the
relevant building blocks of exotic skins; and employing advanced manufacturing
platforms to develop processes that are xenofree, sustainable and
environmentally friendly. The research goal is to replicate the constituent
collagen-based building blocks of the dermal matrix. Collagen fibrils of the
dermal matrix are formed primarily by the triple-helix-forming polypeptide
subdomains that can independently recreate the fibrillar self-assembled
geometries seen with full-length collagen protein. The proposed work will use
collagen and collagen-mimicking subdomains, along with other matrix molecules,
to mimic the molecular and supramolecular self-assembly of fibrils in the dermal
matrix to precisely control the diameter, density, and orientations of the
constituent structures of leather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.