* 2136860
* STTR Phase II:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-based Development of Neutralizing Antibodies for SARS-CoV-2
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Barry Olafson, Protabit LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will lead to the development of engineered neutralizing
antibodies for the SARS-CoV-2 virus that can be used as therapeutic agents to
diminish the severity of a COVID-19 infection and decrease the chances of
hospitalization and progressive disease. As the SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to
mutate it is necessary to increase collective preparedness by generating a wide
collection of neutralizing antibodies that individually provide coverage for a
range of variants (Delta, Beta, Omicron). These antibodies, when administered as
an antibody cocktail, may offer broad protection over a diverse population of
variants. This projectâ€™s approach generates neutralizing antibodies that are
specifically engineered to bind to different regions of the spike protein
thereby increasing the probability that one or more of the engineered antibodies
will be effective against future mutated versions of the virus. The proposed
combination of high-throughput screening, next-generation-sequencing and
artificial intelligence (AI)-based antibody design allows systematic exploration
of vast ranges of antibody sequences. This approach also has the benefit of
engineering antibodies that are more potent, easier to administer, more stable
under challenging environmental conditions, and less costly to manufacture,
leading to therapeutics that can be more readily distributed to low-income
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II project proposes to enable AI
and machine learning antibody engineering approaches by providing needed
antibody sequence mutation binding data. Currently available antibody datasets
number in the thousands of datapoints and the team proposes to generate datasets
that number in the tens of millions. The project will also be generating both
positive and negative antibody binding data, potentially leading to higher
performing learned antibody binding models. This project seeks to test the
hypothesis that synthetic antibodies can be the equal of, or better than,
naturally occurring antibodies for neutralizing SARS-CoV-2 infectivity. This
approach could potentially develop a wide range of antibody variations. The
application of this AI-based antibody engineering will be focused on discovering
a large array of high-affinity neutralizing antibodies targeting multiple,
different regions of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein through the combination of
yeast-display, high-throughput fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and
next generation sequencing. Combining these high-throughput data generation
workflows with the latest deep neural networks may lead to a new methodology
that can efficiently discover high performing antibodies for the current
pandemic and those in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.