* 2136493
* SBIR Phase II:  Mass Produced, Flexible Insulation for Non-Combustible Buildings and Other High-Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Arthur Yang, LIATRIS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,495.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II
project is utilizing thermal energy management to simultaneously improve the
affordability, comfort, and safety of buildings, with an initial focus on
meeting urgent market demand for non-combustible building insulation. This
project will focus on developing a lightweight, easy-to-install, non-combustible
insulation product which is also eco-friendly and non-toxic. Structure fires
represent 37% of all fires in the US. These fires caused $12.3 billion in
property damage and 80% of civilian fire deaths. Wildfires in the Western US,
where &gt;$220 billion in residential construction is in “extreme” wildfire-
prone areas, add to the urgency of this situation. Mineral wool is the only non-
combustible insulation product available today but requires personal protective
equipment for installation and was recently classified as carcinogenic. Fully
non-combustible building insulation is a high growth market, and the broader
market for all types of non-flammable insulation represents a significant
opportunity. This Phase II project seeks to cost-effectively increase the supply
of energy-efficient, non-combustible buildings for both new and retrofit
construction, while also addressing high-temperature industrial markets which
have the most intensive energy use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to scale up a novel
nanocomposite insulation product using a proprietary foaming process for
inorganic aerogel-based insulation that minimizes shrinkage (thus maximizing
porosity for insulation performance and minimizing material and processing
cost). This approach leverages readily available materials such as clay and
silica, as well as potentially renewable cellulose biomass, to produce an
environmentally friendly, high performance insulation product for non-
combustible buildings which is easy to install, lightweight, and non-toxic.
Successfully scaling this approach on existing manufacturing equipment may solve
a significant materials research challenge, creating organic-inorganic
nanocomposites for thermal insulation with a competitive cost / performance
ratio versus incumbent products such as fiberglass, mineral wool, and plastic
foams. The Phase II project may result in the first industrially-engineered
composite material for thermal insulation which is fully non-combustible. The
integration of flexible polymers and radiation blocking additives would also
enable use for high-temperature industrial pipe insulation, a critical energy-
saving application where most existing products have significant limitations due
to radiation loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.