* 2136669
* SBIR Phase I:  AI-assisted software for fast labeling of medical tomographic images
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,09/30/2022
* Sergey Anishchenko, ALIENBYTE SCIENTIFIC SOFTWARE INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 255,807.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to extract new valuable information from medical images, accelerate
image interpretation by radiologists, and improve patient outcomes. The process
of identifying key features in images, known as ``labeling'', is the key to
improved diagnosis and management of certain conditions. The innovations
proposed here will substantially lower the cost of labeled datasets, enabling
access for developers of artificial intelligence (AI) algorithms and improving
the use of AI in health care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will apply machine learning
algorithms to develop a system for assisting in manual labeling of medical
tomographic images. The proposed research will result in an adaptive system
architecture that evolves to accelerate labeling and increase the volume of
labeled data. Moreover, the research will increase labeling accuracy at the
edges of anatomical structures. For instance, surgical resections for cancer
treatment requires accurate labeling of the edges of abnormal tissue to ensure
clean margins and minimal recurrence. Similarly, radiation therapy planning
requires accurate labeling of the edges of organs at risk for safety and
favorable outcomes. Due to its clinical importance, accurate manual labeling of
ambiguities and sophisticated shapes is highly time-consuming. The proposed
approach is differentiated from current methods by the inclusion of an
additional subsystem for increasing the accuracy of edge
labeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.