* 2136700
* STTR Phase I: Self-assembling molecular brachytherapy for treatment of metastatic cancer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Nicholas Trotta, Oncurie, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,730.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable radiotherapies for metastatic
cancer, estimated to account for 90% of the 600,000 cancer deaths in the US each
year. Of the approximately 1.8 million new cancer cases diagnosed each year in
the US, nearly half are candidates for improved outcomes using some form of
radiation-based therapy. Metastatic cancer, however, is generally not treated
with radiotherapies due to the need for prior knowledge of the metastatic sites.
The proposed project treats metastatic cancer by using the cancer cells
themselves to help deliver the radiation. This technology may generate reliable
efficacy of radiotherapy for the treatment of the most lethal forms of
cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project seeks to advance radiotherapy that exploits cancer cells themselves as
catalysts for therapeutic delivery. After systemic administration or local
injection, the monomers are expected to diffuse through tissues and subsequently
polymerize, immobilizing radionuclides in the extracellular space of cancer
cells. Non-cancerous cells will be minimally impacted, as soluble monomers will
remain subject to diffusion and relatively rapid tissue clearance in the absence
of cancer cell-derived catalysts. The chemistry at the core of the approach is
an enzyme-triggered polymerization of native-like compounds under physiological
conditions. The final therapeutic compound features the polymerizable compound
and covalently-conjugated radionuclide 131-I, a commonly used radiotherapy
isotope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.