* 2136225
* CAS-Climate: Acquisition of Eddy Covariance Towers for Assessing Spatial and Temporal Variability in Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Coastal Wetlands in California
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Adina Paytan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 416,100.00

This award will support the acquisition of eddy covariance towers and carbonate
chemistry sensors to continuously monitor greenhouse gas emissions and lateral
carbon fluxes at Elkhorn Slough â€“ a National Estuarine Reserve site and the
largest coastal tidal wetland in California outside the San Francisco Bay-Delta.
The eddy covariance method is the preferred technique today for estimating gas
fluxes which permits calculation of seasonal and annual emissions and
inventories. Data obtained will be deposited in the AmeriFlux database and will
contribute to better constrain the carbon budget in these systems and allow for
extrapolation to other coastal wetlands. The outcomes will also enable coupling
of Earth System Models with realistic predictions emissions from coastal/tidal
wetlands based on reliable emission data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide quantitative information that will enable local communities and
policy managers to understand the cost-benefits of restoring wetlands to
sequester carbon and enhance other ecosystem services. It will improve our
understanding on the processes that control greenhouse gas emissions from
coastal wetlands, information that will help decision-making and the financing
and methodological guidance for introducing coastal wetland management projects
into carbon markets. The project also will provide summer internship
opportunities for local under-represented students to work at the site using
authentic data directly relevant to them and hence expanding their climate and
data literacy. In addition, we will develop and offer a course on data literacy
in which students will use authentic data from the towers (and other sites) to
hone their data and modeling skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.