* 2136674
* STTR Phase I:  Low Cost, Large Scale Production of Biocidal Micropowder by a Reversed Arc, Plasma-Fluidized Bed Reactor
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Vladimir Gorokhovsky, NANO-PRODUCT ENGINEERING, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2023
* USD 255,966.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is based on the improvement of respiratory
equipment and personal protective equipment (PPE). Commercially available face
masks, gowns, filter media and other PPE are contaminated through environmental
exposure, posing a threat to healthcare personnel. The proposed solution is a
high-surface-area antiviral/antimicrobial micropowder which can be applied to
PPE surfaces. Improved protection from infections and reduced cross-
contamination may result in fewer deaths, decreased healthcare costs, and
increased economic productivity. The addressable global PPE market was $23
billion in 2020 and is expected to grow through 2028, while the global
disposable face mask market was valued at $792 million in 2019, and the
inclusion of other types of PPE increases this estimate further. The COVID-19
pandemic is driving the demand for these products, though the applicability of
the proposed technology is not limited to COVID-19. The proposed product will be
material that can modify the surfaces of fabrics with active antiviral
properties, leading to improvements in health and safety. The customer base is
expected to be healthcare personnel, pharmaceutical and food manufacturing
facilities, the public, and manufacturers of PPE, medical devices, textiles, and
filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to improve the
antiviral/antimicrobial properties of respiratory equipment and PPE, which is
typically only passively protective, is difficult to decontaminate and re-use,
and can lead to worker exposure during changing and handling. The proposed
solution is a high-surface-area micropowder, coated with an
antiviral/antimicrobial coating, which can be applied to PPE surfaces. Unlike
current technologies, the particle size, morphology, surface area, and
topography can all be tailored for specific biocidal activity. Additionally,
powder shape and surface quality can be customized to enhance adhesion. The
proposed project is to develop a prototype powder product formulation that
allows easy application of antiviral (copper alloy) coated particles to fabrics
and other materials. This technology is based on a fluidized-bed, plasma-
enhanced deposition process for synthesizing unique core-shell micropowders of
metal, ceramic, or highly-shaped nanoforms of carbon, including proven biocidal
materials. The synthesized microparticles will have high surface-to-weight
ratios making them better suited for capturing micro-organisms while also having
improved bonding to surfaces of filter media and PPE
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.