* 2136307
* SBIR Phase I:  AI-assisted identification of small molecules for targeted repair of vascular barrier dysfunctions
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2021,05/31/2023
* Mario Dipaola, AKTTYVA THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,487.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the identification of treatments for vascular
leak disorders. Uncontrolled vascular leak disorders are common pathological
processes that lead to tissue damage across multiple organs and over 60 clinical
conditions. Currently, there are no drug-based therapies that address vascular
leaks. Available solutions are focused on providing supportive care or
decreasing inflammation, without addressing the underlying mechanism. This
project is proposing a new approach to repair vascular leaks as a therapeutic
intervention. By establishing the first drug discovery workflow for the
identification of small molecules that repair vascular leakage, this project
will enable the development of a pipeline of drugs for multiple conditions. The
first condition targeted will be acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
which accounts for 10% of intensive care unit (ICU) admissions and is the
leading cause of mortality in ICU. Globally, it affects more than 3 million
patients yearly. The proposed solution will decrease the number of deaths and
the costs for ICU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project seeks to validate a new structure-based drug screening
platform designed to identify small molecules that activate the molecular
pathways responsible for repairing vascular leakage. The proposed platform
consists of a unique combination of novel machine learning methods for ligand-
binding site prediction, fast docking algorithm capable of screening ultra-large
(over a billion molecule) compound libraries with targeted absorption,
distribution, metabolism, and excretion-toxicity (ADME-Tox) profile within
minutes (5,000 compounds/second). The AI-guided docking approach is combined
with in vitro high-throughput assays measuring the mechanisms of vascular leak
in a physiologically relevant microenvironment of human tissues to select
candidates targeting vascular leak disorders. In this project, the steps of this
tiered workflow will be validated and applied to the first target, leading to
the identification of a set of new drug candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.