* 2136969
* Online Uncertainty Quantification for Novel Atmospheric Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Kayo Ide, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 413,677.00

In numerical weather modeling, current observations of the state of the
atmosphere are assimilated as an initial condition into the model. For the
observations to be as useful as possible, the range of potential uncertainty in
the measurements needs to be determined. For completely new types of
measurements, such as remote sensing from satellites, it is difficult to
independently validate the observations and determine the uncertainty
characteristics. This work in this project will assess a variety of numerical
techniques to determine the uncertainty of these new observations. The main
impact of the project will be on weather forecasting, with the potential for the
information to be used in various other fields. A graduate student will be
involved in the project, ensuring the training of the next generation of data
assimilation experts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the topic
of uncertainty quantification (UQ) for atmospheric observations. More
specifically, the project will target “novel” measurements, where new
observations are unable to be validated against independent observations. The
research team will perform an examination of current methodology and develop new
methods for advancing the practice of online observation UQ. The first step of
the project will be the development of experiments using the two-scale Lorenz
(L96) model and the subsequent evaluation of various existing strategies for
uncertainty quantification. A new theoretical development based on Kernel
density estimates (KDE) will also be tested and matured. The research team will
then expand the analysis to general circulation model (GCM) use cases. The
result of the project will be: 1) An exhaustive evaluation of assumptions made
by leading observation UQ techniques suggested for geoscience, and 2) A new UQ
technique for non-Gaussian error estimation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.