* 2136249
* EAGER: Student-Driven Internship Opportunities in the Atmospheric Sciences: Breaking Barriers to Diversity, Inclusion, and Equal Access
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Hector Jimenez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,998.00

This grant addresses the need for increasing the levels of representation and
retention of racial and ethnic minorities in the Atmospheric Sciences, focusing
on underrepresented minority students at Hispanic Serving Institutions. It
employs a novel approach to increasing the appeal of Atmospheric Science and
Meteorology programs, the retention of students, and the probability of success
after graduation, through the implementation of an internship program driven by
student needs and input. A survey of the students’ interests, goals, and
aspirations will guide the creation of new internship spaces tailored to the
participants. The full implementation of the internships will result in a much
better understanding of every aspect of the model and allow for the fine tuning
of this new system. Informed by student needs, such a system has the potential
to complement and perhaps replace some of the existing ways of providing
enriching and motivating internship opportunities. It is expected that the
internships themselves will constitute an important recruitment tool to attract
and retain larger numbers of underrepresented minorities into the Geosciences.
The data collected from participation and outcome statistics, combined with exit
interviews would guide future implementations of this model in and outside the
initial scope of the Atmospheric Sciences. This data together with follow-up
contacts with the various participant cohorts may reveal important lessons that
could help better understand the nature of the barriers and systemic obstacles
that disproportionately affect underrepresented groups in the Geosciences.
Lessons learned can be used to apply the model more widely across academic
fields and student populations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
supports a novel approach to increasing the appeal of Atmospheric Science and
Meteorology programs, the retention of students, and the probability of success
after graduation, through the implementation of an internship program driven by
student needs and input. A survey of the students’ interests, goals, and
aspirations will guide the creation of new internship spaces tailored to the
participants. The full implementation of the internships will result in a much
better understanding of every aspect of the model and allow for the fine tuning
of this new system. Informed by student needs, such a system has the potential
to complement and perhaps replace some of the existing ways of providing
enriching and motivating internship opportunities. It is expected that the
internships themselves will constitute an important recruitment tool to attract
and retain larger numbers of underrepresented minorities into the
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student-driven model begins the process by
surveying and encouraging students to think about the possibility of going on an
internship and expressing their personal interests and aspirations in the field.
With this knowledge, the project administrators will approach a wide range of
prospective partners in the weather, water, and climate enterprise and research
complex, to encourage them to open spaces where these students can provide a
needed service while acquiring precious experience, make networking connections,
and increase their self-confidence and sense of belonging. During this time, the
host partner has the added benefit of getting to know and evaluate these
students for future employment opportunities. At the end of the summer
internship period students will be expected to prepare a presentation describing
their internship project. Students will also be encouraged to develop their
summer work into a poster presentation that could be presented at the following
Annual Meeting of the American Meteorological Society or other relevant
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.