* 2136670
* EAGER: Predicting the impact of microplastics on the microbiota and viral transmission by mosquitoes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2021,09/30/2023
* Jaclyn Canas-Carrell, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 09/30/2023
* USD 277,146.00

Plastic pollution has become one of the most pressing environmental issues.
While larger plastic pollution cause concerns when ingested by animals, little
is known about the effects of much smaller microplastics, which can be formed by
the degradation of larger pieces of plastic. Microplastics of a few microns in
size are common, are difficult to remove from the environment, and are easily
ingested by animals particularly invertebrates, yet their biological effects are
unclear. This project will investigate the effects of microplastics on the
microbiota of mosquitoes and examine if any alterations of the microbiota will
affect the ability of the mosquito to transmit disease causing viruses. This
project will also have broader impacts by developing discovery kits and
classroom learning exercises targeting underrepresented students in local high
schools in Lubbock, TX to help educate the next generation of microbiologists
and entomologists, and inform society about the risks of microplastic pollution.
Additional broad impacts and societal benefits will include scientific training
of undergraduate students and graduate students to be the next scientific
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use interdisciplinary
approaches and the combined expertise of the PI and Co-PI in their respective
areas of microbiology and entomology, and effects of nanomaterials, to determine
the impact of microplastics on the microbiomes, immune response, fitness, and
pathogen transmission in mosquitoes. In this project, Aedes mosquitoes will be
used as a model to investigate interactions between microbial communities,
microplastic pollution, insect immunology, and arbovirus infection. This project
will use novel metagenomic sequencing approaches and advanced microscopy. With
the proposed creative, high-risk approaches to test how microplastics may change
microbiome diversity at the microscale, this project may result in fundamental
changes of our understanding of microplastic pollution impacts on insect
microbiomes and the ecology of pathogen transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.