* 2136835
* NSF-BSF: Ion transport and selectivity in salt-rejecting membranes operating at elevated salinities and pressures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Michael Shirts, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Extremely salty water is produced in enormous quantities as waste from brackish
water and seawater desalination, and oil and gas production. Purifying these
wastewaters is a significant priority because it (1) advances human welfare and
prosperity by increasing water supplies and (2) protects public health by
reducing the discharge of potentially harmful wastewaters. Despite the
importance of purifying very salty waters, current purification processes
require substantial amounts of thermal energy or heat. This research project
will investigate how to use polymer membranes to treat extremely salty water
sources. Such membrane treatments can use less than one-tenth of the energy
compared to conventional thermal systems. Novel experiments and molecular
simulations will be used to better understand how polymer membranes perform
under the high salt and high-pressure conditions needed for purifying this type
of wastewater. The knowledge gained by these experiments will make it possible
to develop polymer membranes specifically for high-salt wastewaters. Students
researchers will collaborate directly with international partners, including
travelling to Israel to improve cultural and scientific exchange. Undergraduate
education will be improved through the creation of an innovative “Engineered
Solutions to Water Scarcity” module where collaborators serve as guest
lecturers. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will enhance mentorship
of underrepresented and first-generation university undergraduate students
through the CU Boulder BOLD Center by motivating interest in chemical
engineering, environmental engineering, and separations science. Outreach to
high-school students will be accomplished by developing and implementing
classroom lessons, hands-on activities, and a short video that will be made
publicly available on global water scarcity challenges and engineered solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will elucidate mechanisms governing
ion transport in membranes during high-salinity brine treatment and create a
framework for designing membranes with improved water-salt selectivity by tuning
chemistry and structure. The central hypothesis is that elevated salinity and
pressure cause significant variations in the intrinsic ion transport properties
through polymer deswelling, electrostatic charge shielding, membrane compaction,
and fundamental changes in ionic hydration properties. The impact of extreme
salinity and pressure conditions on these phenomena will be comprehensively
investigated using advanced transport characterization techniques. In
particular, transition state theory will be applied to membrane permeability to
elucidate molecular-level enthalpy- and entropy-related effects that occur
during ion transport and stem from extreme salinity and pressure conditions.
Such molecular-level effects will be further explored using molecular
simulations of ion transport through the membrane. Based on the insights gained,
increasing water-salt selectivity of membranes at elevated salinity and pressure
using tailored charge, hydrophobicity, and crosslinking density will be
explored. Ultimately, the results of this project will reveal the effect of high
salinity and pressure on molecular transport under the extreme confinement of
reverse osmosis and nanofiltration membrane pores, improve the fundamental
understanding of ion transport in polymers, and create design recommendations
that will aid in the development of membrane-based processes for high-salinity
brine treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.