* 2136018
* Collaborative Research: IOS:RUI: Hydrodynamic consequences of spines on zooplankton: Functional morphology of horns and tails on barnacle nauplii
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2022,04/30/2025
* Erich Everbach, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 04/30/2025
* USD 527,423.00

Zooplankton, small animals that drift with ocean currents, are critical links in
marine food webs. Many different types of zooplankton have elongated spines,
horns, or hairs. These structures are thought of as predator deterrents or
sensory antennae. This project examines other ecologically important functions
that spines might impact: feeding, swimming, sinking, and dislodgement from
surfaces. These functions depend on how animals interact with the water around
them. This study investigates how spines work to alter the movement of the
surrounding water and how that water movement varies in the early development of
the “nauplius” larval stage of different species of barnacles. Barnacles are a
type of crustacean, a group that includes the commercially important crabs,
shrimp, and lobsters. Since all crustaceans have a nauplius larval stage, this
research will shed light on how this common body form operates, providing
information about functional tradeoffs between different behaviors and body
shapes. This project -- a collaboration between a small, liberal arts
undergraduate college and a big research university -- brings together students
and faculty from both to conduct the research and to train undergraduates. In
addition, this project crosses disciplinary boundaries between biology and
engineering, so students from different fields will learn how to communicate and
collaborate. Principles discovered from this study can inform bio-inspired
design of aquatic microrobots. The types of experiments designed will also be
used to develop new science curricula. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diverse
zooplankters bear spines with functions that are poorly understood. This study
of the hydrodynamics of different species of barnacle larvae will determine (1)
functional consequences of the presence, location, and morphology of spines on
hydrodynamic forces and torques; (2) functional consequences of spines and
appendage kinematics on the forces and torques generated, and on swimming,
sinking, and feeding performance; and (3) hydrodynamic consequences of the
change in body design from the planktonic nauplius to the settling cyprid form.
Kinematics and flow fields of larvae with distinctive morphologies and ecology
are measured using micro-videography and high-speed particle image velocimetry.
This comparative study on live organisms is coupled with experiments using
dynamically scaled physical models to determine mechanisms by which specific
features control forces and torques on, and flow fields around, larvae. Physical
models allow parameters – spine size and shape; body size and shape; limb
morphology; and kinematics -- to be varied in ways not possible with living
organisms. In addition to elucidating general principles about the hydrodynamic
consequences of spines at the poorly understood size and speed range of
zooplankton – the domain of intermediate Reynolds numbers -- the project will
advance understanding of how tradeoffs between ecological functions impose
biomechanical constraints that can shape the evolution of form. Collaboration
between a PUI college and R1 university integrates research and undergraduate
education at both. The question-driven, experience-based learning approach
involves research teams of undergraduates from physical and biological sciences
to develop their skills at interdisciplinary collaboration. Novel
interdisciplinary course materials will be developed with context-rich modules
for teaching quantitative skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.