* 2136481
* STTR Phase II:  A non-woven bamboo-based strand composite process to manufacture low-cost roofing
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Vikram Yadama, ECO-SHELTER, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 998,164.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II
project is to develop a viable and scalable process to manufacture a bamboo-
based strand composite for application in low-cost roofing globally. This
project develops a new production process for exterior-grade natural fiber
composite building products, derived from a highly renewable resource, bamboo,
through public-private partnership. The resulting roofing product will help
protect users from extreme heat by passively cooling and reducing indoor
temperatures. In addition, this solution can be used to create value-added
energy-efficient building products from highly renewable natural fiber waste.
The innovation holds immense potential to replace harmful and hazardous
materials, including asbestos, in many regions of the world, store captured
carbon into long-lifecycle products, and reduce heating and cooling energy
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase
II project will: (i) refine the design of the 3D panel geometry used to make
commercial-size panels with improved load-carrying capacity and
constructability; (ii) improve the bamboo-stranding process, evaluate a bio-
based adhesive system, impart fire-retardance, enhance panel durability,
manufacture panels using the new geometry, and evaluate performance; and (iii)
demonstrate and evaluate panel use as a roofing material through field tests and
the versatility of the corrugated panel in interior and exterior energy-
efficient building products. This research will advance the field of natural
fiber composites by addressing challenges of long-term construction applications
that can withstand hot and humid climates, including moisture resistance,
biodegradation, and effective binders for
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.